





- re hey 
Ve aa 





ie 


in \?, 


ING 


bie 





ne 


os 


USSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 





I 











A MAID OF OLD MUSCOVY 


(From a painting by Venuga) 


THE RUSSIAN ROAD 
TO CHINA 


BY 


LINDON BATES, Jr. 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS FROM PHOTOGRAPHS 





BOSTON AND NEW YORK 
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY 
Che Viivergide Press Cambridge 

1910 





ata 


TA wn ; 
COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY LINDON BATES, JR. — 


pa 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED — 


Published May gto 


~ 


CONTENTS 


I. THE PATH OF THE COSSACK . : ‘ : one 

II, THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY . ‘ ° . 25 
III. In IRKUTSK . ‘ : ° : ° : : erat 
IV. SLEDGING THROUGH TRANSBAIKALIA . ; wameil4 
V. In TATAR TENTS ‘ ‘ : ; : a ais 
VI. THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD . . . «= = 220 
VII. RussIA IN EVOLUTION ° . . : ; «279 
VIII. THe STORY OF THE HORDES. ; ° ° “322 


PemetewINA 5 elk ‘ Cathe i eegr lire 304 





ILLUSTRATIONS 


A Mar or OLp Muscovy . : . f : . Frontispiece 
From a painting by Venuga 


YERMAK’S EXPEDITION TO SIBIR, ATTACKED BY THE TATARS 8 
From a painting by Surikova 


CHURCH oF ST. Basit, Moscow . : : é : . 20 


Ivan the Terrible blinded its architect that he might never 
duplicate the masterpiece 


BRIDGE OVER THE [RTISH . ; 2 : ; ‘ : 38 
ALONG THE TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILWAY . : : é . 38 
Dintnc-CAR SALOON — VIEW OF THE LIBRARY... ; 46 
Cities oF NEw RussiA — TIUMEN, TOMSK, PERM ; - 50 
ISLAND OF KALTIGEI, LAKE BAIKAL . : : ‘ < 68 
VILLAGE OF LISTVIANITCHNOE, LAKE BAIKAL . . d . 68 


THe ANGARA RIVER, IRKUTSK . : ; . ‘ 5 76 
THE CATHEDRAL, IRKUTSK  . ; ; : : - 70 
A CHAPEL IN IRKUTSK ; ; A “ : ‘ : 86 
BOLSHOISKAIA, IRKUTSK . , ; ; ‘ ‘ 7 . 86 


THE BAZAAR, IRKUTSK 4 ; : 4 2 r \ 90 


Vill ILLUSTRATIONS 


THE IcE-BREAKER, YERMAK — LAKE BAIKAL 
THE ORGANIZERS OF THE CHITA REPUBLIC : 


BAIKAL STATION : , rf ‘ : . 


THE HIGHLANDS OF TRANSBAIKALIA . ; 


SLEDGING SOUTHWARDS . ; ; : 


SIBERIAN TYPES — PEASANT, VILLAGE STOREKEEPER 


PEASANT TYPES r 5 ‘ : ‘ : 


A CuHIckoya GIRL : 2 . = ; c 


A TROITZKOSAVSK STUDENT . : d : 


A WAYSIDE TEMPLE . : 5 ; : : 


A MonGoL BELLE AND HER YURTA : ; 


A ZABAIKALSKAIA BURIAT . rf ? x 5 


A Moncot “BLackK MAN” . , . 


TEMPLE OF GIGIN, URGA . : ; : . 


TEMPLE IN THE URGA LAMASERY . : : 
A PROSTRATING PILGRIMAGE : . : ; 
A GRAND LAMA ; ; : ; / ; 
CHINESE MANDARIN . : : ; r : 
GIGIN, THE LIVING BUDDHA . : = 


CHINESE ARCHWAY, URGA MAIMACHEN , : 


98 
108 
116 
116 
126 
136 
150 
164 
164 
178 
186 
186 
206 
222 
228 
234 
244 
256 
256 


262 


ILLUSTRATIONS ix 
THE GREAT WALL . : : ; : . coat Tee ae 


THE KReEMLIN, Moscow . * : : . 4 a 20a 
RussIAN TyPES — DRAGOON, CONSTABLE : 3 : «202 


STREET SCENES IN Moscow ; ; : ; ; os 0g 
(The Tverskaia Gate, Loubianskaia Place) 


RussIAN TYPES — PEDDLER, POLICEMAN ‘ ‘ 4 - 316 


THE MIRACLE oF ATTILA’S REPULSE . : : ; see 332 
(From the painting by Raphael in the Vatican) 


ON THE ROAD TO THE MING TomBs . : ° . - 342 
THE GLORY IS DEPARTED . ri : ° : sae aod 
THE BRIDGE AND TABLETS IN PEI-HAI . 3 ° : - 368 
HsvEN-wu GATE, PEKING . ; : : : ‘ ae sda 
PEKING, WHERE THE ALLIES’ MAIN ASSAULT WAS MADE - 380 
SUMMER PALACE OF THE EMPEROR . : : ’ - 388 


Map oF AsIA, SHOWING ROUTE FROM Moscow TO PEKING . 392 





THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO 
CHINA 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 


N ancient way leads across northern Asia to the 
Chinese borderland. The steel of the great 
Siberian Railroad harnesses now the stretch which 
mounts the Urals, pierces the steppes, winds through 
the Altai foothills, and by cyclopean cuts and tun- 
nels girdles Lake Baikal. From Verhneudinsk south- 
ward, it has remained as an ancient post-road 
leading through the Trans-Baikal highlands to the 
frontier garrison town of Kiahta. Over the Mon- 
golian border at Maimachen, it has narrowed into 
a camel-trail threading the barren hills to the 
encampment of the Tatar hordes at holy Urga. 
Thence it strikes across the sandy wastes of Gobi, 
and passes the ramparts of the Great Wall of China, 
on its way toward Peking and the Pacific. 
Through five centuries this road has been build- 
ing. Cossacks blazed its way; musketoon-armed 
Strelitz, adventuring traders, convicts condemned 
for sins or sincerity, land-seeking peasants, exiled 
dissenters, voyaging officials — all have trampled it. 


2 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO Chil 


Hiving workmen under far-brought engineers have 
pushed the rails onward, bridging the chasms and 
heaping the defiles. Following it eastward, unpeo- 
pled wastes have been sown to homesteads, ham- 
lets have grown into cities. —To the very gateway 
of China it has led the Muscovite. It is the path of 
Slavic advance. 

The way scarcely passed Novgorod in the early 
sixteenth century when the great family of the 
Stroganovs, a ‘“‘kindred in Moscovie called the 
sonnes of Anika living neare the Castle of Saint 
Michael the Archangel,’ began the fur-trade with 
the Samoied tribesmen from Siberia, who paddled 
down the Wichida River to barter peltries with the 
Russians. The prudent merchant Anika, looking to 
a more permanent source for those valued furs than 
the irregular visits of the aborigines, planned to 
anticipate his brother traders in their purchases. 
He sent east with a band of returning Samoieds 
some of his own henchmen carrying, for traffic with 
the inhabitants, ‘‘divers base merchandise, as small 
bels, and other like Dutch small wares.’’ The 
agents returned to report what impressed them 
most. There were no cities. The Samoieds were 
“lothsome in feeding,’’ —even a Russian fron- 
tiersman might shrink from the cud of a reindeer’s 
stomach as food, —and knew neither corn nor 
bread. They were cunning archers, whose arrows 
were headed with sharpened stones and fishbones. 
They were clad in skins, wearing in summer the 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 3 


furry side outward and in winter inward. They 
willingly gave sable-skins for Dutch bells. 

A series of trading expeditions began, which made 
the Stroganovs so enormously wealthy that ‘‘the 
kindred of Anika knew no ends of their goods.”’ 
Indeed, they gained so much by this exploitation 
that they began to fear the application by the 
Czar’s agent of a monetary test of patriotism. So, 
by a stroke of finance not unknown in modern days, 
there was arranged the Russian equivalent for 
carrying five thousand shares of Metropolitan. A 
block of small wares for the account of the Czar’s 
brother-in-law, Boris, was added to the stock in an 
especially important expedition among the Samoieds 
and Ostiaks. The adventurers got far inland. They 
saw men riding on elks, and sledges drawn by dogs. 
They returned with wonderful tales of marksman- 
ship, and, moreimportant, brought back enough furs 
to give Boris a dividend, in gratitude for which he 
secured to the Stroganovs the grant of an enormous 
tract of land along the Kama River and a monopoly 
of the trade with the aborigines. 

The Stroganovs grew and thrived. They scat- 
tered trading-posts and factories along the river- 
highways and sent many parties into the interior 
to barter. In the half-century following old Anika’s 
expedition, they had carried the Slavic way to the 
Urals. 

In the summer of 1578, when Maxim Stroganov 
was ruling over the family estates along the Kama, 


4. THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


one Yermak, heading a fugitive band of Cossacks, 
tattered and spent, with dented armor and drooping 
ponies, straggled into camp and offered service. 
With great delicacy Maxim forbore pressing too 
closely his inquiry into their antecedents. It might 
have wounded Yermak’s susceptibilities to avow 
that his chief lieutenant, Ivan Koltso, was under 
sentence of death for capturing and sacking a town 
of the Nogoy, and that the immediate cause of his 
advent was an army of Imperial Strelitz, which had 
driven his band from the Volga District for piracy 
and highway robbery. 

The situation on the far side of the Urals, where 
the skin-hunting tribes had been conquered by a 
roving horde of Tatars under Kutchum Khan, was 
at this time interfering sadly with the Stroganovs’ 
fur business. Eight hundred Cossacks, furthermore, 
of shady character and urgent needs were undesir- 
able neighbors. So the prudent Maxim, not par- . 
ticularly solicitous as to which of the two might 
be eliminated, offered Yermak a supply of new 
muskets if he would go away and fight the Tatars. 
They were not pleasant people for the Cossacks to 
meet, these former masters of Moscow. But be- 
hind were the soldiers of Ivan the Terrible. With 
a possible conquest before, and the Strelitz behind, 
Yermak gladly chose to invade the Tatar territory, 
which is now western Siberia. : 

Up the Chusovaya River the little expedition 
started in 1579, damming the stream with sails to 


ioe PATH: OF THE COSSACK 5 


get the boats across its shallows. Penetrating far 
into the mountains, the band reached a point where 
a portage could be made across the Ural water-shed. 
Then they headed down the Tura River into 
Siberia. Here the invaders met the first army of the 
Tatars under Prince Yepancha, and with small loss 
drove them back. Yermak made his winter camp 
on the site of the present city of Tiumen. 

Next year the advance began once more. The 
Khan of the Tatars, Kutchum, was alive to the se- 
riousness of the incursion, and prepared to ambush 
the Cossack flotilla as it descended the Tura. Ata 
chosen spot chains were stretched across the stream, 
and bowmen were stationed on the banks to await 
the coming of Yermak and overwhelm with arrows 
his impeded forces. The Tatar sentries above the 
ambuscade signaled the coming of the boats; all 
eyes were turned intently upstream. Then Yer- 
mak’s soldiers fell upon them from the rear, to their 
total surprise and his complete victory. Straw- 
stuffed figures in Cossack garments had come down 
in the boats; the men themselves had made a land- 
circuit and had struck the enemy unprepared. 

In defense of his threatened capital, Sibir, the 
old Khan rallied once more. He assembled a great 
army, thirty times that of the Cossacks. For the 
invaders, however, retreat was more perilous than 
advance. Yermak went on, and in a great fight on 
the banks of the Irtish, again prevailed. With his 
forces reduced by battle and disease to some three 


6 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


hundred effectives, he entered Sibir on October 25, 
1581. A few days later the Ostiak tribes, glad to 
escape their Koran-coercing masters, proffered their 
allegiance, and the Cossack saddle was on Siberia. 

But how precarious was their seat! Southward 
were the myriads of the unconquered hordes of Ta- 
tary; only one of the score of their khans had been 
vanquished. As thistledown is blown before the 
wind, so could Yermak’s oft-decimated band have 
been swept away had once the march of the Mon- 
gols’ main division turned northward. Girding him 
round were the self-submitting Ostiaks, loyal for 
the moment to those who had won them freedom 
from the old proselyting overlord, but not long to 
be relied upon once the weight of Cossack tribute — 
the fur-yassak — began to be felt. 

But what the Tatar hordes had not, what the 
Ostiak hunters had not, the three hundred Cossacks 
had —aman. This man, starting his march as the 
hunted captain of a band of outlaws, could conquer 
half a continent. Then over the heads of his em- 
ployers, the mighty family of Stroganov, over the 
heads of governors of provinces, of boyars, of min-— 
isters to the throne, he could send by his outlaw 
lieutenant, Ivan Koltso, loftily, imperially, as a 
prince to a king, his offer of the realm of Siberia to 
Ivan Vasilevich. 

Ivan the Terrible, Czar of all the Russias, he who 
had blinded the architect of St. Basil, lest he plan a 
second masterpiece; he who had tortured and slain 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 7 


a son, hated less for his intrigues than for his unroyal 
weakness, responded imperially. Over the long 
versts Ivan’s courier carried to Yermak a pardon, 
confirmation as ruler of the newly-won realm and 
the Czar’s own mantle, an honor accorded only to 
the greatest, the boyars of Muscovy. Following the 
messenger eastward there plodded three hundred 
musket-armed Strelitz to bear aid to the Cossack 
garrison. Sorely now were these reinforcements 
needed, for the Ostiak tribes flamed into rebellion 
against King Stork. With Kutchum’s Tatars, they 
returned to the attack and besieged Sibir. Once 
again, though hemmed about by the multitude of 
his enemies, the valor of Yermak saved his cause. 
In a totally unexpected sally, in June, 1584, the 
Tatar camp was surprised, a great number mas- 
sacred, and the besiegers scattered. 

The whole country, however, save only the city 
of Sibir, was still in arms. Engagements between 
small parties were constant. Ivan Koltso, striving 
to open a way for a trader’s caravan, fell with his 
fifty, cut down to the last man. Yermak, marching 
out to avenge him, was himself surprised near the 
Irtish. With Ulysses-like adroitness, he and two 
followers escaped the massacre and reached the 
river-bank, where a small skiff promised safety. 
Leaping last for the boat, Yermak fell short, and, 
weighted with his armor, sank in the river that he 
had given to Russia. The two Cossack soldiers 
alone floated down to their comrades. 


8 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


One hundred and fifty, all that were left of them, 
started their long homeward retreat. Far from 
Sibir, they met a hundred armed men sent by the 
Czar. Great was the spirit, not unworthy of the 
dead leader, that turned them back, to march to 
a site twelve miles from Sibir, where they built their 
own town, now the city of Tobolsk. 

In the years that followed, their nomad enemies 
drifted south, leaving those behind who cared 
not for their old khan’s quarrels. The phlegmatic 
Ostiaks returned to their hunting and to their 
feasts of uncooked fox-entrails. The long fight had 
rolled past, leaving the Slavic way undisputed to 
the Irtish. 

Well it was, for no more of the Strelitz marched 
to the aid of. the garrisons. Russia was in the 
throes of civil war and invasion, — the long-remem- 
bered “Smutnoe Vremya,”’ time of troubles. Boris 
Godunov, once favorite of Ivan the Terrible, be- 
came the real ruler in the reign of the weak Feodor. 
On the death of this prince, with the heir-apparent 
Dimitri suspiciously slain, he had mounted the 
empty throne, and a pretender, claiming to be 
Dimitri miraculously escaped, had risen up in 
Poland, gained the supportof the king, and marched 
against Boris. Though the Polish army was routed, 
Boris succumbed shortly after to a poison-hastened 
demise. 

Dimitri attacked the new czar, captured Mos- 
cow, and was crowned in the Kremlin by the Poles. 





ow -. 








1 


YERMAK’S EXPEDITION TO SIB! 


(From a paintin, 





R ATTACKED BY THE TATARS 


by Surikova) 





THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 9 


A revolution followed within a year, in which the 
pseudo-Dimitri was slain. Meanwhile the Poles 
were devastating Russia more cruelly than had 
the old Tatar conquerors. At length Minim the 
butcher of Novgorod led a popular revolt, which in 
1613 carried to the throne Michael, the first of the 
Romanovs. 

Through all these years, despite the fact that 
anarchy and chaos rioted over Muscovy, despite the 
fact that no troops came to aid in the advance, 
the Cossacks still pressed their way, contested by the 
scattered bands of Tatars, and farther on by 
the Buriats, the Yakuts, the Koriats. After these 
fighters and conquerors came the traders and colon- 
ists, with their families, following along the road 
that had been won. The valleys of the great Siber- 
ian rivers, which so short a time before had been 
the grazing-grounds of the Tatars, became dotted 
now with the farms of the new-come settlers. The 
advance guards of the fur-traders, with block- 
houses guarding the portages, and clustering wooden 
huts and churches, pushed south and east as far as 
Kuznetz, at the head of navigation on the River 
Tom, and to the foot of the Altai Mountains. North 
and east the trade-route was advanced to the 
Yenesei, twenty-two hundred miles inland. As 
many as sixty-eight hundred sables went back to 
Russia in 1640, together with great quantities of 
fox, ermine, and squirrel-skins. 

The quaint volumes of “ Purchas his Pilgrimes,”’ 


10 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


published in 1625, tell of some of the early explora- 
tions. A band of Cossacks dared the upper Yenesei, 
which ‘‘hath high mountains to the east, among 
which are some that cast out fire and brimstone.” 
They made friends of the cave-dwelling Tunguses 
in this region, who were themselves stirred to ex- 
plore, and went on far eastward to another river, 
less than the Yenesei but as rapid. By faster run- 
ning the Tunguses caught some of the inhabitants, 
who pointed across the river and said ‘Om! Om!”’ 
The old chronicler diligently records the specula- 
tion as to what ‘Om! Om!” could mean. Some 
thought that it signified thunder, others held it a 
warning that the great beyond teemed with devils. 
These unfortunate slow-running natives died, ‘‘ prob- 
ably of fright,’”” when the Tunguses, in a spirit as 
naively unfeeling as if they were collecting curios, 
were taking them back to be exhibited to their friends 
the Cossacks. How far these Tunguses had pierced 
cannot be told. In one of the dialects of the Yakuts 
who live beyond Baikal, ‘“‘ta-oom”’ or ‘‘tanak- 
hoom”’ means “‘greetings.’’ Had the Tunguses and 
the Cossacks who followed them arrived at the 
Yakuts’ country? Or was the river on which passed 
‘‘ships with sails’’ and beyond which was heard the 
booming of brazen bells the Amur? Were those the 
junks and temple-gongs of the Manchus? Ni snaia, 
—who knows? 

In 1637 the Cossacks reached and established 
themselves in Yakutsk. In 1639 by the far northern 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK II 


route they pierced to the Sea of Okhotsk. In 1644 
a party reached the delta of the Kalyma, and 
curiously speculated upon the mammoth tusks 
which they found. In 1648, on the Cellinga River 
beyond Lake Baikal they built Fort Verhneudinsk. 
Had their tide of conquest now rolled southward, up 
the Cellinga Valley, the Russian Eagles might to- 
day be flying over Peking. Only the Kentai Mount- 
ains were between them and prostrate Mongolia, 
enfeebled by the internecine warfare of her rival 
khans. From Mongolia, the road, worn by so many 
conquerors of old, leads fair and clear to the Chi-li 
Province and the heart of China. 

But they passed this gateway by, those old Cos- 
sack heroes, as the railway builders have passed it 
by, to press with Poyarkov to the Pacific; to con- 
quer, with Khabarov, the Amur; to meet in desper- 
ate conflict the whale-skin cuirassed Koriats of the 
coast; to battle with the Manchu in conflicts where 
“‘by the Grace of God and the Imperial good for- 
tune, and our efforts, many of those dogs were 
slain’; to fight until but an unvanquished sixty- 
eight were left of the garrison of eight hundred in 
beleaguered Albazin. 

The current of conquest passed by this door 
to China, but the swelling stream of commerce 
searched it out. In 1638, the Boyar Pochabov, 
crossing Baikal on the ice, broke the first way to 
Urga, the capital of the Mongolian Great Khan, 
and gained the friendship of the monarch. In the 


12 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


interests of trade, the deputies of the Czar Alexei 
Michailovitch followed up the opening with an 
embassy in 1654 to the Chinese Emperor himself. 
Over steppe and mountain and desert the mission 
wound its weary way to Kalgan, the outpost city 
beside the Chinese Wall, and then on to Peking, 
bearing to the Bogdo Khan, the Yellow Czar, the 
presents of Chagan Khan, the White Czar. 

From the Forbidden Palace at Peking were start- 
ed back, four years later, return presents, including 
ten puds of the first tea that reached Russia. With 
the presents came a message that drove flame 
into the bearded cheeks of the Czar and set his 
Muscovite boyars to grasping their sword-hilts. “In 
token of our especial good-will we send gifts in re- 
turn for your tribute.’’ Thus, the Chinese Emperor. 

The answer of the Czar started another legation 
plodding across a continent, and the retort was 
thrown at the feet of his Yellow Majesty. It was a 
summons forthwith to tender his vassalage to Russia. 
The Czar’s gauntlet had been hurled across Asia. 
But all it brought was beggary to the traders who 
had begun to press along the newly-opened route to 
a commercial conquest of the East. 

Soon Russia regretted the fruitage of her chal- 
lenge. In 1685 Golovin’s embassy left Moscow, and, 
arriving two years later at Verhneudinsk, opened 
negotiations with Peking. A Chinese commission 
then made its way north, and at Nerchinsk, 
August 27, 1689, was signed the famous treaty 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 13 


closing to Russia her Amur outlet to the Pacific, 
purchased with such desperate valor at Albazin, 
but granting to a limited number of Russian mer- 
chants trading privileges into China. 

A lively traffic at once sprang up. Long caravans, 
silk- and tea-laden, crossed the Mongolian deserts, 
the Siberian steppes and hills, and the forested 
Urals, taking the road to Europe. A little Russian 
settlement was founded at Peking, and a traders’ 
caravansary was built. The church constructed by 
the prisoners of Albazin, who had been so kindly 
treated by the Manchus that they at first refused 
the release which the treaty brought, gave place to 
a larger edifice erected by popes from Russia. 

Soon, however, the Russians again offended the 
Celestial Emperor. In their riotous living, the 
quickly enriched merchants disquieted the sober 
Chinese. The Siberians over the frontier gave 
asylum to a band of seven hundred Mongol free- 
booters, whom it was urgently desired to present to 
a Chinese headsman. So commerce was forbidden 
anew, and most of the reluctant merchants left 
their compound. Some stayed and assimilated with 
the Chinese, retaining, however, their religion; and 
for years a mixed race observed in Peking the rites 
of Greek Orthodox Christianity. 

It may seem strange that rulers so energetic as 
Peter the Great and some of his successors took no 
steps to resent by force of arms the arbitrary acts 
of the Chinese Emperor. But much was going on in 


14 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Russia; Peter was occupied with his invasion of 
Persia, and Catherine was without taste for a dis- 
tant and doubtful campaign. The garrisons scat- 
tered over the enormous area of Siberia were numer- 
ically too weak and too poorly equipped to do more 
than hold their own. So, when commerce was once 
more interdicted and the merchants banished, re- 
course was had to diplomacy. In 1725 the Bogdo 
Khan relented enough to receive Count Ragusinsky 
with a special embassy from Catherine the First, 
which arranged the second great agreement with 
China, called the Treaty of Kiahta. 

By it the frontier cities of Kiahta in Siberia, and 
Maimachen, facing it just across the line in Mon- 
golia, were established as the gateway to Chinese 
trade. The treaty provided for the extradition of 
bandits and for a perpetual peace and friendship 
between the high contracting parties. Ever since, 
the citizens of Kiahta have alternately blessed and 
blamed Ragusinsky, — blamed him because, in the 
fear lest any stream flowing out of Chinese into 
Russian territory should be poisoned, he settled the 
boundary city beside a Siberian brook so inadequate 
that Kiahtans have suffered ever since for lack of 
water, with the river Bura only nine versts away in 
China; blessed him because of the great prosperity 
the treaty brought to their doors. 

The tea carried by this highway became Russia’s 
national drink. Great warehouses arose, built 
caravansary-wise around courts. Endless files of 


THE (PATH OF THE COSSACK 15 


two-wheeled carts rolled northward, bearing each 
its ten square bales of tea, or its well-packed bolts 
of silk. The merchants grew wealthy in the rapidly 
swelling trade. 

A great Chinese embassy, headed by the third 
ranking official of the Peking Foreign Office, made 
its way to Moscow to keep permanent the relations 
of the two empires. Similarly, a Russian embassy 
was established in the rebuilt compound in Peking, 
where a new church arose, whose archimandrite 
gained a comfortable revenue by selling ikons and 
crucifixes to the many Chinese converts he had 
baptized. 

Catherine the Second’s edict opened to all Rus- 
sians the freedom of Chinese trade. Its volume, 
large before, became now even greater. In 1780 
the registered commerce at Kiahta had risen to 
2,868,333 roubles, not to mention the large value 
of the goods taken in unregistered. 

Tea, a pound of which, if of best quality, cost 
two roubles in those days, silks, porcelains, cottons, 
and tobacco, went north, exchanged for Russian 
peltries, for cloth, hardware, and, curiously enough, 
hunting-dogs. 

An English merchant, who had penetrated to 
Kiahta in that year, gives an amusing account of 
the mutual distrust with which the barter was 
conducted. The Russian going over the frontier to 
Maimachen would examine the goods in the Chinese 
warehouse, seal up what he desired, and leave two 


16 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


men on guard. The Chinese merchant would then 
come to Kiahta, and do the same with the Russian’s 
wares. When the bargain was struck, both together 
carried one shipment over the border with guards 
and brought back the exchange. 

In growing prosperity, undisturbed, the Kiahta 
Caravans came and went, while elsewhere history 
was warm in the making. 

Napoleon marched to Moscow, to Leipsic, to 
Waterloo. The Kiahta caravans came and went. 
The St. Petersburg Dekabrists rose for Constantine 
and the Constitution. The Kiahta caravans came 
and went. The Crimean War saw the Russian flag 
flutter down at Sevastopol. Even as the Malakoff 
was stormed, a Russian army marched into Central 
Asia to seize the Zailust Altai slope, which points 
as a spear toward Turkestan and India, and a Rus- 
sian navy sailed under Muraviev to occupy the 
fobidden Amur. The Kiahta caravans came and 
went. 

At length a railroad, pushed year by year, 
reached the Pacific. One branch cut across the 
reluctantly-accorded Manchurian domain to Vladi- 
vostok; another struck southward to Dalny and 
Niu-chwang. The Russian Eagles perched at Port 
Arthur and nested by the far Pacific. 

The camel-commerce of the old overland road 
across Mongolia shrank now as shrinks a Gobi 
snow-rivulet under the burning desert sun. The 
meagre Kiahta caravans became but a gaunt 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 17 


shadow of the mighty past. Only an intermittent 
wool-export and a dwindling traffic in tea to the 
border cities remained of the great tribute of the 
Urga Road. As trade vanished from their once busy 
warehouses, the Chinese merchants were troubled. 
Perhaps to prayer and sacrifice the God of Com- 
merce would relent? Soa scarlet temple rose on the 
hill by Maimachen. Prosperity came suddenly once 
again, a new trade rolled north over the historic 
way. The Mongol cart-drivers returned from far 
Ulasati. The camel-trains, that had scattered south 
to the trails beyond Shama, gathered back as an- 
telopes herd to a new spring in the desert. 

The God of the Red Temple, the God of the Cara- 
van, had sent the Japanese. As the Amban’s execu- 
tioner strikes off a victim’s hand, so had the Nip- 
ponese lopped away the railroad reaching down to 
Dalny and Niu-chwang—the road that was break- 
ing the camel-trade a thousand versts beyond, on 
the old route by Maimachen and Kiahta. Against 
the Russian control of the Pacific the Japanese had 
hurled all their gathered might. By battle genius 
and efficiency the Island soldiers won, and athwart 
the front of Slavic empire they set their desperate 
legions. Far more was lost to Russia than men 
and squandered treasure, far more than prestige and 
power of place. The enormous stakes, even in the 
port of Dalny, in the forts of Port Arthur, in 
the East China Railway, were but incidents. The 
real tragedy of the war was that the vital terminus 


18 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


of her continent railroad was alienated, and that 
her civilization was barred back indefinitely. 

The soldiers and statesmen who carried Russia’s 
power across a savage continent had sought out 
many inventions. But by whatever means each 
successive territory was won, its maintenance had 
been by the warrant that the Slavs had gone not 
lightly, adventuring to conquest, but as an earnest 
host clearing a way for the homes and the hearths 
of their race. The colonist had followed the Cos- 
sack; cities and villages, railways and telegraphs, 
had risen behind the armies. The dawn of the twen- 
tieth century saw a mighty expanse of Siberia 
redeemed from a desolate waste to a land of farms 
and villages, of mines and industries; a native popu- 
lation, once hardly superior to the American Indian, 
not, like him, displaced and exterminated, but 
raised side by side with the settlers to a more equit- 
able place than is held by any other subject people 
in Asia. The Russian advance had brought the 
establishment of the volunteer fleet plying from far 
Odessa to Vladivostok, and the completion of the 
greatest railway enterprise the world has ever seen. 
It had opened from Europe to the Far East a land- 
route more important to more people than the 
water-route discovered by Vasco da Gama. The 
fruition of a nation’s hope was lost when the Eagles 
went down at Port Arthur. 

For those who feast at Russia’s cost the reckoning 
is long. Predecessors not unfamed are worthy of 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 19 


remembrance: the Tatars who lorded it four hun- 
dred years, the Poles whose kings caroused in the 
Kremlin, the great Emperor, with his Grande 
Armée, whose stabled horses scarred the walls of 
St. Basil, the Turks, the Swedes, — all conquerors 
of yesterday. But long years must take their toll of 
life and gold before Russia can carry the en- 
trenched lines along the Yalu, and reénter the 
redoubts hewn in the sterile hills around Port 
Arthur. The spoils to the victors for the present are 
unchallenged. The Russian way to China is not 
now through Manchuria. 

But the ancient road of the Kiahta caravans is 
still unblocked. Here is the shortest route from 
Europe to the East. Here, through the defiles and 
the broken foothills of the Gobi Plateau, lies the 
future redemption of the great unfettered land- 
route to North China. The Chinese are themselves 
advancing to anticipate it. They have already built 
into Kalgan. To this trading-centre across the pale, 
a Russian railway may yet pass and her colonists 
make fruitful the unpeopled wilds of Mongolia. 

In the cycles of progress old paths are reworn. 
Pharaoh’s canal from the Mediterranean to the 
Red Sea was swallowed up under the sands of 
three thousand years when the Genoans won a way 
across the Isthmus. Their track was left unsought 
when the Portuguese showed the route for ships 
around the Cape. Yet to-day the Strait of Suez is 
thronged with reborn commerce. 


20 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The first American highway to the Western Re- 
serve was superseded by the better avenue of the 
newly built Erie Canal, yet came to its own again 
beneath the tracks of the Baltimore and Ohio. So, 
far to the westward of Japan’s outpost, the age-old 
caravan road, with a shadowy fantastic history 
dim as its dun trail across the desert, may rise to 
a resurrected glory as a new road to China. 

Its greatness is of yesterday and of to-morrow. 
Unto to-day belongs the quaintness of the cavalcade 
that passes to and fro along its track. Over the 
frozen snows of winter and the rocky trails of sum- 
mer there plod horse and ox and camel, sleigh and 
wagon and cart, —a broken line of men and beasts. 
Russian posts thunder past with galloping horses, 
three abreast. Bands of Cossacks convoy the 
guarded camel-trains of heavy mail for China. One 
meets troops of boyish recruits, singing lustily in 
chorus on the tramp northward, and Mongol carts 
and flat-featured Buriats on their little shaggy 
ponies, sleepy wooden villages, forests, steppes, 
swamps, frozen river-courses, mountain passes. 

Through the kaleidoscope of races and peoples 
one moves in a world-forgotten life, a procession of 
the ages. 

On the threshold of Siberia the traveler has 
turned back in manner, in ways of thought, in 
government, in everything, to the past. Go into 
one of these cities, — you are in the Germany of 
1849, with the embers still hot of the fire lighted 


‘ Or a CRD dae 


iii re 





CHURCH OF ST. BASIL, MOSCOW 


(Ivan the Terrible blinded its architect that he might never duplicate the masterpiece) 





mae PATH OF THE COSSACK 21 


by the republican movement of the young men and 
the industrials. The seeming chance of victory has 
passed them by. The iron hand is over all. One 
hears of Siberian Carl Schurzes, fugitives to Amer- 
ica and to Switzerland, of the month-lived Chita 
Republic, of the row of gallows at Verhneudinsk, 
of the bloody assizes at Krasnoyarsk. 

It is as if one lived when citizens gathered in 
excited groups in the Forum to discuss the news 
from Philippi; or as if, from the broken masonry 
of the Tuileries, there stepped out into breathing 
actuality the five hundred Marseillaises ‘‘who know 
how to die,’’ fronting the red Swiss before the 
palace of Louis, the King. Here is the reality of 
friends in hiding, of files of soldiers at each railway- 
station, of police-examined passports without which 
one cannot sleep a night in town, of arms forbid- 
den, meetings forbidden, books forbidden, — all 
things forbidden. Here as there men thought that 
the new could come only by revolution. Yet one 
can see, despite all, the germs of improvement and 
the upward pressures of evolution. 

Move further toward the frontier towns, where 
the relayed horses bring the weekly mail, — you have 
gone back a hundred and fifty years. You are 
among our own ancestors of the days of the Stamp 
Act. Did the General Howe who governs the 
oblast from his Irkutsk residency overhear the 
school-boys of Troitzkosavsk as they chant the for- 
bidden Marseillaise, he, too, might say that freedom 


22 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


was in the air. These Siberian frontiersmen shoot 
the deer with their permitted flint-locks as straight 
as the neighbors of Israel Putnam, and with spear 
and gun they face the bear that the dusky Buriat 
hunters have tracked to its lair. 

Our Puritans are there, rugged, red-bearded dis- 
senters, ‘‘Stare’ Obriachi,’’ Old Believers, they are 
called, who came to Siberia rather than use Bishop 
Nikon’s amended books of prayer. Yankee-like, out- 
spoken, keen at a trade, are these big Siberian sons 
of men who dared greatly in their long frozen march. 
The grants to Lord Baltimores and Padroon Van 
Rensselaers are in the vast ‘‘ cabinetski’’ estates of 
the grand-ducal circle, engulfing domains great as 
European kingdoms. 

Go into one of the villages of the peasants trans- 
planted in a body by the paternal Government. 
Here are the patient, enduring recruits for the army, 
brothers to the toilers over whose fields the Grand 
Monarch’s wars rolled back and forth. Though 
steeped in ignorance and overwhelmed by the in- 
cubus of communism, they are capable of real and 
splendid manhood, and will show it when their 
world has struggled through into the century in 
which we others live. 

Go to a mining-camp in the Chickoya Valley. It 
is California and the days of ’49. Histories as 
romantic as those of the Sierras are being lived out 
in its unsung gorges, — tales of hardships, of grub- 
stakes, of bonanzas in Last Chance Gulches. 


THE PATH OF THE COSSACK 23 


When the bumping tarantass rolls across the 
Chinese frontier into Mongolia, it enters a kingdom 
of the Middle Ages flung down into the twentieth 
century. Feudal princes, lords of armies weaponed 
with spear and bow, tax and drive to the corvée 
their nomad serfs. A hierarchy of priests whose 
divine head lives in a palace at Holy Urga, sways 
the multitude of superstition-steeped Mongols, and 
receives the homage of pilgrims wending their way 
from Siberia, from the Volga, from Tibet, from all 
‘Mongolia, to their Canterbury of Lamaism. In 
prostrate devotion the penitents girdle the Sacred 
City before whose hovels beggars dispute with dogs 
their common nourishment, and in whose com- 
pounds princes of the race of Genghis Khan, with 
armies of retainers, live bedless, bathless, lightless, 
in the felt huts of their race. Squalid magnificence 
and good-humored kindly hospitality are linked to 
utter brutality. Sable-furs and silks cover sheep- 
skins worn until they drop from the body. Hereand 
there among the natives a Chinese trading caravan- 
sary, alien, walled, peculiar, stands as of old the 
_ Hansa-town, with merchant guilds and far-brought 
caravan goods. 

A way of adventure and strangeness, where the 
years turn back, is this old road of the Golden 
Horde, leading down past the ancestral homes of 
the Turks to the Great Wall. 

The Cossack sentries at Kiahta look Chinaward. 
They have become an anomaly, this hard-riding, 


24 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


fierce-fighting soldier class. The plow has meta- 
morphosed into myriad farms the plains along the 
Don where once their ponies grazed. Mining-cuts 
score the hills in the Urals where once they hunted. 
Villages of Slavonic peasants rise along the Amur. 
The sons of the old warriors grow into peaceful 
farmer-folk, differing in name alone from their blue- 
eyed neighbors. Soon they must disappear in all 
save picturesquely uniformed Hussars of the Guard, 
and as a memory, chanted by young men and girls 
in the Siberian summer evenings when Yermak’s 
song is raised. The task of the Cossack, to lead in 
the conquest of kindred native races and to weld 
these through themselves into Russia’s fabric, is 
nearly done. 

Down the ancient road lies a last avenue of ad- 
vance. Eastward is Manchuria, where artillery and 
science grappling must decide the day with Japan. 
Southward is India, where England’s guarded gate- 
way among the hills can be opened only from behind. 
But into Mongolia Fate may decree that the yellow- 
capped Cossacks, drafted from Russia’s Mongol 
Buriats, shall lead once more the nation-absorbing 
march of the White Czar. For another memorable 
ride, the Cossacks, who on their shaggy ponies led 
the long conquering way across the continent, may 
yet mount and take the road to China. 


II 
THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 


ow long to Irkutsk? Seven days now, seven 
years when last I came.’”’ The bearded Rus- 
sian standing in the doorway of the adjoining com- 
partmentin the corridor-car of the Siberian Express 
gazes thoughtfully at the fir-covered slope, whose 
dark green stands in sombre contrast to the winter 
snows. The train is slowly climbing the Ural Range, 
toward the granite pyramid near Zlatoust, on op- 
posite sides of which are graven ‘Europe’ and 
“‘Asia.’’ Neighbors with easy sociability are con- 
versing along the wide corridors, exchanging stories 
and cigarettes, asking each other’s age and income 
in naive Siberian style. 

Regarding the burly occupant of the next state- 
room one may discreetly speculate. From sable- 
lined paletot and massive gold chains you hazard 
that he voyaged with the traders’ slow caravans 
in the days before the railway — that he was a 
merchant. 

‘‘A merchant? Optovi? No, I did not come with 
the caravans.” 

From the triangle of red lapel-ribbon, the rank- 
bestowing decoration, you venture a second guess. 

“Perhaps the gaspadine made the great circuit 


26 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


to oversee the local administrations? He was a 
government inspector — Revizor ?”’ 

‘““Chinovnik niet navierno,”’ he answers. Most 
decidedly he was not an official. The suggestion 
causes him to smile broadly. ‘I was with the con- 
victs,” he says. 

Beside the line of rails curves the old post-road 
winding like a ribbon through the highlands. 

“It was by that road we marched. Seven years 
of my life lie along it.”’ 

The train swings through a cleft hewn in the living 
rock, steep-sided as if the mountain had been gashed 
with a mighty axe. It rumbles around the base of 
an overhanging crag while you look clear down over 
the white valley, with the miles of rolling green 
forest beyond. 

‘Was not seven years a long time for the march ?” 
you venture. 

‘“‘For a traveler, yes; for convict bands not un- 
usual. We went back and forth, now northward 
a thousand versts as to Archangel, now west as to 
Moscow, now south as to Rostov. Again and again 
_ our troop would split, and part be sent another 
. way. New prisoners would be added, from Warsaw, 
Finland, Samara. New guards would take charge. 
Some groups would go to the West Siberian stations, 
some east to the Pacific and Sakhalin. I, who was 
written down for ten years at the Petrovski Works be- 
yond Baikal Lake, with a third commuted for good 
behavior, had finished my term before I got there.” 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 27 


‘““Why did they wander so aimlessly ?”’ 

“It seems truly as a butterfly’s flight, but you 
others do not know the way of Russia. Very 
slowly, very deviously she goes, but surely, none the 
less, to her goal. We each came at last to our place.” 

A match flares up and he lights another cigarette. 

‘Shall we not go to the ‘wagon restoran’ for a 
glass of tea?’ you ask. 

Along the broad aisles you walk, past the state- 
rooms, filled with baggage, littered with bedding, 
kettles, novels, and fur overcoats. Everything is 
in direst confusion, and the owners are sandwiched 
precariously between their belongings. On the lit- 
tle tables which are raised between the seats, they 
are playing endless games of cards, sipping tea and 
nonchalantly smoking cigarettes the while. You 
pass the stove-niches at the car entrances, heaped 
to the ceiling with cut wood. The fire-tenders 
as you pass give the military salute. You cross the 
covered bridges between the cars, where are little 
mounds of the snow that has sifted in around the 
crevices; and a belt of cold air tells of the zero 
temperature outside. At length the double doors 
of the foremost car appear ahead, and crossing 
one more arctic zone over the couplings, you can 
hang your fur cap by the door and salute the ikon 
that with ever-burning lamp looks down over the 
parlor-car. Now you can sit on the broad sofa set 
along the wall, or doze in the corner-rocker under 

the bookcase, or sit téte-a-téte in armchairs over 


28 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


a miniature table. Ladies here, as well as men, are 
chatting, reading, and smoking, for this combina- 
tion parlor, fumoir, and dining-room is for all, not a 
resort to which the masculine element shamefacedly 
steals for unshared indulgences. 

‘Dua stakan chat, pajolst”’ (two glasses of tea, 
please), your friend says to the aproned chelaviek, 
a Tatar from Kazan. 

‘* Stakan vodka,’’ you add; for you are willing to 
contribute twenty kopecks to the government re- 
venues if this beverage will help out the memoirs of 
your friend, the convict. 

‘Say chass,’’ replies the waiter, which means, 
literally, “this hour,’ figuratively, “at once,”’ 
actually, whenever he chances to recall that your 
party wants a glass of tea and another of vodka. 
When at length the refreshments have come, your 
companion gets gradually back to the reminis- 
cences. 

‘“Were your comrades many on that march?” 

‘Twenty-six from my school in Odessa,” he says. 
He tells of the tumult in the Polytechnic Academy, 
when he was a boy of sixteen studying engineering ; 
of the barricade which the students threw up; of the 
soldiers sent against it; of an officer wounded with 
a stone, and the sentence to the mines. He tells of 
the journey, day after day, the miserable company 
trudging under the burning suns of summer and 
shivering under the biting cold of winter, ill-fed and 
in rags. He recalls how this friend and that friend 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 29 


sickened and died ; how a peasant-woman gave him 
a dried fish ; how one of the criminals tried to escape 
and was lashed with the plet until he fainted beneath 
its strokes. 

“‘We were a sad procession. First came the Cos- 
sacks on their ponies, with their carbines and sabres. 
Then the murderers for Sakhalin, and the dangerous 
criminals in fetters; a few women next; then we, the 
politicals; last, more soldiers marching behind. Far 
to the rear came carts and wagons with the wives 
and families of the prisoners, following their men 
into exile. Slowly we went, scarcely more than 
fifteen versts a day, with a rest one day out of 
three, for the women. In winter we camped in sta- 
tions along the road.” 

From the comfortable leather armchairs they 
seem infinitely distant and dream-like, these tales 
from the dark ages of Siberia. The speaker seems to 
have forgotten his auditor and to be talking to him- 
self, and soon he relapses into silence. He sits hold- 
ing his glass of lemon-garnished tea, like a resting 
giant with his shaggy beard and mighty chest. The 
drag of the brakes is felt through the train. ‘ Desiet 
minute stoit’’ (ten minutes’ stop), somebody calls 
out. Suddenly, with an effort, the man across the 
table rouses from his reverie, and looks about the 
car, when the broad smile comes back and he says 
earnestly : — 

“You must not think of that as the true Siberia. 
It was all long ago — thirty-five years. And you 


30 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


see I who became a kayoshnik, a gold-seeker, have 
prospered, and work many mines. I am glad now 
that they sent me to Siberia. And many others 
prosper who came with the convicts. The old dark 
Siberia dies, but our new Siberia of the railroad 
lives, and grows great.” 

He rises resolutely and shakes your hand with a 
vise-like grip. 

‘De svidania!’’ (Till we meet again.) 

You rise with the rest, draw on your fur cap and 
gloves, work into the heavy fur-lined overcoat, and 
clamber down to the platform. A little wooden 
station-house painted white is opposite the carriage 
door. It has projecting eaves and quaint many- 
paned windows. In front of it is a post with a large 
brazen bell. On the big signboard you can spell out 
from the Russian letters ‘‘ Zlatoust.’”’ This is the 
summit station of the pass that crosses the Urals. 
Around are standing stolid sheep-skinned figures, 
bearded peasants just in from their sledges, which 
are ranked outside the fence. Fur-capped mechan- 
ics, Carrying wrenches and hammers, move from 
car to car to tighten bolts and test wheels for the 
long eastward pull. Uniformed station attendants 
are here and there, some with files of bills of lading. 
As you walk down the platform among the crowd, 
you come upon a soldier, duffle-coated and muffled 
in his capote, standing stoically with fixed bayonet. 
Forty paces further there is another, and beyond 
still another, all the length of the platform, and far 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 31 


up the line. What a symbol of Russian rule are these 
silent sentries! And what a mute tale is told in the 
necessity for a guard at every railroad halting-place 
in the Empire! 

You stroll along toward the engine. Huge and 
box-like are the big steel cars, five of which compose 
the train. Two second-class wagons painted in mus- 
tard yellow are rearmost, then come the first-class, 
painted black, next the “‘ wagon restoran”’ and the 
luggage-van, where the much advertised and little 
used bath-room and gymnasium are located. The 
engine is a big machine, but of low power, unable to 
make much speed; and the high grades and the 
road-bed, poor in many places, additionally limit 
progress. It is apparent why the train rarely moves 
at a rate greater than twenty miles an hour. 

At first you do not notice the cold. But now that 
you have walked for a few minutes along the plat- 
form, it seems to gather itself for an attack, as if 
it had a personality. You draw erect with tense 
muscles, for the system sets itself instinctively on 
guard. The light breeze that stirs begins to smart 
and sting like lashes across the face. The hand 
drawn for a moment from the fleece-lined glove, 
stiffens into numbed uselessness. As you march 
rapidly up and down the platform, an involuntary 
shiver shakes you from head to foot. A fellow 
passenger, remarking it, observes : — 

“Tt is not cold to-day, in fact, quite warm. Ochen 
jarko.”’ 


32 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


You walk together to the big thermometer that 
hangs by the station-door. It is marked with the 
Réaumur Scale, and your brain is too torpid for 
multiplications. But the slightly built official, 
known as a government engineer by green-bordered 
uniform and crossed hammers on his cap, is inspect- 
ing the mercury also. 

‘Eight degrees below zero Fahrenheit,” he says. 
“Quite warm for January. It is often thirty-five 
degrees below zero here in the Uralsk.” 

It gets colder at the suggestion. The three start- 
ing-bells ring, and everybody scrambles into the 
compartments. 

The express rolls onward down the Urals. You 
stroll back to the warm dining-room and idly watch 
the groups around. Across the way is an elderly mild- 
looking officer, whose gold epaulettes, zig-zagged 
with silver furrows, are the insignia of a major- 
general. He smokes endless cigarettes in company 
with another officer lesser in degree, a major, 
decorated with the Russo-Japanese service-medal, 
smart of carriage and alert of look. By the window 
beyond is a young German, gazing meditatively at 
the hills and the snow through the bottom of a 
glass of Riga beer. A rather bright-mannered dame, 
with rings on her fingers and long pendants in her 
ears, chats vivaciously in French with a phlegmatic- 
looking personage in a tight-fitting blue coat which 
buttons up to his throat like a fencer’s jacket. A 
quietly-dressed gentleman, evidently in civil life, 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 33 


is reading one of the library copies of de Maupas- 
sant. 

Outside, cut and tunnel, hill, slope, and valley, 
green forest, white drifted snow, and bare craggy 
rocks, the Urals glide past. The little track-ward- 
ens’ stations beside the way snap back as if jerked 
by a sudden hand, and the telegraph-poles catch up 
in endless monotony the sagging wires. 

The Tatar waiter goes from place to place, clear- 
ing off the ashes and the glasses, and getting ready 
for dinner. There is a table-d’hote repast, the Rus- 
sian obeid, a meal which starts with a fiery vodka 
gulp any time after noon, and tails off in the falling 
shadows of the winter sunset with tea and cigar- 
ettes. Or, if one wishes, he may press the bell, 
labeled in the Greeco-Slavonic lettering, ‘‘ Buffet,’ 
and dine a la carte. 

‘Il vaut mieux essayer le repas Russe,’’ says the 
quiet reader of de Maupassant, joining you. 

He is duly thanked for the advice, and we beckon 
to the aproned waiter. At once the latter passes the 
countersign kitchenward to set the meal in motion, 
and puts before us the little liqueur-glasses and the 
bottle of vodka. While we still gasp and blink over 
this, he has gotten the cold zakuska of black rye- 
bread and butter, sardinka, salty beluga, and cold 
ham, and has started us on the first course. Then 
comes in, after the omni-inclusive zakuska, a big 
pot of cabbage-soup which we are to season with 
a swimming spoonful of thick sour cream. The 


34 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


chunky pieces of half-boiled meat floating in it are 
left high and dry by the consumption of the liquid. 
The meat becomes the third course, which we garn- 
ish with mustard and taste. 

‘‘Voyons!”’ the Frenchman observes. ‘‘Of the 
Russian cuisine and its method of preparing certain 
food-substances one may not approve. Frankly it 
calls for the sauce of a prodigious appetite. But 
contemplating the obeid as an institution so evolved 
as to fit into the general scheme of life, it finds 
merit. The Russian meal is a guide to Russian char- 
acter.” 

‘‘What signifies this mélange of raw fish, eggs, 
and great slices of flesh, and mush of cabbage- 
soup ?”’ 

‘‘Not that the Russian has no taste. It is that 
he sacrifices his finer susceptibilities to his love of 
freedom. A regular hour for meals would seem to 
him a sacrifice of his leisure and convenience to that 
of the cook. The guiding principle of the national 
Cuisine is that all dishes must be capable of being 
served at any time that the eater feels disposed.” 

This is a problem to put to any kitchen, we 
allow. Napoleon’s chef met it by relays of roasting 
chickens. But one cannot keep half a dozen fowl 
going for each household of the one hundred and 
forty million inhabitants of Russia. Thus sturgeon 
is provided, and sterlet, parboiled so that it tastes 
like blotting-paper; and the filet that is called 
“‘biftek,’’ and the oil-sodden ‘‘ Hamburger,” that is 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 35 


dubbed “‘filet.’’ These can be started at nine in the 
morning, and be removed at any time between that 
hour and nine at night, without any appreciable 
change in taste or texture. The cook of the res- 
taurant, like his brethren of the Empire, has laid 
his professional conscience sacrificially upon the 
national altar of unfettered meals. If the obeid is 
not a triumph in culinary art, it is at least a signal 
example of domestic generalship. 

We have advanced without a hitch to roast par- 
tridge, with sugared cranberries, which our friend 
washes down with good red wine from the Imperial 
Crimean estates. We get through a hard German- 
like apple-tart, and reach the last item of cheese. 

When the mighty meal is over, we order tea, light 
cigarettes, and lean back in the armchairs to chat 
and note how our neighbors are getting through the 
time. 

At the far end of the room a Russian has joined 
the French lady and her escort. They are celebrat- 
ing some occasion that requires heaping bumpers 
of champagne. The babble of their conversation is 
in the air. It seems to refer to the comparative 
appreciation of histrionic talent in Rouen and 
Vladivostok ! 

Somebody is being treated to a dressing-down in 
the latest Parisian argot. ‘‘Ces sont des betteraves 
la-bas!’’ one hears scornfully above the murmurs. 

Across the way some Germans are engaged with 
beer-schooners. One of them gets excited and brings 


36 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA © 


his fist down upon the table. ‘Arbeit in Sibirien 
nimmer geendet ist; they always want more advice 
about their gas-plants.”’ 

In the lull that follows the explosion, a gentle 
English voice floats past from the seat behind us. 
‘‘And so I told him that the station had nearly 
enough funds, but we needed workers, more work- 
ers.” Itis the English medical missionary on his way 
to Shanta-fu, discussing China with the American 
mining-engineer, bound for Nerchinsk. 

The piano, under the corner ikon with its ever- 
burning lamp, tinkles out suddenly, and a man’s 
voice starts up — 


You can hear the girls declare, 
He must be a millionaire. 


He misses a note every now and then, which does 
not embarrass him in the least. Caroling gayly to 
his own accompaniment, he forges ahead. The 
crowd in the armchairs around the room, consuming 
weak tea or strong beer, and smoking, all join with 
an untroubled accord and versatile accents, French, 
English, and Russian, in the blaring chorus, ‘‘ The 
man that broke the bank at Monte Carlo.”’ 

The train rocks faster on the falling grade; little 
by little the mountains drop away; gradually the 
mighty forests become dwarfed intoscattered clumps 
of straggly birches, and the great trees dwindle into 
bushes; lower and still lower fall the hills, until allis 
flat. As far as the eye can see are the snow-covered 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 37 


wastes, treeless, houseless, lifeless. The lowest foot- 
hills of the Urals have been passed. It is the be- 
ginning of the great steppes. 

Slowly the daylight wanes. The gray darkness 
deepens steadily ; it seems to gather in over the glid- 
ing snow, and the peculiar gloom of a Siberian win- 
ter’s night closes down. At each track-guard’s post 
flash with vivid suddenness the little twinkling lan- 
terns of the wardens of the road. Involuntarily 
conversation becomes less animated and voices are 
lowered ; the spell of the sombreness is over all. 

Soon the electric lamps are lighted, and from 
brazen ikon and sparkling glasses flash reflections 
of their glitter. Curtains are drawn, which shut out 
the enshrouding blackness. The piano begins tink- 
ling again; the waiters come and go with tea and 
liqueurs; the babble of conversation rises; and the 
idle laughter is heard anew. Darkness may be 
ahead, behind, and beside, but within there is light 
— enjoy it. 

The train slows for a halt. Station-lamps shine 
-mistily through the brooding night. Lanterns bob 
to and fro on the platform as fur-capped train- 
hands pass, tapping wheels and opening journal- 
boxes. At each door a fire-tender is catching and 
stowing away the wood which a peasant in padded 
sheepskins is tossing up from his hand-sled below. 
It is Chelliabinsk, whose old importance as the 
clearing-house of the convicts has been passed on 
to the new city of the railroad. Here the just com- 


38 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


pleted northern branch, linking Perm to Petersburg, 
meets the old southern line from Samara and Mos- 
cow. : 

A short stop and the train moves on again. The 
day is done and gradually each saunters into his 
own warm compartment, which the width of the 
Russian gauge makesas largeasa real room. One can 
read at the table by the window, under the electric 
drop-light, or, propped in pillows, one can stretch 
out luxuriously on the easy couch that is nightly 
manceuvred into an upper and lower berth. Practi- 
cally always after crossing the Urals, the number of 
passengers has so thinned out that each may have 
a stateroom to himself. 

Presently you push the bell labeled, ‘‘ Konduk- 
tor.” A uniformed attendant appears standing at 
the salute. ‘‘ Spate’’ (sleep) is sufficient direction. 
The sheets and pillows are dug out and the trans- 
formation of the couch into a bed is effected. 
‘ Spacoine notche’’ (good-night) he says, and you 
fall asleep to the rhythmic throb of the engine. 

During the following hours the train enters the 
Tobolsk Government, the oldest province of Siberia, 
whose 439,859 square miles of area, nearly four 
times as large as Prussia, extend roughly from the 
railroad northward to the Arctic Ocean, and from 
the Urals eastward so as to include the lower basin 
of the Ob-Irtish river system. This ancient province 
has seen much of Siberia’s history, whose predomin- 
ant features have been two, growth and graft. 


bat 


bs 


pot pete Ni 





BRIDGE OVER THE IRTISH 





ALONG THE TRANS-SIBERIAN RAILWAY 





THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 39 


Out of evil, somehow, in a marvelous way has 
been coming good. In the earliest days, with what 
smug satisfaction did the Stroganovs find that the 
native inhabitants would trade ermine for glass 
beads! Yet the fruit of their sharp dealing and 
purchased protection and special privilege was the 
expedition that won Sibir, founded Tobolsk, and 
opened to Russia the way into northern Asia. The 
imperial commissioner who came to Tobolsk shortly 
after Kutchum Khan’s overthrow, to collect the 
yassak tribute of ten sable-skins for each married 
man and five for each bachelor, was detected culling 
the choice skins for himself, and substituting cheap 
ones for his master. But his agents had sought out 
the paths and extended the Russian Empire far 
into the northern forests. 

By despotic oppression the inhabitants of Uglitch 
town, condemned for testifying to the murder of 
Dimitri, the Czarevitch, came here into exile in 
1593, Carrying with them the tocsin-bell that had 
tolled alarm when the Czar wished silence. But 
they, together with the deported laborers settled 
by the same arbitrary will along the Tobol River, 
started the permanent settlement of the new realm. 

A succeeding functionary called on the natives 
for a special tribute of ermine for the Czarina’s 
mantle. He collected so many bales of it that the 
taxed began to wonder at the stature of the “‘ Little 
Mother,’’ and sent a special deputy to Petersburg. 
The legate discovered that the Empress was as 


40 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


other women, and on his disclosures the official was 
unable to save his own, let alone the ermines’ skins. 
Yet while the governor was plundering the fur- 
merchants of Tobolsk, the frontiers were extending, 
until by 1700 they reached eastward to Kamchatka 
and Lake Baikal, southeast to the Altai foothills 
at Kuznetz, and north to the Arctic Ocean. 

At Tobolsk in 1710 Peter the Great established 
the capital of his reorganized province of Siberia. 
Prince Gagarin, whom he appointed its first gov- 
ernor, found here a systemless extortion unworthy 
of an efficient statesman. With the thoroughness of 
genius he built up in the unhappy province a regu- 
lar organization of rascality. His pickets patrolled 
the roads into Russia, to prevent the escape of those 
who might carry the tale of his oppression. He ar- 
ranged with high officials at Court that any petition- 
ers who evaded this frontier net should be handed 
over to an appropriate committee. Thus fortified, 
he began collections of as much as could be wrung 
from his luckless subjects. Every traveler paid 
Gagarin’s tariff, every farmer sent him presents of 
stock, every trapper forwarded the best of his catch. 
The fur-trader’s donations and the merchants’ 
loans were assisted into Gagarin’s warehouses by 
thumbscrew and thonged knout. 

While these things passed in Tobolsk there came 
periodically to Petersburg delegations of outwardly 
contented citizens attesting the wisdom of their 
governor. They brought to the Czar and the Grand 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 41 


Dukes, in addition to the punctiliously rendered tax 
yassak, gifts of especially fine furs. Such was the 
completeness of Gagarin’s control that not an echo 
of the true state of affairs reached the ears of the 
astute Peter. 

At length, in 1719, Nesterov, the Minister of Fin- 
ance, was privately approached bysome Tobolsk mer- 
chants and was supplied with evidence sufficient to 
hang half the officials in Siberia. In a dramatic pre- 
sentation the Minister furnished this to the Imperial 
Senate, showing so bad a case that Gagarin’s own 
agents in the ducal circle rose up against him. The 
Czar sent Licharev, a major of the Guard, to Siberia, 
to proclaim in every town and hamlet that Gagarin 
was a criminal in the eyes of the Emperor. As this 
messenger approached Tobolsk, official after official 
came out to turn state’s evidence, trying to assure 
his personal safety. The highways to Russia were 
guarded by Peter’s own troops, with orders to seize 
all outgoing travelers who might be transporting 
Gagarin’s accumulated spoil, which with commend- 
able prudence the Czar had allocated to himself. 

When Peter was in England he had remarked 
casually to an acquaintance, ‘‘In my realm I have 
only two lawyers, and one of these I intend to hang 
as soon as I get back.” It was particularly unfor- 
tunate for this ex-governor that the remainder of 
the legal profession did not feel himself called upon 
to explain to Peter the Gagarin campaign contribu- 
tions. No one ever needed an attorney more. He 


42 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


was under trial before an imperial judge who did not 
know a technicality from a tort, and whose prelim- 
inary procedure was to order a reliable gallows. 

For some score of years subsequent to Gagarin, 
the governors of Siberia were, in any event, moder- 
ate. The province grew apace, increased by exiles, 
by land-seeking colonists, by raskalniks, — noncon- 
formists of the Greek Church, self-called ‘Old 
Believers,’ — who preferred to come to Siberia 
rather than follow Peter’s orders and shave off their 
beards. 

Then Chicherin the Magnificent came. His life 
was a round of celebrations. Wonderful stews he 
concocted for his sybaritic revels. At obezd an or- 
chestra of thirty pieces supplied the music. Artil- 
lery in front of the residency saluted him with salvos 
when he drove out. In Butter-Week all Tobolsk 
drank the spirits which their governor bountifully 
provided. It is hardly necessary to say that the 
money for these entertainments did not come from 
Chicherin’s private purse: the city merchants 
groaned over forced loans and benevolences; and 
at last their cry reached the throne, and Chicherin 
too was removed. 

With his passing, the Tobolsk Province fell to less 
spectacular rulers, but under good and bad it grew 
steadily, until in 1860 there were a million inhabit- 
ants within its borders, a population which at the 
present time has risen to a million and a half. Some 
forty thousand of these are exiles; some eighty 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 43 


thousand raskalniks; and forty thousand Tatars, 
who feed the flocks where their ancestors once bore 
sway, living peacefully side by side with the Rus- 
sians. Some fifteen thousand are descendants of the 
Samoieds and Voguls with whom the first Stro- 
ganov from the adjoining Russian province of 
Archangel traded his wares. Some twenty thousand 
are Ostiaks whose forebears were alternately allies 
and enemies of Yermak. 

The capital city, Tobolsk, on the Tobol River 
hard-by its junction with the Irtish, has grown from 
a precariously held camp of two hundred and fifty 
fugitive Cossack soldiers to a city of thirty thou- 
sand. Tiumen, the easterly city on the Tura River, 
another of Yermak’s camps, has grown into a great 
distributing-centre for produce brought by the river- 
highways. From the railway line northward as far 
as the city of Tobolsk extends a farm-belt, a con- 
tinuation of the black-earth region of great Russia. 
The fertility of the land may be judged by the 
number of villages met as the train speeds on, and 
the large proportion of enclosed fields on both sides 
of the track. Some of the finest agricultural soil in 
the world lies here, such soil as composes the 
prairies of Minnesota and Dakota. Three million 
head of live stock graze in the district, which has 
a yearly production of ten million hundredweight of 
wheat alone, four million of rye, and nine million 
of oats. Five million more settlers may live and 
thrive, and the harvest will feed the ever-growing 


44 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


cities of Europe when Siberia comes to be the new 
granary of the old world. The stress and turmoil of 
Tobolsk are passed. Happy the people who have no 
annals! 

Gradually, as the train rolls eastward beyond the 
Ishim River Valley, the farm country opens out into 
the unfenced prairie of the Great Steppe. The clus- 
tered wooden villages that flanked the line through 
Tobolsk appear less and less frequently, till at last 
we seem to glide over an immense white sea, frozen 
into perpetual calm and silence. Here and there a 
gray thicket of stunted trees and bushes, here and 
there a grove of naked-limbed birches, mutely ex- 
hibit Nature’s desolation. 

As the sullen landscape bares itself, one thinks of 
the prison caravans tramping these wastes; of the 
early neglected garrisons which Elizabeth’s favorite 
General Kinderman proposed to victual on crushed 
birch-bark and relieve the Crown of their expense; 
of all the misery and the wrong that the steppes of 
Siberia have symbolized. No sign of man’s handi- 
work or of Nature’s kindliness is seen, — only the 
cold snow and the bare birches, while regularly as 
the ticking of a clock the telegraph-poles and the 
verst-spaced stations snap back into the wastes. 
The dominant reflection is not, how great is the 
achievement which has mastered these steppes! but, 
how infinitesimal is all that man has done in this 
ocean of untrodden snow! Hour after hour we are 
driving on. Yet never is there passed a landmark 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 45 


to conjure into imagination a picture of progress. 
One moves as in a nightmare, where he runs for 
seeming ages, hunted forward, yet can never stir 
from the spot. The horizon-bounded circle of vision 
is as the ever-receding rim of a giant dome, the 
rails ahead and behind bisecting its white immens- 
ity. Above, the vast bowl of the blue sky dips and 
meets it, imprisoning us. Where are the fields and 
villages; the bustling activity of human life that 
tells of man’s mastership? Hour after hour passes 
without a change in the drear monotony of the land- 
scape; for miles on miles not a trace is seen of hu- 
man dominion. Grim Nature spreading her shroud 
over plain and pasture is despot here, and Winter 
is ruler of the Siberian Steppe. 

One could ride due south a thousand versts, 
through Golodnia the ‘“‘hunger steppe” to the bor- 
ders of Turkestan, and find the same monotonous 
plain, snow-covered save where the dryness of the 
south has thinned its fall. One could ride from 
the Caspian Sea due east to China, with each day’s 
march a counterpart of the rest. Five hundred thou- 
sand square miles of area are covered with grass and 
gaudy flowers in thespring, with low brush and green 
reeds where the salt swamp-lakes receive the tribute 
of snow-fed streams. In midsummer the growing 
grass scorches under a heat of 104°. In winter snow 
is everywhere, —in feathery flakes that the midday 
sun does not soften during whole months of a cold 
which is a ferocity. Thirty to forty degrees below 


46 THE RUSSIAN. ROAD TO CHINA 


zero is not unusual, and the land is swept by bitter 
winds that pierce like daggers through doubled furs 
and felts. Yet there dwell on the central plateau of 
Asia a million people, and one million cattle and 
three million sheep are scattered over the tremen- 
dous range. As the herds have become hardened 
through the centuries and survive in measure de- 
spite the severity, so also have the men. From the 
train-windows now one may chance to see infrequent 
straggling herds of long-horned cattle, lean and 
gaunt, scratching away the snow in search of food. 
Mounted on little shaggy ponies are figures buried 
in skins, who keep guard over them. 

One detects a new type among the crowds at the 
stations, — flat faces, round eyes, square thickset 
bodies. Here on the borderland, the old race has 
fused with the Slavand has become metamorphosed. 
The sons of the Tatars, whose very name was dis- 
torted into that of a dweller in Tartarus by those 
who feared their fierce valor, have become shop- 
keepers, train-hands, waiters, and butchers, who 
come to sell meat and milk to the chef of the wagon 
restoran. Sometimes, at the stops, figures, gnome- 
like in enveloping red capote and grotesquely 
padded furs, hold their ponies with jealous rein, 
staring curiously at the locomotive and passengers. 

Looking long from the windows at this steppe, 
a drowsy hypnotism steals over the mind —a dull 
stupor of unbroken monotony. It is better to do 
as the Russians — pay no attention whatever to the 





DINING-CAR SALOON, VIEW OF THE LIBRARY 





THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 47 


landscape outside, but make the most of the life 
within the moving caravansary, — cards and cigar- 
ettes and liqueurs, tea and endless talk, with yarns 
that take days for the spinning. 

The uniformed judge, passing by, joins you. He 
is traveling to a new appointment with his swarming 
family of children, shawl-decked females of unknown 
quality and quantity, the household bedding, and 
the ancestral samovar, all crowded into one stifling 
compartment. He discusses volubly the confusions 
of the Code, and propounds a unique theory of his 
own as to Russian jurisprudence, to the effect that 
all the best laws of other nations have beenadopted, 
with none of the old or conflicting enactments 
repealed. The general drops into the circle. He is 
interesting when one has pierced the crust, but 
dogmatic. At every station the soldiers of the gar- 
rison, not on sentry-duty, jump to one side, swing 
half-around, and stand at the salute until he passes, 
to the huge inconvenience of the porters. He would 
undoubtedly vote the Democratic ticket to repay 
Mr. Roosevelt for putting Russia under the alter- 
native of stopping the war perforce, or forfeiting 
sympathy, when Japan was said to be breaking 
under the strain. 

‘Russia was beaten this time. What of it? Niet- 
chevo!”’ says the general. 

‘* Nietchevo,”’ we echo, as we sip our tea. 

‘But the Japanese are wily insects,’’ observes his 
companion, the young service-medaled major. “I 


48 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


was in Vladivostok when our prisoners came back. 
They tried to get money for the checks the Japanese 
had given them. That was how the big mutiny 
began. You know, when our men were taken cap- 
tive, the Japanese treated them very well, much 
good food, vodka, let them write home all about it, 
and gave them enormous pay, six yen, three dollars 
a month, charging the expense all up to the Czar 
- for after the war. When at last the prisoners were 
to be released, the Japanese promised every man 
double pay, twelve roubles. But they gave them the 
money? No, the insects gave them each an order 
payable by the Russian commander in Vladivostok. 
So the transports came, and these men were sent 
ashore with these checks in their hands, and they 
went up to the commandant of the city, and asked 
for their cash that the Japanese had promised. 
What money did the commandant have for them? 
What could he do? He ordered them to go away. 
So they stood and discussed on the street-corners. 
And more men still came from the transports. Then 
they said, ‘We will ask the general of the forts.’ So 
they marched to the forts in a big crowd, and the 
general he also told them to go away. For a long 
time they talked and they persuaded the sailors to 
help them. So they went again to the forts, and the 
sailors shot at the forts, and the general ordered 
the artillery to shoot. But the artillery would not, 
so the men broke in and killed the officers and got 
arms and went back to the city commander. Him, 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 49 


too, they killed, and all Vladivostok was in mutiny 
for two weeks. Not an officer dared show himself. 
General Orlov persuaded them to let him into the 
town. Then many were shot, but at last the city was 
quiet. The Japanese are very sly insects.”’ 

His story ends and the two officers go back to join 
their families. The train throbs on across the steppe. 

The German gas-plant drummer, with his new 
Far Eastern outfit, is gathering from the missionary 
doctor details of treaty-port life, which are being 
treasured up as valuable reference data. The 
French fur-merchant dips back into his library copy 
of de Maupassant. 

The rigor of the outside scene seems at length to 
be changing. A few scattered houses appear, and 
trees and fenced fields, and villages, with curling 
smoke rising from the chimneys. Men and children 
are walking about, and finally we come to the Irtish 
River, over which the train rumbles on a half-mile 
bridge. Spires and gilt domes are visible, dark 
wooden houses, and bright white-painted churches 
with green roofs. Droshkies and carts are passing in 
the streets, and presently we draw up to the station 
of Omsk, the second city of Siberia. 

The junction of the Trans-Siberian Railway with 
the Irtish River, which is 2520 miles long and open 
from April to October, would of itself make Omsk 
a centre of great strategic importance. But in addi- 
tion to this main river-highway, which is navigated 
by some hundred and fifty steamers, there are afflu- 


50 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


ents by which one can sail from the Urals to the 
Altai, from the Arctic Ocean to China, and these 
lines of communication centre here. 

From Omsk, following the Irtish down past To- 
bolsk, one can steam by the Obi to Obdorsk, within 
the Arctic Circle. Indeed, a regular grain-export 
service was planned via the Kara Sea to London by 
an ambitious Englishman. It failed after some 
promise of success, because of the ice-packs in the 
Gulf of Obi. From Omsk, following the Irtish up- 
stream, steamer navigation extends as far as Semi- 
palatinsk, in the Altai foothills. Smaller craft may 
go nearly to the Chinese frontier. 

By the Tobol and Tura rivers, Tiumen, in the 
Ural foothills, may be reached, four hundred and 
twenty miles from Semipalatinsk. By ascending 
the Obi, a boat may go fourteen hundred and 
eighty miles east from Tiumen to Kuznetz on the 
Tom; through a canal from an Obi confluent the 
Yenesei River System may be entered, and from it 
by a short portage the Lena System. In all twenty- 
eight thousand miles are navigable by small craft, 
and seven thousand miles by steamer. Omsk is 
the pulsing heart of this mighty interior waterway 
system. 

The train leaves the station, which is at a dis- 
tance from the town, and once more we are en 
route. The eye rests gratefully upon the ribbon of 
cultivated fields which follow the Irtish down. But 
we reenter the steppe, and again the desolation set- 





TIUMEN 


TOMSK 








CITIES OF NEW RUSSIA 


Tf 


e 
iy 
ts 
i 
’ - 
; 
; 





THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 51 


tles over all. In hours of looking, not a habitation is 
seen, not an animal, not a tree, — only the same 
white billows. This Barbara district in the Tomsk 
Government has an area of fifty thousand square 
miles. Kainsk, some seven hundred versts from 
Chelliabinsk, is the centre. The section, though cov- 
ered with the fertile black earth of the adjoining 
regions, is, owing to lack of drainage and adequate 
rainfall, arid and almost untilled. 

The round-faced civilian from the compartment 
further up, whose familiarity with the country has 
made him a welcome accession, joins us at the win- 
dow. He looks out over the level plain of the Bar- 
bara Steppe with manifest satisfaction. 

“You admire the landscape?”’ we ask satirically. 

He smiles. ‘‘We got big money when the line 
went through here. I made my first fortune then.”’ 

He sighs at the memory of old times, and tells of 
the railway-building days when the Czar had given 
the order for a road across the continent, and the 
soldiers of fortune, of whom he was one, had gath- 
ered to the task. 

‘Not a kopeck had I when the Dreyfus brothers 
made their big speculation in Argentine wheat and 
went down, leaving us young clerks stranded in 
Kiev. You know Kiev? Great pilgrimages come 
there to see the bodies of Joseph and his brethren, 
all preserved just as when they died. We heard by 
accident of a grading job under a big contractor out 
here. None of us knew anything about construction, 


52 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


but three of us grain-clerks wrote a letter saying we 
would put the work through, and started. We had 
just enough money to get to Samara. In Samara 
was a merchant much esteemed, whom I went to 
see. He went on our bond, never having seen us be- 
fore, and gave us enough money to come. So it was 
in the old days. The country was flat as a board. 
We had but to lay down the ties and spike the rails. 
Thirty versts we made of this line. It cost us thirty 
thousand roubles a verst, but we got fifty thousand. 
Would that we might do that now again.” 

The contractor, his round jolly face glowing with 
the recital and hiseyes shining through gold-rimmed 
glasses, is entertaining a growing company, for the 
judge has stopped to gossip, and the railroad official. 

“I took my money and bought an estate in the 
country of the Don Cossacks,’ the contractor is 
saying. ‘‘I paid ten per cent to the Government for 
taxes when I bought the land. I had to pay no more 
taxes then all my life, but my heir would pay taxes, 
or, if I sold, he who bought would pay. So it was 
done in the Hataman Government.” 

‘It is just,’’ says the judge. ‘‘ Why should they, 
who get the property, not pay taxes?” 

The contractor shrugs his shoulder and continues: 
“‘For five years I farmed, and though I had a Ger- 
man overseer, I did not prosper. So I went to one 
of the cities of Russia and thought to put in a tram- 
way. The men of the city said, ‘Are all the horses 
dead? He of the spectacles is mad.’ Yet by impor- 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 53 


tunity I got them to give me the right to make a 
tramway. There were in Petersburg then many 
Belgians, with much money, wishing to give it 
away. So I went to them and said, ‘Here is a great 
franchise, but who will build the line and gain the 
riches ?’ 

““*We will, we will,’ said the Belgians. 

“‘From them I got a hundred and eighty thou- 
sand roubles clear, and an interest. I sold the interest 
quickly to other foreigners, Frenchmen, and went 
away. Yes, the tramway was built, and the people 
crowded to ride on it as I had said. But when it 
was going well, and the profits were yet to come, 
the people said, ‘Shall foreigners oppress our city?’ 
So the town bought the tramways for what they 
said was the cost, and the Belgians went away. 
And they did not come back to Russia. Thus were 
many railways and tramways built and taken. The 
foreigners will not come back now, and Russians too 
do not enter these pursuits, lest the Government 
come after them later. It is hudoo (bad).” 

*‘ But is it not worse that these men should make 
a tramway and draw vast money from the people?”’ 
says the railroad official. ‘‘For me, I think the 
Government should do it all.” 

“* Ni snaia, | don’t know,”’ says the contractor. 
“‘But I who bought stocks with the Belgians’ money 
(foolishly thinking that the business which I knew 
not was safe, while that which I knew was shaky), 
I will not give again to the stock-people the money 


54 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA - 


I shall make from the oil-fields of Sakhalin, where 
I go now.” 

“But,” says the railway chinovnik, “does not 
the State do these things better? Look you at this 
very railway. For years any who wished might 
have built into Siberia. An Amerikanski, and Col- 
lins, an Angleski, came proposing railroads, but all 
things slumbered. Then in 1891 the Czar ordered 
the road to be built, and in ten years we had laid 
the eight thousand versts to Vladivostok. I read 
that the line of Canada, where too there are steppes 
and highlands as ours, took ten years for but half 
the distance. We made two versts a day for all the 
years, and they but one. Who other than the Gov- 
ernment could spend a billion roubles for a line that 
will bring money returns only in the far future? ”’ 

‘‘ Ah, you chinovniks, you say, lo, we do all this! 
But it was such as I built that road, and because 
you gave us big money. And is not the money to 
support it now got from the peasants’ taxes while 
so many clerks and operators waste time in the 
offices? I have seen a third as many men as at 
Omsk do the same work. And your trains go as the 
water-snails, twelve versts an hour for freight, 
twenty versts an hour for the mail-trains, thirty- 
five versts for the express. One can go eighty versts 
in Europe.” 

“Truly, truly, but why go so fast? It costs more 
for fuel, and the track has to be made straight. 
What good does it do you to come in sooner? Ifa 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY = 55 


man is in a hurry to get somewhere, can he not take 
an earlier train?”’ 7 

The group mulls over this knotty point of logic, 
which is complicated by the fact that our own train 
is twelve hours late. They cite hypothetical men 
with varying sorts of engagements, and then lightly 
switch to talk of the nourishing properties of beer, 
the utility of agricultural machinery, and the old 
tiger battue of Vladivostok. 

The birch groves become more frequent now, 
pines begin to appear, and at last the country has 
become forested. Several of the passengers bestir 
themselves for departure, gathering multitudinous 
bundles, and making the circuit in demonstrative 
hand-shaking farewells. 

‘*We come to Taiga, whence they go to the stingy 
town of Tomsk,” the government engineer observes. 

“Why do you call it the stingy town of Tomsk?” 

**T will tell you. Tomsk, before the railroad came, 
was the biggest, finest, and wealthiest of our cities. 
She was the capital of the great Tomsk Gobernia, 
with three hundred and thirty thousand square 
miles of area, and a million and a half people. The 
Tom brought the big river steamers to her wharves. 
In the city she had sixty thousand inhabitants, 
increasing every year; a university, Stroganov’s 
Library, a cathedral, fine public buildings. The 
merchants were rich; the miners came down from 
the Altai; all things were prospering. When the 
railway was ordered, the engineers came through 


56 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


to locate the line. All they asked was a hundred 
thousand roubles. But how stingy were the people 
of Tomsk! They had given two million roubles for 
their university, where the students made speeches 
and got sent to the Yakutski Oblast, yet they would 
not give a hundred thousand roubles to the engin- 
eers. ‘Give fifty, give even forty thousand,’ said the 
engineers. But the people of Tomsk said, “Are we 
not the seat of government for all western Siberia ? 
Have we not Yermak’s banner in the cathedral ? 
Are we not Tomsk? You must bring the railway 
here anyway. But if the engineers had done that, 
who could say where it would have ended? All 
the other cities would begin to make excuses. So the 
grades to Tomsk became suddenly so bad that 
the line had to be run away south here, eighty-two 
versts. The station where one changes was named, 
in mockery, Taiga, ‘in the woods.’ The merchants 
flocked out begging the engineers to come back to 
Tomsk. They offered all that had been asked and 
much more. They hung around the office and wept 
over the blue-prints. But how can a professional 
man change his plans and sacrifice his reputation? 
One cannot do such things. So Tomsk was left, and 
her trade now falls far behind that of the other cities, 
Omsk and Irkutsk. We in Siberia smile at her and 
call her the stingy city of Tomsk.” 

‘‘ We have, too, another jest, of the Tomsk Czar,”’ 
chimes in the judge. ‘“‘There appeared one day 
there a stranger calling himself Theodore Kuzmilch, 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 57 


who bought a little house which he never left save 
to do some act of charity. For years he lived; then, 
when he died, the house was turned into a chapel 
because of his good deeds. Many years after his 
death, a merchant started the tale that this was the 
Czar Alexander I, who did not die in the Crimea, 
but left a false body to be carried to Petersburg and 
entombed in state. He had, it was told, not really 
died, and, disappointed at his powerlessness to help 
his people, had come, self-exiled, to Siberia. But we 
others laugh at this tale of Tomsk as an imperial 
residence.” 

The twenty minutes’ stop at Taiga ends, and the 
train renews its journey through the forests. 

With rolling hill and long-stretching forests, the 
watershed bounding the eastern limits of the Obi 
Basin is crossed near Achinsk, and the drainage- 
basin of the mighty Yenesei River, one million three 
hundred and eighty thousand square miles in area, 
is entered. It just fails to equal in length the 
Mississippi-Missouri System. Including the admin- 
istrative territory ‘“‘ Yeneseik”’ of the East Siberian 
Gobernia, the river sweeps from the Chinese border- 
land north beyond the Arctic Circle. In the far 
south, where it rises among the Minusink Mount- 
ains, the valley country is like the Italian Alps, 
mild and very fertile. Iron-mines of prehistoric anti- 
quity are found in these cs relics of the old 
Han Dynasty of China. 

Of the twenty million bushels of grain produced 


58 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA . 


throughout the Yeneseik territory, nearly a third 
comes from the Minusink oasis. The railroad pierces 
the central plains, farmed in the most favorable 
- spots only, and capable of enormously extended 
cultivation. 

Through alternating forest, field, and plain the 
train moves on, and crossing the three thousand-foot 
Yenesei bridge, enters the city of Krasnoyarsk. 
When we pull out, the engineer, who has been chat- 
ting with the erstwhile contractor, observes, “‘ This 
town was a main hotbed of the great strike. They 
are well in hand now, but we had our time with 
them in 1905. Even I knew nothing of what had 
been prepared.” 

He goes on to tell the most curious tale of the 
organized strike movement which introduced the 
disturbances subsequent to the Russo-Japanese 
War. 

“‘On September 15 at noon, no one knows by 
whom or from what station, a signal of dots and 
dashes was tapped off. Each telegraph-operator an- 
swered the message and passed the word to thenext, 
standing by until it was repeated back. Then, leav- 
ing all things in order, he stepped from the operat- 
ing-room into the railway-station. With a motion 
he gave the countersign to the ticket-sellers, and 
each, as he received it, shut his desk, and walked 
out. The word went to the engineers, and each, at 
the signal, drew his fires and left the engine and its 
train forsaken on its tracks. Every postman put 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 59 


away his mail, closed the safe, and left his office; 
every diligence-agent locked his doors. From As- 
trakan to Archangel, from Warsaw to Vladivostok, 
the electric summons went, and the whole realm of 
Russia was paralyzed. 

“With two thousand roubles, offered by the 
Governor-General of Poland, before them, and ten 
bayonets on the tender behind, an engineer and a 
fireman were secured to run one coach, containing 
a terrified prince, from Warsaw to the frontier. In 
the south, a few cars were started by soldiers, but 
beyond such rare instances, for three weeks nota train 
was moved. More than this, not a telegram was 
transmitted, not a letter delivered. Everywhere 
was black silence, as if all the Russias had been 
swept from the face of the world. 

“““More wages, and the constitution,’ was the 
slogan of the strikers. The official cohorts met the 
issue courageously, with bribes and bayonets, and 
little by little got the upper hand. Force and money 
were used unstintingly to win the operators needed 
and break the front of the strike. A few, who, con- 
trary to the expectations of their mates, had re- 
mained loyal to the officials, were finally secured 
and protected by the soldiery. As in time one train 
after another was manned and moved, the men who 
had stayed away lost heart, knowing but too well 
what would be the fate of those who were left out- 
side the breastworks. First singly, then in crowds, 
they returned, and the great strike was broken.” 


60 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘Here in Krasnoyarsk there was revolutionist rule 
for a while as well,’’ the manager remarks. “The 
troops were driven out, and we had to wait for re- 
inforcements. Yet when I came to my office there 
were sixty thousand roubles in the safe, not a ko- 
peck of which had been touched. Some of the best 
employees were condemned. I was very sad, and the 
service was very poor when they marched away.” 

‘What became of them?”’ we ask. 

In a low voice he answers, ‘‘They went to the 
Yakutsk.”’ 

Everybody is silent for a moment. 

‘Where did you say?” inquires the missionary. 

“The Yakutski Oblast,’ answered the chinovnik. 

In Europe people talk of the rigors of Russia’s 
winter. In Russia of the cold of Siberia. In Siberia, 
along the railway, when the thermometer gets down 
into the forties and the sentries pick up sparrows 
too numb to fly, they say, ‘‘It’s as cold as the 
Yakutsk.”’ 

“One starts to the Yakutsk by the steamer- 
towed prison barge, following down the Yenesei 
from Krasnoyarsk,’’ the engineer continues. ‘‘ For 
the first thousand versts northward the way is 
through a mighty forest region. The interior is al- 
most as unknown as when the Samoieds were its 
sole inhabitants. Marshes covered with trembling 
soil, to be crossed only on snowshoes, alternate with 
thickets, called urmans, of larches, cedars, firs, 
pines, and beeches.” | 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 61 


“‘Tt is not alluring,’’ we observe. 

“The cold of the winter seems largely to arrest 
decay, and the fallen trees, remaining unrotted, 
form a nature-made cheval de frise, impossible to 
traverse save along the hunters’ trails. Another 
thousand versts up the Upper Tunguska River, at 
whose limit of navigation is a crossing into the Lena 
System, and the Yakutsk Province begins; eastward 
to the coastal range overlooking Behring Sea, and 
northward to the Arctic Ocean, a million and a half 
square miles of desolation, extends this exiles’ 
oblast. Prison-stations are located in the forsaken 
tundra country beyond the Arctic Circle, where 
scattered clumps of creeping birches and dwarf 
willows struggle to maintain existence in the few 
unfrozen upper inches of ground, congealed perpet- 
ually beneath to unmeasured depths. Here, where 
the average winter temperature is eighty below 
zero, come the exiles deemed most formidable.’’ 

“How long do men last in the Yakutski cold ?’’ we 
ask the engineer. 

‘“‘Oh, sometimes a strong man will outlive his 
sentence and return. The friends of our strikers 
ask me sometimes about one or another, but we 
have heard nothing of them since they marched 
away in chains. May fate keep us from that road!” 

The theme is not enlivening, and soon we go for- 
ward into the observation-car. 

After crossing the Kan River at Kansk, the rail- 
road turns abruptly southwest, through the hilly 


62 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


country of the Irkutsk Gobernia, and climbing into 
the highlands of the Altai, enters the watershed of 
the Angara. The drainage-basin of this river equals 
the combined areas of Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York. It is as well 
adapted to agriculture as parts of the best provinces 
of Central Russia in the same latitude. 

The train pulls next into the station of Nishneu- 
dinsk. A booted peddler is making his way down 
the platform, with knives, combs, caps, and cheap 
knick-knacks. He stops to show us something 
special, a miniature of multicolored minerals, glit- 
tering from a hundred crystal facets. The Russian 
engineer picks out the flaky quartz, the iron 
pyrites, — ‘‘fools’ gold,’’ as they called it in old 
Nevada times, — green porphyry, iridescent pea- 
cock ore of copper, and some black crystals like 
antimony, which show here and there. Malachite, 
serpentine, topaz, and numberless other minerals 
are in the mass, which glitters in kaleidoscopic 
changes. A small piece of gold ore tops the pile. 

“‘ Cabinetski?’’ asks the engineer. 

‘Da, da,” assents the peddler. ‘‘ Cabinetski.”’ 

““TItcomes from one of the domains of his Im- 
perial Majesty’s Cabinet,” explains the engineer. 
‘‘Stretches of forest, belts of fertile river valley, fur 
districts, hundreds of thousands of square versts, 
the best mines in these Urals which produce some- 
times yearly seven million roubles, the entire Ner- 
chinsk region, producing six million roubles, are 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 63 


‘cabinetski,’’’ he remarks. ‘‘EvenI,Ivan Vasilovich 
Poyarkov, am ‘cabinetski’!”’ 

He explains the origin of the term, going back to 
the old days when princedoms went io the cuurtiers 
of Catherine. Always for a great enterprise it was 
necessary to have a friend at Court. So the rich 
merchants and miners would form, with powerful 
members of the inner circle at St. Petersburg, alli- 
ances such as that made by the Stroganovs with 
Boris. Gradually, as time went on, the protected 
were swallowed by the protectors, until one by one 
the various estates had passed into the hands of 
the nobles of the Imperial Court. The mines in the 
Altai, which Demidov had opened up, were taken 
over in 1747 by the Emperor, those in the Zabaikal- 
skaia Oblast at about the same time. With the pass- 
ing of the years, what had been graft and expro- 
priation was transmuted into vested interest, until 
now it is the established right of the Imperial Cabi- 
net, or the Grand Dukes, to receive the revenues 
of these vast domains. In the mining regions their 
perquisite is from five to fifteen per cent. Save for 
the tax, however, miners are free to operate upon 
the ducal estates, and many are thus engaged. 

A fur-capped station-agent clangs the big bronze 
bell, waits a moment, and then clangs twice. The 
passengers climb back into the box-like steel cars of 
the express. The third bell sounds, and the train 
starts. We sit down beside the engineer and the 
conversation takes up the “‘cabinetski’’ again. 


64 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


“We have great traditions. One Governor, Ner- 
yschkin, of the ‘cabinetski’ mines at Nerchinsk, 
marched to fight the Czar. In 1775 he was ap- 
pointed chief of the mineral belt in the Zabaikal- 
skaia Oblast. He sat for eleven months at home 
with closed shutters. Then, on Easter Sunday, 
singing a devil’s hymn, and with a fat female on 
either side, he drove to church and ordered the 
service amended to suit a rather bizarre taste. He 
organized a series of glittering shows at the Crown’s 
cost, gave free drink to the populace, and throwing 
out many of his subordinates, appointed convicts in 
their stead. When he had used up all the tax-money 
in his keeping, he drew up cannon before the house 
of the rich merchant Sibirayakov, the operator of 
the mines, and made him hand out five thousand 
roubles. Finally he got together an army of Tun- 
guses and the peasants, to march against the Czar. 
He was caught on the way and sent to Russia for 
punishment. It is the great honor of our service to 
be governor over the ‘ cabinetski’ mines. Perhaps 
I shall rise there some day. Perhaps not. But I shall 
not march against the Czar.” 

The forests of birch and pine and fir, and the hills, 
as the car drives eastward, close in again. The 
crests of mid-Siberian mountains lift their snowy 
heads, and the train climbs up and up toward the 
great central Lake Baikal, and the city of Irkutsk, 
3378 miles from Moscow, and further east than 
Mandalay. 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY — 65 


When, on this seventh day, the train is winding 
up the Angara Valley toward Irkutsk, one may 
mentally look back over the country that has been 
traversed and estimate somewhat the meaning of 
the railway. The Urals formed the first landmark. 
As in the dominion of the blind the one-eyed man 
is king, so after the monotony of the plains, the Ural 
Mountains seem great and worthy of the name 
given by the old Muscovite geographer, the ‘‘ Girdle 
of the World.’”’ By actual measurements, however, 
in their seventeen hundred miles of length, no peak 
rises over six thousand feet. Coming eastward from 
the Urals the line has cut through the southwestern 
corner of the old Tobolsk Government, has skirted 
the northern border of the steppe, has bisected the 
Tomsk Province, and after crossing the Yenesei 
River in Yeneseik has entered Irkutsk Province, 
and traversed the central highland region nearly to 
Lake Baikal. 

Many who journey this way will have as their 
first impression, when the long winter ride draws to 
its close, a feeling of depression, almost of discour- 
agement, so few are the settlements, so desolate 
seems all Nature. They see the single line of rails, 
without a branch or feeder in the mighty expanse 
from Chelliabinsk to Irkutsk, save for the stub put 
in for the ungenerous outlanders of unlucky Tomsk. 
They calculate that for a territory forty times the 
size of the British Isles, and one and a half times as 
large as all Europe, the inadequacy of a railroad less 


66 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


in total mileage than the Chicago, Milwaukee and 
St. Paul, is manifest. Statistically-informed bank- 
ers sometimes shrug their shoulders at the mention 
of the Trans-Siberian. ‘‘ Every year a deficit,”’ they 
say. ‘‘Gross earnings but twenty-four million 
roubles, — one sixth of the Canadian Pacific Rail- 
way; one tenth of the Southern Railway. Hudoo 
(bad)! One hears expressed not infrequently in 
Russia the opinion that the railway is a sacrifice 
justified politically by Russia’s need for a link to 
the Pacific, but ineffectual to secure prosperity and 
advancement to the isolated land of mid-Siberia. It 
is deemed, like the Pyramids, a monument to colossal 
effort and achievement but of little service to man- 
kind. 

Their statistics are correct. But it is to the 
greater honor of the road that much which it has 
accomplished will never appear in credits on the 
account-sheets. Where the white stations of the 
Siberian Railway stand now were once the wooden 
prison-pens with their guarded stockades. Murder- 
ers and priests, forgers, profligates, and university 
professors, highway robbers and privy councilors, 
all together have tramped this way. It is its past 
from which the railroad has raised Siberia, the past 
of neglect and exile that this steam civilizer has 
banished to the far Yakutsk. 

Closer study gives, too, a better appreciation of 
the railroad’s economic significance. The line holds 
a strategic position as truly as does the Panama 


THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 67 


Canal. Though in Siberia proper there is the enor- 
mous area of nearly five million square miles, so 
much of this is in Arctic tundra, impassable swamp, 
forest, or barren steppe, that the really habitable 
and arable land narrows down to a tenth of this, 
which lies in general between the parallels of 55° 
and 58° 30’ north, and is contained within a belt 
some thirty-five hundred miles long and two hun- 
dred to two hundred and fifty miles broad. 

When it is noted that the tillable area of one 
hundred and ninety-two thousand square miles in 
Tobolsk and Tomsk, mostly along the Obi System, 
the stretch of twenty thousand miles in the steppe, 
and that of one hundred thousand in the Yeneseik 
and Irkutsk governments of eastern Siberia, are 
all in immediate proximity to the railroad, whose 
course is generally along the 55th parallel, the eco- 
nomic value of Russia’s great enterprise takes a 
different perspective. 

Its vantage is still more emphasized when the 
element of the north and south watercourses is con- 
sidered. One after another the great Siberian rivers 
are crossed, —in the Tobolsk Gobernia, the Tobol, 
the Ishim, the Irtish; in the Tomsk Gobernia, the 
Obi and the Tom; in Yeneseik, the Yenesei; in 
Irkutsk, the Angara. Each of these reaches far up 
into the agricultural zone that lies north of the rail- 
road, bringing the harvests to its cars by the cheap 
unfettered water-avenues. Thus, to the part of 
Siberia that is capable of extensive development, the 


68 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


railroad is even now in a position to give great 
aid. 

It is from such natural factors as these, not from 
financiers’ figures, that one must weigh the poten- 
tiality of this great line. Its direct value is enor- 
mous, its indirect commercial services greater yet. 
It may best be compared to a mighty river sys- 
tem such as that of the Mississippi. The latter’s 
traffic has never directly returned a dollar of the 
millions that have gone to maintaining its levees 
and training-walls and channels. Yet indirectly the 
return and the value, as an asset to the American 
people, are so great as to be incalculable. From its 
controlling position in relation to the cultivatable 
land and the interior watercourses of Central 
Siberia, as well as in relation to the far eastern 
artery, the Russian railway is an empire-builder 
as important as has been the Nile. 

The results already achieved are noteworthy. 
The city of Omsk, where the railroad and the Irtish 
River lines meet, has risen from a population of 
thirty-seven thousand in 1897 to seventy thousand 
in 1908. Further east, Stretensk has sprung from 
a town of two thousand people ten years ago to over 
twelve thousand to-day. Irkutsk has climbed from 
sixty to over eighty thousand since the railroad 
opened. 

The rural population has increased even as that 
of the cities. At the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, all Siberia contained but two hundred and 








VILLAGE OF LISTVIANITCHNOE 


LAKE BAIKAL 





THE GREAT SIBERIAN RAILWAY 69 


thirty thousand souls; at the end of the eighteenth, 
one million five hundred thousand; at the end of 
the nineteenth, five million. Now, with the railroad- 
induced immigration, it approaches the seven mil- 
lion mark. The Steppe Government alone has risen 
in fifty years from five hundred thousand to one 
million five hundred thousand, and the Tomsk from 
seven hundred thousand to two million five hundred 
thousand. 

More in importance than its present utility is 
the fact that the railway holds the key to Siberia’s 
future. The arable territory of the belt is equal 
to that of Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Ohio, 
Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, Kansas, Ne- 
braska, and the Dakotas combined. This land is 
generally well-watered, in a climate suitable to grain- 
raising, and it is, as has been shown, in its whole 
extent, adjacent to river and rail transportation. 

While such farming districts of the United States 
have some fifty inhabitants to the square mile, the 
most densely populated gobernia, Tomsk, has but 
six, and the Yeneseik but six tenths of one. 

An immense further area will yield to clearing 
and to irrigation, as has been demonstrated in the 
great results secured from five hundred versts of 
canals in the Barbara Steppe. Coal and iron are 
available in many places, and timber in the greatest 
abundance grows in the northern district. 

From a summary of these elements one may 
glean an idea of the Colossus sleeping beneath 


70 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


these snows. At a normal rate of increase, fifty 
million souls should populate Siberia at the close of 
the twentieth century. The agency of their coming 
and existing will be primarily the line of rails across 
the continent. Despite the eight hundred million 
roubles expended, with only far-off hopes of profit, 
the faulty road-bed, the light rails, the steep grades, 
and crawling trains, the glory of Russia is still 
‘The Great Siberian Railway.” 


Iil 
IN IRKUTSK 


HE train pulls slowly up to the white station- 
house at Irkutsk. A swarm of porters, 
nasilchiks, white-aproned, with peaked hats, and 
big, numbered arm-tags, invade the carriage. They 
seize each piece of luggage and run with it some- 
where into the crowd outside. You, encumbered 
with your heavy coat, laboriously follow. Irkutsk 
station, more than any previous one, is crowded 
with passengers and Cossack guards. Train officials 
are shouting instructions, and every few paces 
a sentry is standing his silent watch. This is the 
transfer entrepot for all through traffic, as well as 
the depét for the largest and most important city 
of Siberia. 

Threading the press on the platform, you struggle 
with the outgoing human current, and in time reach 
the big waiting-room of the first class. It likewise 
is crowded with a mass of people, and its floor is 
cumbered with heaping mounds of baggage. One 
of these hillocks is constructed from your impedi- 
menta, which are being guarded now by a porter, 
apparently the residuary legatee of the half-dozen 
original competitors within the car. The man takes 


72 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the long document that witnesses your claim to two 
trunks, and departs. Upon you in turn devolves 
sentry duty for the interminable time during which 
those trunks are being culled out from the baggage- 
car. 

It is an exasperating wait, but the fundamental 
rule for Russian traveling is, ‘‘never separate from 
the baggage.’’ The parcel-room here at Irkutsk 
held for six months a suit-case left by a friend to 
be sent to this traveler. The officials would not give 
it up to its owner or to any person save the for- 
warder, though he, oblivious to sequels, had gone 
on to San Francisco. 

Like the rest, now, you camp, with the baggage 
in front of you, on the waiting-room floor. It is a 
very country fair, this station. At the far end is 
a big stand crowded with dishes, on which are cold 
meats, potato salad, heaps of fruit and cakes, sec- 
tions of fish from which one may cut his own slices, 
boxes of chocolates, and cigarettes. All are piled 
up in heaping profusion. One can get a glass of 
vodka and eat of the zakuska dishes free, or while 
waiting he may buy a meal of surprisingly ample 
quantity and good quality at the long tables that 
run down the centre of the room. Most of the Rus- 
sians order a glass of tea, and with it in hand sit 
down till such indefinite future time as the luggage 
situation shall unroll itself. 

We move our baggage and join the tea caravan. 
Across the table is a slight, brown-faced man, with 


IN IRKUTSK 73 


an enormous black astrakan cape falling to his 
ankles, and wearing a jauntily perched astrakan 
cap on his head. ‘One of the Cossack settlers,” 
a friend from the train remarks. Beyond are half a 
dozen tired-looking women, with dark-gray shawls 
over their heads. Near them are men with close- 
fitting shubas, or snugly-belted sheepskin coats, fur 
inside, and rough-tanned black leather outside. 
Beside the lunch-stand are a couple of young men 
with huge bearskin caps, short coats, and high 
leather boots tucked into fleece-lined overshoes. 

A general at one of the little side tables is talk- 
ing volubly to a plump dame with furs, which are 
attracting envy from many sides. The lady merely 
nods between puffs of her cigarette, and sips her 
tea. A large fat merchant waddles past, wrapped in 
a paletot made of the glistening silvery skin of the 
Baikal seal. The room is stifling, full of smoke, and 
crowded with people. Yet no one seems to feel 
the discomfort, even to the extent of taking off the 
heavy outer coats, which, with the thermometer at 
twenty degrees below zero, they have worn on the 
sleigh-ride in, from across the river. 

Your friends of the train, save those whose pos- 
sessions were comprised in their multitudinous 
valises, are all here, fur-coated likewise and sipping 
tea, waiting, without a thought of impatience, for 
the baggage to be brought out. 

At last appears your nasilchik. ‘‘They are got,” 
he cries, and balances about himself, one by one, 


74 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


your half-dozen pieces of luggage. Through the noisy, 
gesticulating, thronging passengers and heaped be- 
longings, he shoulders and squirms a way to the 
door and into the anteroom. 

A couple of soldiers are good-naturedly hustling 
out, from the third-class waiting-room opposite, a 
little leather-jacketed and very dirty mujik. 

‘‘T did not owe seven kopecks. I cross myself. I 
am not a Jew,’ he loudly proclaims. 

‘* Nietchevo,” says the soldier. “‘Out with him 
just the same!’’ The peasants and crowd loafing 
alongside grin appreciatingly, as the mujik is es- 
corted, collar-held, through the great doors. 

The porter and yourself follow. A plunging line 
of sleighs, backed up against the outer platform of 
the station, extends far up and down the road. 
Their isvoschiks, leaning back, are shouting for 
fares. In sight are your two trunks. ‘“‘ How much to 
the Métropole?” you call. The legal fare across the 
river to the hotel is a rouble, but the Governor- 
General of eastern Siberia could n’t tell how much 
it would be if you didn’t bargain beforehand. 
“ Piat rublal” “tree rubla!l’”’ come hurtling from all 
sides. 

It is for you to walk down the line calling in the 
vernacular, “fifty, seventy kopecks!’’ One of the 
drivers will eventually shout a fare which you feel 
able to allow, and the porter, who has been watching 
the bargaining process with keen interest, gives him 
thetwotrunks. The zsvoschik retires then behind the 


IN IRKUTSK 75 


stormy hiring-line, and you renew the process for 
a second vehicle. The sleighs are just big enough 
for one person to occupy comfortably. Two can 
squeeze in if they be thin enough or economically 
minded. But a second sleigh is needed now for the 
hand-baggage, and a third for one’s self. At length 
the arrangement is completed. The porter bows 
low at the donation of fifty kopecks, ‘‘for vodka”’ ; 
then, ‘“‘Go ahead! all ready!” you call, and with 
a flourish the procession of sleighs dashes out of 
the station purlieus. 

The road to the town mounts first a low hill 
parallel to the river. As the horses climb toward its 
crest the panorama of the city and stream, hidden 
previously by the railroad structures, unrolls. Like 
a great band of white, the frozen Angara sweeps to 
the left and right. Beyond it stand out boldly the 
clustered domes of the cathedral, their surmounting 
crucifixes glittering in the sunlight. At your feet 
are the sections of the pontoon bridge, which in 
summer spans the river but in autumn is discon- 
nected, the parts being moored to the shore, lest 
the drifting ice from partly frozen Baikal cut and 
destroy their woodwork. 

A dark streak crosses the frozen river, with dots 
moving, as small apparently as running ants. The 
deceptive snow has made the distance seem much 
less than it is in reality. The streak is a road, and 
the seeming insects are the sleighs that pass and 
repass on the frozen river-trail. Between scattered 


76 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


wooden houses our cavalcade rides down to the 
bank, and at length onto the smooth white sheet. 
It is like skating. The big horses on our sleigh are 
imported from Russia, and trot splendidly, overtak- 
ing one after another of the citizens with their lit- 
tle shaggy Siberian ponies. The heaped snow is on 
either side. The cold air is bracing, almost welcome, 
until it begins to eat its way in. 

It is a fair drive, this, across the river —a full 
verst to the northern bank. We mount the incline 
that leads up the slope, and come to the first log 
houses of the poorer quarter of Irkutsk town. 
Gaunt dogs bark feebly, and slink away on either 
side. The street is almost deserted ; the houses give 
no sign of life. 

Suddenly we come into a square crowded with 
people, gay with life and motion, and motley in 
colors. It fairly buzzes with talk and cries and 
chaffering. Low-built booths face every side of the 
open piazza. We catch a glimpse of one stocked 
with hardware. Opposite it stands a little shrine 
within which are dimly visible pictured saints and 
the Madonna, before which are scores of burning 
tapers. Our isvoschik takes off his hat as he drives 
past, and reverently makes the sigm of the cross. 
He crosses himself also as he passes the white 
church of St. Nicholas with its green roofs and gilded 
crosses, and he removes his cap to the long-haired 
and dark-robed pope that he meets, for the Siberian 
pays much reverence to his Church. 





THE ANGARA RIVER 


ee 
1 ncaa... 


ox TERRE OTE 


oe ce 2 





THE CATHEDRAL 


IRKUTSK 





IN IRKUTSK 77 


The residences improve from the log cabins of 
the outskirts, and grow into the two-storied white- 
washed structures of the main thoroughfares. The 
streets also have an interesting procession of people. 
The big troika of some high official glides past, with 
coal-black horses and a coachman padded out into 
a liveried Santa Claus, after the style of St. Peters- 
burg. Officers of the garrison sweep by in their light- 
gray overcoats. Shoals of sleighs and sledges are 
going to and fro. At almost every corner, armed 
with a sabre and revolver, stands a police officer. 

As one drives along he reads the Russian letters 
on the placards and the names on the stores. Many 
here are Hebrew, for the Siberians of the cities are 
more tolerant than their European cousins. Ir- 
kutsk has a very large and prosperous Jewish mer- 
chant community, and sent her Dr. Mendelberg to 
the Duma. Irkutsk has had its representation cut 
down, they say, post hoc, — perhaps propter hoc. 

The driver, who has kept his horses at a moderate 
trot from the station through the town, suddenly 
cries out to them, and swings and snaps his lash till 
they break into a gallop. ‘‘We always come in 
handsomely,” says the city native who is with you, 
as the sleigh pulls up triumphantly at the door of 
the Hotel Metropole. 

A swarm of attendants greet you at the portal, 
a tall uniformed concierge, half a dozen aproned 
porters, a waiter or two, a page, and behind them 
the Hebraic Hazan, our host. Each porter seizes a 


78 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


parcel and the concierge leaves his post by the front 
door to lead the procession up the broad red- 
carpeted stairway. With a rattle of keys he swings 
open the door toa salon big enough to give a ball in, 
and whose ceiling is six good feet above one’s head. 
The average New York flat would rattle around in 
it. The concierge advances to its centre and bows. 
Then he goes on through to another room, almost 
its duplicate in size, with a forlorn-looking wash- 
stand and a screen across one corner. 

‘But the bedroom, where do we sleep ?”’ you ask. 

‘* Sdiece, gaspadine,”’ he says, “right here”; and 
he conducts you to the screen. 

Raised about eighteen inches above the floor is 
a little wooden platform-like structure, about the 
size of a cigar-shop showcase. A dingy mattress is 
rolled up at one end of it. As you ruefully feel its 
straw texture and survey the planks which it is to 
cover, the hotel-keeper pushes in to tell you that 
sheets will be put on at once if the gaspadine has not 
his own. ‘‘Chass! Chass! If only the rooms suit 
_the gaspadine, everything will be arranged.” 

The porters silently deposit their loads and de- 
part with their twenty kopecks each. The manager 
goes out, doubtless to gather his sheets. Only the 
concierge stays expectant after he has received his 
tribute. You throw your heavy overcoat over one 
of the armchairs and begin to open some of the 
bags. The concierge still stays and looks on. You 
begin to segregate laundry, and locate brushes and 


IN IRKUTSK 79 


tooth-powder. The concierge still stays and looks 
on. You get out some slippers which are an im- 
provement upon the heavy snow-boots. The con- 
cierge still lingers. 

“The room is accepted,’’ you say finally. 

“Yes, yes,”” he answers. ‘‘ Haracho, but for the 
police, I want, please, your passport.”’ 

To show your passport, true enough, is no more 
of an incident than to take out your handkerchief. 
But to be obliged before you have been ten minutes 
in a place to produce a paper for the police telling 
of your age and infirmities, the color of your eyes, 
the number of your arms and legs and children, 
seems tiresome. 

‘Must all give in their passports?’’ you inquire. 

‘All, all,” he answers. ‘‘I am punished if one 
person stays here overnight without showing it.” 

He takes the document, visibly impressed with 
its flying eagle and the big red seal, and bows his 
way out. 

Now one can stroll around one’s suite and take in 
some of the details. There are electric lights with 
clusters of globes in the big pendant electrolier of 
the parlor, and drop-lamps for the massive writing- 
desk in the corner! The armchair by the high- 
silled window is a good place to read in. Too bad 
one cannot look out on the shuttling sleighs of the 
street below, but the cold has thickly frosted the 
double windows. Here is a big sofa, plush-covered, 
and half a dozen armchairs surround the polished 


80 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


table, whose top is scarred with a multitude of rings 
— from the hot tea-glasses, one deduces. 

Mentioning tea, why not have some? There 
ought to be a bell somewhere. Unfortunately there 
is not a bell. In looking for it one finds that Siberian 
housekeeping does not include any dusting of the 
heavy red hangings which flank the doors and 
windows. An imperious cry resounds in the cor- 
ridor. ‘‘Chelaviek!’’ It is followed by a patter of 
footsteps. So this then is the custom of the country. 
You open the door, and in the tone described in 
books upon elocution as ‘‘hortatory,”’ cry out into 
the dim distances of the corridor, ‘‘ Samovar, chat!” 
Somewhere down the line a voice answers, ‘‘ Chass, 
chass!’’ and you retire to wait and hope. 

Curiously battered the furniture looks when you 
inspect it closely. Here and there a flake is chipped 
away from the varnish, and cuts or dents show in 
the paint. Have sabre fights, perhaps, taken place 
here, or raids on assembling revolutionists? Cer- 
tainly in the generations of occupants, life has been, 
in some fashion, tumultuous. 

There is a fumbling at the door-knob, and, with- 
out any preliminary knocking, a waiter comes in 
with a nickel samovar, an empty teapot, and a glass. 
He puts them down on the battered table and walks 
out. The big kettle hums away pleasantly as the 
red charcoal in its hollow interior glows from the 
upward draft. The preparations seem all made, save 
for the tea. Perhaps the chelaviek has gone to get it. 


IN IRKUTSK 81 


You let your eye rove around to the little ikon far 
up in the corner, and the sleighing and wolf-shooting 
etchings on the walls. But after a time this becomes 
tiresome. Has the secret gendarmerie descended on 
the waiter among his teapots and trays? Has he 
forgotten the matter entirely, or what? The cor- 
ridor-call seems to be the only recourse. Once again 
you go out. ‘‘Chelaviek/’’ and from some region he 
comes trotting up. 

“Where is that tea ?”’ 

“Oh, chai,”’ he says, illumined. ‘‘ Has the gaspa- 
dine not his own?” 

‘Most decidedly the gaspadine has not his own,”’ 
you retort. ‘The gaspadine does not carry pillow- 
shams or bales with him. He is not a draper’s 
establishment or a grocer’s store.”’ 

“ Nietchevo,’’ says the waiter, amiably; and runs 
off, to return with a saucer of tea-leaves, and an- 
other containing half a dozen lumps of sugar. 

“Your pardon, generally the gaspadines have 
their own’’; and he leaves you to the brew and your 
meditations. 

Well, it is pleasant, after a long train-ride, to 
stretch out in a big, if battered, armchair, and sip 
glasses of anything hot. The little teapot, full of a 
very strong decoction, is perched on the top of the 
samovar over its chimney. For a fresh glass you 
pour out a half-inch of the strong essence, throw in 
the sugar, and from the samovar’s spigot fill the 
glass with hot water. It is thus just the strength 


82 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


you personally prefer, and always hot. The samo- 
var, by a judicious regulation of the draft, can be 
kept for hours exactly at the boil. It is a fine insti- 
tution, but cannot be transplanted to a country 
where hot charcoal embers are not constantly 
available. 

Comfortably ensconced and sipping one’s tea, one 
can leisurely, Russian fashion, think of the most 
amusing method of passing the time. It is getting 
on toward evening; for the day fades early here. 
To-morrow is soon enough to look at things and 
distribute letters of introduction. The beverage has 
also blighted the appetite. Perhaps a light supper 
and an early couch would be wise. The latter in the 
far room looks singularly unpromising, but, ‘‘ Nzef- 
chevo!”’ It is rather early for dinner or supper, but 
what of that? As an elusive New York politician 
used to say to each of the office-seekers who came 
to ask his influence for nominations, “If you want 
it, there is no reason why you should not have it.” 
We will try another summons of the waiter. 

Up he comes with the bill of fare printed in Rus- 
sian and alleged French. 

Perhaps some eggs would be good. You decide 
upon them to begin with, and you will have them 
poached. 

‘‘Gaspadine,”’ he says, “ the eggs to-day cannot be 
poached. Will you not have an omelette instead ?”’ 

On second thoughts we will not have eggs at all 
this time; we will have a sterlet, a small steak, and 


IN IRKUTSK 83 


a compote. He goes off to the nether regions again. 
A long time passes, but at length he returns with 
the sterlet, its chisel-shaped nose piercing its tail in 
true Siberian style. White creamy butter and 
Franzoski kleb, white bread, round out the course. 
The steak is excellent and the canned fruit is satis- 
fying, eaten beside the singing samovar in the great 
room of the main hotel of Irkutsk. Half a dozen 
letters pass the next hours until it is time to sleep. 
They are written on the big desk beneath the drop- 
light, with a glass of tea at one’s elbow in warm cosy 
comfort. 

The place is rather warm, and without any appar- 
ent source of heat, for there are no registers or grat- 
ings of obvious instrumentality. A search of elimin- 
ation, like the game in which one is warm, warmer, 
very hot, leads at length to a rounded corner of 
porcelain built into the wall, of which only a curved 
segment shows in an angle of the room. Further 
inspection reveals that it is a big cylindrical stove 
fed by somebody in the hallway, and so arranged 
as to warm two adjoining rooms. 

In mitigation of the fire-tender’s zeal, we decide 
to open a window. Perhaps with an hydraulic jack 
this might be possible ; but to manual labor it is not. 
A single pane of the inner window, however, swings 
back, and then we can open a similar pane in the 
outer window, leaving a hole as big as the port of a 
ship. It is sufficient in this weather. Some further 
corridor-shouting, produces, in due time, sheets and 


84. THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


blankets, and presently we lie down on the straw 
mattress in the little wooden-bottomed box called 
a bed. ‘‘ Spacoine notche,’’ the attendant calls, and 
without trace of irony. 

It is one thing to go to bed, another to sleep. 
Tales are told of powder-circled couches which the 
invaders, surmounting these ramparts by climbing 
walls, dropped upon from above. There is a legend 
that there are some people whom they do not bite. 
‘* Nietchevo!”’ Is it not Irkutsk, the Paris of Siberia ? 
Why then complain of parasites? 

Furthermore, a brass band has started up some- 
where in the immediate neighborhood the tune of 
Viens poupoule! to which there echoes a popular 
accompaniment of tapped glasses and stamping 
feet. Perhaps one had better get up and see things 
after all, — ‘‘ Needs must when the Devil drives.” 
We dress again. An exploring expedition reveals 
the big dining-room on the floor below full to the 
doors with uniformed officers, long-haired students, 
and assorted civilians. All are drinking and smok- 
ing. On a stage at one end of the room thirty 
short-skirted damsels are singing and dancing in 
chorus, to the great approval of the audience. As — 
the curtain rolls down on an act, the ci-devant 
dancers descend to their friends on the floor. Corks 
pop, and sweet champagne flows. The call goes 
up for ‘‘ Papirose!”’ and more cigarettes and more 
bottles come thick and fast. 

Soon there is an air of subdued expectancy, and 


IN IRKUTSK 85 


eager looks are directed to the curtain. Somebody 
near by leans close and whispers for your enlighten- 
ment, ‘‘ All-black man !’’ Out comes an old Southern 
Negro, who sings to the wondering Russians a 
Slavonic version of the ‘‘Suwanee River,’’ between 
verses delivering himself, with many a flourish, of 
a clog-dance. Johnson is the man’s name. How he 
drifted so far from Charleston he hardly knows him- 
self. He followed the music-halls to ’Frisco, and 
somebody, for whom he ‘‘has a razor ready,” told 
him he would make his fortune in Vladivostok. 
He kept getting further and further into the in- 
terior, picking up the language as he went, and 
turning his songs into the vernacular. Poor chap, 
the pathos he puts into the ‘Suwanee River’’! He 
is thinking, in frozen Irkutsk, of the old Carolina 
homestead, and is singing and dancing his way back. 

A girl in peasant dress takes the stage after 
*‘Sambo.”’ She is singing some song that is running 
its course across northern Asia. The lassies at the 
tables and the men join in. Glasses clink and heels 
tap. The miners who have made their stake, the 
prospectors who hope to, the sable-merchants of the 
Yakutsk, the wool-dealers from Mongolia, all meet 
here as the first place where the rigors of the hinter- 
land can be compensated. It is very gay — very, 
very gay. 

In the years after the ukase of Paul I, ordering 
that all officers who had made themselves notorious 
for lack of education or training should be sent to 


86 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the Siberian garrisons, it may be imagined what a 
Gomorrah grew up under the Russian banners. 
Modern celebrations are by comparison mild and 
temperate, as the cold beyond these double win- 
dows is mild and temperate to that outside the 
Tunguses’ huts, in the Yakutsk Province. But it is 
fairly impressive, nevertheless. 

Even in a Siberian hotel, the world goes to bed 
sometime. By four o’clock the music has stopped, 
and the traveler is tired enough to sleep on even the 
populous plank-bottomed bed. Thus do all things 
work together to weave the “‘web of life.” 

It is nearing noon when one wakes to eat a com- 
bination of breakfast and lunch, and plan for the 
day. The Post-Office and the Bank are the first 
material objectives. One must register so that mail 
may be delivered. We go down and join two com- 
panions of the road. With careful directions from 
the porter, the party prepares for the half-mile 
walk to the Post-Office. The preliminaries are for- 
midable in themselves. First the felt goloshes must 
be pulled over the shoes; then the big fur overcoat 
must be swung on and carefully buttoned down its 
length. Finally a fur cap, like a grenadier’s, with 
ear-flaps is tied, and great fleece-lined gloves are 
donned. The droshky-drivers assembled before the 
hotel seem to take it as an insult to their profession 
that we elect to walk, and two or three follow along 
outside the curb until the group reaches the corner 
and turns into the main street, Bolshoiskaia. 





IN IRKUTSK 


ff 





IN IRKUTSK 87 


There is an air of placid quiescence at this noon 
hour. The policeman at the nearest corner is rum- 
inatingly handling his sabre-hilt, and watching the 
sleighs go by. Here and there a woman, with the 
ubiquitous gray shawl over her head, passes, with a 
preoccupied air. Sheepskin-clad mujiks are driving 
along, with sledge-loads of firewood or stiffly-frozen 
carcasses, on their way to the bazaar markets. The 
shop-windows attract our gaze. Here is one with 
the word ‘‘ Apieka” over the door, which is to say, 
Apothecary. Benches are set in front of it, on which 
one may sit and watch the people pass, as in the 
chairs before a New England country tavern. Fur- 
ther along is a solidly built white department store, 
the Warsawski Magazine, wherein one can get all 
manner of apparel, — shawls of the latest Irkutsk 
pattern, towels and soap, and — most important — 
blankets for the trip into the interior. We stroll in 
fora moment. An individual looking like a stalwart 
Chinaman, with long braided queue, shoulders his 
way past us to buy some cloth. 

“He is a Buriat of the tribe north of Irkutsk,” 
explains one of the shop-girls, very close herself in 
type to those seen at Wanamaker’s in Manhattan. 

Near-by the imposing magazine is a low one-story 
booth occupied by a watchmaker. Beyond that isa 
walled enclosure with lofty gates, as befits a school. 
Still further is the yellow and green sign of a gov- 
ernment liquor-traktir. The name is said to be 
derived from the French word traiteur, which was 


88 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


current in the days when Napoleon and Bourrienne 
were planning conquests in their Parisian poverty. 

As we turn up a side street, the shops for the 
poorer people appear. Gaudy pictures, of pack- 
ages of tea, vegetables, and sugar-loaves, illuminate 
the walls, to tell the unlettered that groceries are 
sold within. Saws and hammers and vises are 
painted on the walls of the hardware-shops. Loaves 
of bread, crescent rolls, and rococo wedding-cakes 
decorate a bakery; boots and high-heeled slippers, 
a shoemaker’s booth. The street is an open-air 
gallery of rude frescoes. 

Presently we come to residences, some of cement- 
covered brick, with high enclosing whitewashed 
walls and iron gates, some wooden, with their rough- 
hewn logs unpainted save for the brilliant white sills 
and window-frames. 

At length, far from the town’s busy district, the 
Post-Office is reached. The building is thronged. 
Two soldiers are loading their saddle-bags with the 
mail for the regiment. Women are collecting 
money-orders. A crowd waits at the window of the 
girl who sells stamps. In rushing industry she 
makes the calculating beads of her abacus fly 
across the wires. Everybody is far too occupied to 
register a voyageur’s name, — excepting always the 
half-dozen soldiers posted in different parts of the 
room and leaning stolidly upon their bayonets. We 
venture to ask one of them which is the registry 
window. 


IN IRKUTSK 89 


“‘Russisch verstehe ich nicht,’ is the answer. 

A Siberian post-guard knowing no Russian and 
answering in German seems extraordinary. 

‘‘Where are you from?”’ we inquire in his native 
tongue. 

‘“‘Courland,”’ he answers, — ‘‘Courland by the 
Baltic.” 

This city of Irkutsk gave trouble in 1905. If it 
gives trouble again, the garrison will be safe. 

The registering at length is done and we turn to 
go out. A tattered figure, bearded and haggard, 
with rags bound on his feet, opens the outer door. 

“Will the gaspadine help a man get back to 
Russia ?”’ 

Your companion looks closely at him. 

‘A convict! very bad people.’’ He adds: ‘‘ There 
is a murder every day here, and one cannot safely 
go out at night. Very bad men!” 

With the contradictory charity that is so typical 
of the Russian, he fumbles in his pocket and gives 
the unfortunate a fifty-kopeck piece. 

We go now to the great market-place and the 
bazaars. Here where we enter is a row of hardware- 
shops. In the first booth a string of kettles hangs 
down, and knives, spoons, candlesticks, and ham- 
mers are suspended so as to catch the eye. The 
proprietor stands outside, chatting with a passer-by 
and the tenant of the adjoining booth. Further on 
are stationers, with tables of cheap-covered books. 
The wall of one is decked with chromos of galloping 


90 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Cossacks, led by a long-haired pope with a crucifix. 
The soldiers are sabring fleeing Japanese, and red 
blood is lavishly provided. On the opposite wall are 
glittering brass and silver ikons, and lithographs of 
ancient martyrdom. 

Row upon row of red felt boots hang in the next 
line of booths, and in still another — the wooden- 
ware bazaar — are bowls and spoons, and platters 
of high and low degree. Further on a dozen women 
are grouped around one of their class, who is bar- 
gaining for a huge forequarter of beef, a full pud 
weight by the big lever scales that are balancing it. 

‘‘Dorogo! dorogo!’’ (Too dear, too dear!) she 
cries. ‘‘I will give eight kopecks a pound.” 

The market-woman protests that she will be 
beggared at less than eleven kopecks. 

A half-sotnia of little Buriat Cossacks come rid- 
ing by, clad in their puffy leather shubas. Yellow- 
topped fur caps are their only uniform garment, and 
across their backs are hung the carbines. They 
make merry at the haggling women. Two swing off 
their shaggy ponies, and begin in turn to bargain 
_ in broken Russian for some paper-wrapped sweet- 
- meats. They close the deal finally, tuck these away, 
toss themselves back into position, and ride off. 
Further along, half a dozen men cluster around a 
fur-cap seller. He is a merry fellow, and there is 
much noise and banter and gossiping. Such is the 
bazaar, the Forum of old Rome set down in a Siber- 
ian city. 


MSLANUI SAVVZVA AHL 





sy 
a: 

b 
, 

+ 
> 
i 

7m 

; 


ye 








IN IRKUTSK QI 


A short further stroll, and the party is at your 
other objective, the Bank. You take leave of the 
rest and enter. At the door, a grandly uniformed 
porter helps you off with the outer husk of furs, 
and motions you into the outer office, with its half- 
dozen clerks bending over sloping desks. One of 
these takes your card, and returning leads the way 
to a capacious sitting-room, with armchairs scat- 
tered here and there, pictures on the wall, maga- 
zines of many nations on the centre table. The 
American typewriter, which alone betrays that this 
is an Office, is on a little table at one side. A tall 
military-looking man, gray-mustached and grave 
in manner, is seated beside the window reading some 
documents. He rises as you enter, and greets you, 
and for some minutes the conversation in French is 
upon general themes. Presently you go down into a 
side pocket and get out letters of introduction. One 
is from the Petersburg headquarters. He looks at 
the signature — Ignatieff. 

“You are his friend?”’ The polished worldliness 
falls away as a cloak that is thrown off. ‘‘Splendid!”’ 
he says. ‘‘Welcome to our city. We must have tea.” 
He pushes a bell, and a page, red-bloused and wear- 
ing brightly polished jack-boots, appears. ‘‘Chaz, 
Alexis,” he orders. ‘‘And how did you leave Igna- 
tieff?”” he begins eagerly. ‘‘Does he still drive his 
black stallions? It is two years that I have not seen 
him. When I was in Petersburg last winter, he was 
in Paris, and when I was in Paris, he was at Nice. 


92 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


One is very separated from his friends here. One 
might as well be a convict.” 

You answer all his questions, and begin to feel as 
if you were at a little family party. Presently, in the 
midst of the double conversation, — for the Rus- 
sians seem to talk and listen at the same time, — 
the boy comes in with a big samovar, and the other 
accompaniments. The banker makes the brew in 
the china pot. From this each of us serves himself 
as the compound conversation moves on. 

‘“You have not yet seen the sights of Irkutsk?” 
he observes at last. ‘‘I will get my sleigh and show 
you around when we have finished.” 

‘“‘Tt is the middle of the day. I cannot break into 
your work like that,’”’ you protest. 

But he rings a bell for the red-jacketed boy. 
‘“‘Order my sleigh.— We have the finest city in Si- 
beria,’’ he continues; ‘‘eighty thousand people now, 
and growing always. And trade has come with the 
railroad as we had not dreamed before. In the days 
when they used to bring the tea overland from 
Kiahta, the sledges from Baikal would carry as 
many as five thousand bales daily. We thought 
when this began to be shipped through by the rail- 
road that it would hurt the city. But there was so 
much other traffic that the loss was hardly felt.”’ 

‘The sleigh is ready,’”’ the boy announces. 

‘May I have the honor?” he says, with his easy 
grace. 

He leads the way to the coat-rack, and is received 


IN IRKUTSK 93 


with the deepest bows by the uniformed worthy, 
who solicitously helps him on with his coat and 
overshoes. Then with a stereotyped motion the 
man holds out his hand for the tip. Though this 
servant is at the door of the banker’s own office and 
presumably upon his pay-roll, the incessant tribute 
is his perquisite. It is usual throughout Siberia for 
wealthy Russians to scatter small silver everywhere 
along their path — to friends’ servants, to house- 
porters, to beggars on the street. The most profuse 
miscellaneous generosity prevails. Riding to-day 
with the Russian banker is like watching the pro- 
gress of a medieval prince dispensing his largesse. 
At the entrance to the bank is the sleigh, skeleton- 
framed and high-built, unlike most of the sleighs of 
Siberia. Three big black horses, with the snake-like 
Arab head that characterizes the best Orloff strains, 
are hitched to it, troika-fashion, the centre horse 
under a big bow yoke, the outside animals running 
free. The coachman has the square pillow-hat, and 
the enormous wadded corpulence of Jehu elegance. 
It is an interesting ride in which we move slowly 
up the Bolshoiskaia, receiving, so far as the banker 
is concerned, neighborly greetings from most of the 
sleigh-riders, and respectful salutes from the foot- 
passers on the sidewalks. A nice social distinction 
our host draws in returning the formal salute for 
uniformed officials, the cordial wave of the hand 
for intimate friends, a nod for the humbler ac- 
quaintances: but none go unrecognized. 


94 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Something like the Roman’s idea of showing his 
city by turns up and down the Corso, is this Siber- 
ian’s. We do halt, however, and look at the big 
Opera House and the Geographical Society’s Mu- 
seum and the many-domed Cathedral, — buildings 
which in no city would be other than sources of sat- 
isfaction. After an hour of driving in the piercing 
cold, one’s conscience begins to prick. The banker, 
even though absent from his affairs, does not appear 
to feel either business or atmosphere. At length we 
are brought at a gallop to the doorstep of the hotel. 

‘“To-night we dine at eight. Adieu.’’ With a bow 
he draws the bearskin robes about him, and the 
black horses bear him swiftly around the corner. 

An acquaintance from the train is in the hallway 
as you climb stiffly up the steps. 

‘‘Has the drive been a bit cold?”’ he asks. ‘‘Come 
in and have a stakan of vodka.”’ 

“Is that not rather heady for a between-meal 
tipple ?”’ you suggest. 

‘‘This is Siberia. When you run with the wolves, 
you must cry like a wolf, — but tea, too, is good.” 

You mount the stairs together, to the scene of 
last night’s orgy, and order a couple of glasses of tea. 

It is a strange anticlimax to find the room so 
deserted. At three this morning it was a good imi- 
tation of the traditional ‘‘Maxim’s.’’ At four in the 
afternoon it is simply a crude wooden hall, with 
the stiff-backed, plush-seated chairs ranged in bour- 
geois regularity at the discreetly covered tables. 


IN IRKUTSK 95 


‘Only the shuffle of somebody practicing a new step 
on the stage behind the curtains suggests the double 
life of this innocent-looking hotel dining-room. 

A couple of glasses of tea attack the cold in stra- 
tegic fashion, from the inside, and are better than 
the external reheating method. We sip in silence for 
a while. 

“T am going to drive over to the Banno and have 
a Russian bath,” observes your companion. ‘I do 
not like the tin tub they bring around here at the 
hotel. Are you impelled to come along ?”’ 

“‘Is there attendance and room for two? I’m not 
minded to sit around and wait.” 

*‘Room for five hundred,” he says, with a long 
sweep of the hand. ‘‘Everybody goes there. It is 
one of the institutions of the city.” 

As you are now warm enough to consider a further 
drive, you go down to assist in bargaining for a 
sleigh to make the tour to and from the Banno. 

A big brick building a verst or so away, with a 
number of private equipages and a stand for public 
sleighs and droshkys, is our destination. A beggar- 
woman opens the double doors and gets her service 
percentage from each passer. 

‘‘How much is given in this part of the world to 
beggars!’ you remark. 

The Russian smiles. ‘‘It is a part of religion to 
give. At every big family affair, —a wedding, a 
christening, a funeral, — we distribute money and 
gifts to the poor.” 


96 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


In the entresol of the bath-house, a big tiled 
anteroom, there are marble-topped tables, around 
which men and women are smoking and reading 
papers. One can dine here, even; but this comes 
after the bath. A ticket at the kontora gives, for a 
rouble, the privilege of a preliminary boiling and 
a flaying by one of the naked attendants. A start 
is made by washing you with infinite thoroughness, 
section by section, the attendant continuing on 
each spot until told to stop or advance to the next. 
An unfortunate foreigner, in Irkutsk, had his head 
shampooed seven times in succession before he could 
recall the cabalistic word necessary to direct the 
man’s attention elsewhere. 

One is scrubbed and rinsed, and is then conducted 
up onto a wooden platform, running along under 
the ceiling. Here, while the first inquisitioner dashes 
water on a steamer-oven below, the second scrapes 
the victim with new pine branches. One remembers 
an Irkutsk Russian bath at least as long as the 
smarting and the cold he gets from it endure. 

Back at the hotel one can dig out his rather 
crumpled dress-suit in preparation for the evening’s 
entertainment. Later, he gathers in another sleigh, 
and sets out for the home of the banker. 

In Irkutsk nobody relies on house-numbers to 
find his way. Even Moscow has not yet advanced 
to this refinement of civilization. If the driver does 
not know the route, he stops to ask passers-by, 
‘“Where is So-and-So’s house?”’ Again and again 


IN IRKUTSK 97 


you are taken to the abode of somebody else with a 
name more or less similar. Then the driverwill say, 
quite nonchalantly, ‘‘ Nietchevol’’—ask the next 
person he encounters for directions, and start anew. 
You leave abundant margin of time, and usually 
arrive sooner or later. 

Our host of to-night is, happily, well known 
throughout the city. So the driver whips up to a 
gallop and rushes down the snowy streets. It is not 
a long ride to the big arched doorway of the white 
two-storied plaster-covered house, in front of which 
the driver pulls up with a flourish. You ring a bell 
at the side of the door and wait. The zsvoschik has 
taken a station beside the curb, has folded his arms, 
and is nodding on the box, apparently prepared to 
camp there indefinitely. ‘‘Eleven o’clock, return,” 
you say. ‘‘Haracho!”’ is his drowsy answer, given 
without moving. The horses have drooped their 
heads; they too are settled for repose. The tinkle 
of a piano comes from within, but minute after 
minute goes by, the bell unanswered, the zsvoschik 
immovable on his little seat. Other pulls of the bell 
are at last of avail: the door slowly opens. A final 
objurgation to the coachman that he is not wanted 
until eleven o’clock falls on sealed ears. You go in 
through the massive doorway. 

In the antechamber a gray-bloused attendant 
helps you off with wraps and goloshes, then silently 
disappears through a rear door, leaving you standing 
there unannounced. The vestibule is cumbered with 


98 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


coats and hats on the wall-hooks, overshoes helter- 
skelter on the floor, and canes and umbrellas in the 
corner. It is like a clothing establishment. Beyond 
the curtained doorway on the right are lights, and 
the sound of the piano is louder. This seems the 
most promising direction for exploration, so — for- 
ward! 

Beyond the portiéres is a splendidly lofty room, 
like that of an Italian palace, brilliantly lighted 
with electricity. Many-paned windows run high up, 
starting from the level of one’s breast, and long 
heavy hangings half-conceal them. To the right of 
the door isa mahogany grand piano, at which, obliv- 
ious of the world, the host is diligently thumping 
away at Partant pour la Syrie! with inadvertent 
variations, singing carelessly as he plays. Beyond 
him, in an imposing armchair of German oak, like 
King Edward’s throne in the Abbey, is a lady, 
propped with many cushions. She is slender and 
darkly clad, and is conversing with a young man in 
uniform, who sits very straight on a dainty gilt chair 
of the Louis XVI epoch. A low lacquered table 
before them is gayly painted with geisha girls and 
eaved pagodas. It holdsa massive brass samovar en- 
circled by a row of beautifully colored tea-tumblers 
of the sort that one sees on exhibition in the glass- 
factories which front the Grand Canal at Venice. 
The chorus comes from the banker at the piano: — 


Amour 4a la plus belle; 
Honneur au plus vaillant. 





KAL 


R, YERMAK—LAKE BAII 


EAKI 


R 


) 
2 


ICE-E 


THE 





IN IRKUTSK 99 


There is no use of paltering and waiting to be 
announced, so we enter the room. The performer 
hears the steps on the polished floor and swings 
round on the stool. “‘Ah, voila!’ he says, and rises 
to introduce you to his wife. 

‘‘A moi le plaisir,’ she says, smiling. ‘Mon 
frére, Ivan Semyonevich,”’ presenting you next to 
the young officer, who rises abruptly and clicks his 
heels as he takes your hand. 

You are motioned to a replica of the little chair, 
and your host returns to his piano, this time to play 
with immense satisfaction in your honor a hazy 
memory of some bygone variety show: ‘‘ There’ll be 
a hot time in the old town to-night.”’ 

‘A friend is very welcome,’’ says Madame Karet- 
nikov, when he finishes. ‘‘Wedo not see many from 
the world here in Siberia.” 

“The life, however, is interesting, is it not?” 

‘‘O monsieur, I, too, was interested at first, but 
there are so few people of the world here, and we 
see them all the time. C’est affreux! I give youa 
month to change that opinion.” 

“You give a month, Irina; I give a week,”’ growls 
her brother. 

“If it were not that we get away during the 
spring one would perish of ennui,” the hostess adds. 
“But Japan is not far. We go there or to Europe 
every year. Perhaps soon we shall get a transfer 
to another branch.”’ 

“You bankers have hopes,’’ observes the brother, 


100 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘but what of us poor officials of the Justice Depart- 
ment! We are chained to the bench like old galley- 
slaves, and all we get is three hundred roubles a 
month and a red button when we are seventy.” 

As the macerated song floats anew from the piano, 
the hall-door opens and there is dimly visible in the 
anteroom a curious much-encumbered figure, with 
a gigantic sheepskin hat and short blue reefer coat. 
He divests himself of these, and of a long woolen 
inside muffler, and, brushing back his long hair, 
comes into the room. His blue tunic is resplendent 
with brass buttons and he wears jack-boots. A light 
down is growing upon his upper lip. He is nineteen 
or twenty. 

‘“‘Good-day!’’ says our host, hailing him in Eng- 
lish. 

‘‘Good-day, uncle!’’ he replies. 

He presents himself before Madame Karetnikov, 
who holds out her hand, which he formally kisses. 

“‘ Zdravstvouitie, Valerian!’’ says the official, 
shaking the young man’s hand. 

Then you are introduced with explanations. 

‘Valerian here is in his last year at the Irkutsk 
Realistic School, studying preparatory to engineer- 
ing.” 

The status of science in Siberia becomes the 
theme, and the newcomer infuses considerable local 
color into his pictures. 

‘“‘Does the professor in drawing suit you now, 
Valerian?’ the banker inquires presently. Then he 


IN IRKUTSK 101 


adds to you: ‘‘They all went on strike because the 
old professor of drawing had a method they did not 
like. The authorities had to replace him before any 
of the students would go back.”’ 

“The new professor respects our rights,’’ says 
Valerian soberly, not liking the levity of his elder. 

Soon, from an adjoining room, come in the child- 
ren of the host, —a very pretty girl of the age at 
which misses wear short dresses and braids; and 
a little boy of about eight. The boy very respectfully 
kisses his mother’s hand and is introduced to the 
stranger, but finds a superior attraction in his father 
at the piano. 

The girl, Marie Pavlovna, sits down beside her 
cousin Valerian. Lacking the stock football amen- 
ities of a happier land, and half-embarrassed, half- 
superior in the status of a budding young man, Val- 
erian is not much of a conversation-maker. Marie 
Pavlovna, too, is seen but not heard. She is evid- 
ently the typical product of the French system of 
sex-segregation and cloistered study, which keeps 
girls abnormally uninteresting until marriage, per- 
haps to make amends subsequently. 

“T think we had better go in and eat. It is half- 
past eight,’’ says the host. 

‘Si tu veux,” replies his wife; and we stroll out 
into a big dining-room, at one end of which is a 
heavily-freighted oak sideboard. 

As we approach this, the host opens a far door, 
and shouts down into the darkness : — 


1o2 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘Obeid, Dimitri.” 

We turn to the zakuska sideboard. The official 
reaches for the vodka-bottle, and the little silver 
egg-like glasses. 

“Vodka will it be, or do you prefer cognac ?”’ 

The various guests choose their tipple. With 
the gulp of a mountaineer taking his moonshine, the 
banker swallows the twenty-year-old French brandy, 
of thesort that gourmets protractingly sip with their 
coffee. The little boy slips out to his particular re- 
gion of the house. The hostess takes her seat at the 
foot of the table, and the gentlemen pass and repass, 
bringing her assorted zakuska dishes as at a ball. 
Caviar from the Volga, Thon marine from Calais, 
sprats from Hamburg, Columbia River salmon, are 
spread out and attacked by the rest of us, standing, 
free-lunch fashion. One by one the men finish and 
straggle to their places at the table. 

Three menservants, with gray blouses and baggy 
silk trousers falling over their topboots, appear now, 
one with a huge tureen of bouillon, another with 
the little silver bowls, and a third with a plate of 
the piroushkies that accompany the soup. Madame 
Karetnikov deals out the consomme for the whole 
table, and also for little Paul and his governess in 
some outside quarters. Every one begins to eat, 
without waiting for the hostess or for anybody else. 

“Tt is hard work managing a big family like ours,” 
she allows, in reply to your question about the 
domestic problem. ‘We always have seven or eight, 


IN IRKUTSK 103 


and one can never tell how many friends will come 
in to dine with us.” 

She casts a solicitous eye over the table, to see 
that no one has been neglected, and then serves 
herself. 

““One must keep the men well fed,’’ she observes. 
‘‘Remember that, Marie, when you get married.” 

Marie at the far end of the table nods assent. 

‘‘But you must not think of marrying until you 
are told,”’ adds the banker. 

She nods assent to this, too. 

‘Don’t mind him, Marie,” says the official. ‘He 
thinks he is living in the time of the Seven Boyars. 
Take my advice. Pick out the man you want and go 
for him. You can’t fail.” 

‘“‘Such ideas to put in a girl’s head!’’ says his 
sister, smiling. 

The soup-course is nearly over, when suddenly the 
banker ejaculates, and jumps up to welcome some 
new atrivals. 

‘Ah, father!’ 

He runs to a sturdy benignant-looking old man, 
and kisses him on both his white-bearded cheeks, 
then does the same to the little old mother. 

‘‘Come in, come in; we are just beginning.”’ 

At once the table is in a state of unstable equi- 
librium. The old lady is steered to a chair at the 
head, and the rest are pushed along to make room. 
The father makes his way, under similar escort, in 
the direction of the vodka-bottle. 


104 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘“No French brandy for me!” he says, and puts 
the fiery Russian liquid where it will do the most 
good. He, too, goes to the far end of the table. 

The student tells in a low voice that the new- 
comer is a veteran of Sevastopol, was once the 
personal friend of Czar Alexander, the Liberator, 
and was decorated by him for gallantry at Plevna. 

‘‘What a splendid old Russian he is!’”’ one thinks, 
noting all the kindliness and courtesy of his honored 
age, and the grip of a bear-trap in his hand. Yet 
there is an indescribable air of melancholy about 
him, as if a great sadness were being bravely and 
uncomplainingly faced. A remark from the hostess 
turns you to her. 

‘“‘Father is one of the Colonization Commission. 
We are all very much interested in hearing about 
his discussions with the settlers!’ 

‘Colonization for the settlers or for the exiles 
here?’’ you ask. 

‘“‘Itis the government assistance for the voluntary 
emigrants, not for the unfortunate ones.” 

“But the latter must be a problem in them- 
“selves?” 

Madame seems embarrassed. 

The student leans over and in a low. tone whis- 
pers: ‘‘His youngest son, the brother of Vladimir, is 
in hiding, is under sentence of death. They don’t 
speak of him here.” 

“He has just come from the Governor,” adds 
Madame Karetnikov, ‘‘who is a great friend of his. 


IN IRKUTSK 105 


The Governor has heard from Petersburg that they 
may bestow the cross of St. Stanislaus.” 

“That is the autocracy here, which you do not 
know in your country,”’ adds the student, in a low 
voice. ‘‘He is an intimate friend of the Governor 
and two of his sons are officials, yet his last son 
is beyond pardon. The old man himself knows not 
where he is. Yet they decorate the father. He still 
believes in the Emperor.” 

“‘Do not let my nephew talk politics to you,” says 
the hostess, rather anxiously. 

Valerian is silent. 

A supplementary tureen of soup makes its ap- 
pearance, and the two newcomers are served with 
it. The rest of the party have advanced to boiled 
sturgeon, with a thin sauce, compensated by Rus- 
sian Chateau Yquem from the Imperial domain 
in the Crimea. Roast beef follows the fish, with 
the old general and his wife at length even with the 
rest. 

Then come duck and claret, and finally dessert 
and champagne. The toast of the evening is drunk 
to the old general, who brightens as the meal ad- 
vances. In the big reception-room, Turkish coffee is 
brought, which is poured from the brazen ladle and 
served in exquisite little cups without handles. 

“We got them in Damascus on one of our trips,” 
_ says the host. 

Conversation goes round the table. The official is 
in eager talk with Madame Karetnikov about a com- 


106 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


mon friend in a smart Petersburg regiment, who has 
got badly in debt. 

‘“‘He ought to apply for a transfer to the Siberian 
service. The officers get more pay, and it costs less 
to live,” she is urging. 

‘But for Serge we must consider how much 
greater is the cost of champagne here,” retorts the 
official. 

‘“We can marry him to Katinka, and make her 
father get him a promotion,’ the sister suggests. ‘I 
think he ought to have left the army and gone into 
the contracting, — every contractor I know is as 
rich as sin and goes to Monte Carlo.” 

So the conversation rambles on. Cigarettes are 
passed. The hostess will not have one. 

‘‘T used to smoke, but it is so common now,” 
she explains. ‘‘Every peasant’s wife hangs over 
her oven with a cigarette in her mouth. Even a 
vice cannot survive after it has become unfashion- 
able.” 

The host comes up to show you his curios. 

‘This Alpine scene is one of Segantini’s. We got 
it in Dresden before he had earned his repute. I 
am very proud of my wife’s discrimination. The 
statuettes are from a little sculptor in the Via Sis- 
tina in Rome. Rien d’extraordinaire. The vase 
came from the Imperial Palace in Peking. I bought 
it from a Cossack for fifty kopecks. I have been 
told it belongs to the Tsin Dynasty, and is better 
than those they have in Petersburg Hermitage.” 


IN IRKUTSK 107 


So you are shown the spoil of two continents in 
connoisseur purchases. 

“Hardly to be suspected in Irkutsk,” he allows, 
complacently. 

Every year host and hostess visit the Riviera, 
taking a turn at Monte Carlo and Nice and Cannes. 
The banker speaks English, French, German, and 
Italian fluently, and half a dozen other languages 
passably. His wife acknowledges only French and 
Italian. 

The conversation turns to the idealism of Pierre 
Loti’s description of the road to Ispahan. The 
banker has followed this road himself, and he has 
a much less poetic memory of it. The veteran— his 
father —is not up in French or English, but he has 
a good knowledge of German left from academy 
times. In this language he tells of the old days of the 
serfs and of the Crimea. He talks with the kind 
frankness of age that does not need self-suppression 
to prompt respect. When the guests rise to leave, 
and the buoyancy of the entertainment is passed, 
his cloud comes back. His voice has just a touch of 
bitterness as he says good-bye. 

“‘T am glad we can welcome to our country a man 
traveling for pleasure. So many who come are here 
under less pleasant auspices.” 

“* De svidania,”’ you say at last to everybody, and 
out you go into the midnight frost. The droshky- 
driver is still there waiting. He has slept since 
you entered, unmoving through the hours. ‘‘Gas- 


108 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


tinitza,’’ you direct; and he drives to the hotel 
through the bleak starlit night. 

Valerian comes a few days later to visit us, and 
volunteers to be our guide for Irkutsk. 

“Tf I miss a few days at the Academy, what 
matter? I shall improve my English,” he explains. 

Valerian is typical of the student class, all ideal 
and aspiration. He has gathered the heat of the 
epoch, and has concentrated it upon his philosophy. 
He is saturated with the French Revolution. Does 
he mention Danton, for example, it is with intent- 
ness of loyalty for the great Mountain speaker, 
which makes one almost think that the year is 1792, 
and that the place is sans-culottic France; ‘‘ debout 
contre les tyrans!’”’ He sings fiercely with his com- 
rades, to the tune of the Marseillaise, the Russian 
revolutionary anthem, ending it with a swirl. “‘For 
the palace is foe to our homes!’’ America he con- 
siders one of the free nations, but he has reserves. 
Though he is not at one with our political system, 
yet he thinks that all learned about it is a great gain. 

‘‘Your land is free politically,” he specifies, “‘but 
it is not yet emancipated from capital, — it is not 
free socially. You have an industrial feudalism and 
a proletariat. So will it not be when we have won 
our revolution.”’ 

Many are his anecdotes of the uprising of 1905, 
whose tragic drama will never be fully pictured and 
whose history is to be gleaned only from the mouths 
of cautious witnesses. 





CHITA REPUBLIC 


THE 


RS OF 


ORGANIZE 


ELE, 





if 


IN IRKUTSK 109 


*“We rose at Irkutsk, many of us, students and 
workmen, but General Miiller had a strong garrison 
of troops here. We tried them, but they would not 
come over. They shot down our men and dispersed 
all the meetings, and now he is Governor in the 
Baltic Provinces. They say that when he was 
drunk, he would shoot accused men in his own rail- 
way carriage; ‘‘the butcher!” we of the Cause call 
him. At Tomsk and Krasnoyarsk the city was held 
for weeks by our party. The railway men would not 
run troop-trains and the Government was paralyzed. 
Chita was held by a Revolutionary Committee of 
Safety. We manned the entrances with artillery. 
We took turns watching, and ran the whole city, not 
touching the money in the Treasury. But we were 
few, and word came that the insurrection was every- 
where broken. Miiller was marching from Irkutsk, 
and Rennenkamp came back with the troops from 
Manchuria. He promised moderate terms to all 
but the leaders. The townspeople were afraid, and 
rose against our men. Many were taken. Many fled 
away and got to Japan and America. Some were 
shot and some were sent to the Yakutsk. So it was 
crushed, and our great chance was gone.” 

“Will it come again ?”’ 

*“‘ Ni snaial The workmen are ready. The intel- 
lectuals are ready. The peasants back in Russia cry 
for land. Perhaps they too will be ripe next time, 
and the soldiers will be with us. In any case Siberia 
has seen the red flag float over the Chita Republic.” 


110 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Many-faceted is the life in a Siberian city. In 
numerous ways it seems feverish and abnormal, for 
it represents the young blood of a capable race 
struggling upward, and knowing that in much its 
battle is desperate. The towns have hardly yet got 
settled methods; they are outgrown villages where 
men of all stamps, who have become enriched in 
the new land, come for the pleasures or the benefit 
of a less monotonous existence. The traditions of 
peasant origins survive in the conditions and gen- 
eral civic neglect. 

Irkutsk, once its novelties have become familiar, 
has lost its charm. That it is provincial is no dis- 
credit, but its amusements are of the grosser order, 
unredeemed by wit. Every evening the tawdry 
dining-room at the hotel echoes the songs and noise 
of the revelers. The same circle attends the the- 
atres. The students discuss hotly the rights of man 
and the Valhalla prepared for all martyrs, and 
calm simple wholesome life seems to be reserved 
for the workaday world which moves on its slow 
toilsome upward way in silence. 

There is, however, to-night an unwonted stir at 
the Hotel Métropole. The corridors are thronged. 
A Russian friend points out the notables. The blue- 
uniformed official yonder with the gray mustache 
and the row of glittering orders on his breast is 
the Governor-General. Half a dozen members of the 
local bar, in frock-coats, pass through. In the dining- 
room a young lieutenant, dashingly clad in long 


IN IRKUTSK III 


maroon coat with the row of silver-topped cartouches 
and the clattering sabre of the Emperor’s Cossack 
Guard, is being deferentially entertained by officers 
of the garrison. Three officials are taking champagne 
with two beautifully gowned women, Parisiennes 
even to their long pendant earrings. The hotel-pages 
in fresh red blouses and high boots pass here and 
there with messages. The waiters, with intensified 
deference, glide among the crowd in its many-colored 
uniforms and glittering war-medals. 

“Who has arrived ?”’ we ask, surveying the scene. 

*‘A member of the Imperial Cabinet.”’ 

The announcement of his name has a personal 
interest and memories of earlier stays in Russia. 

The Minister’s life has been a romance indeed. 
Disagreeing with his family through liberal ideas, 
he went in 1862 to Birkenhead as a locomotive 
engineer, to the United States, to Argentine, and 
returning to Russia worked up from a very small 
government position to be chief of all the Russian 
roads, railways, and telegraphs, and Minister of 
Ways and Communications in the Czar’s Cabinet. 
His brain threw the line of railsover half a continent. 
On the outbreak of the Japanese War he was called 
from his retirement to the colossal task of bringing 
to the front across the width of Asia half a million 
men, their artillery and arms, their food, their trans- 
port, all on the one line of rails. He has served under 
three Emperors and is life-member of the Senate. 

You send a card in through one of the attachés. 


112 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


In a few minutes there is delivered to you the 
Prince’s card, across which is written: ‘‘ At noon.” 

At the hour appointed you mount to the apart- 
ment overlooking the Bolshoiskaia. Guards at sa- 
lute, staff in brilliant uniforms, secretaries and 
callers in full dress, — the antechambers are full. 
You pass through to the furthermost room. 

In a nest of books and maps, with blue-prints out- 
spread on floor and chairs and sofas, is an elderly 
man in a plain frock-coat, without a ribbon or a 
button to hint his honors. He is vigorous, hearty, 
simple, almost unchanged from your earlier ac- 
quaintance, his keen flashing eyes hinting ever a 
reverse side to the great repose of his manner. 

Personal questions occupy the first minutes, but 
presently we are into larger themes, and you begin 
to feel subtly the man’s power. He has comeon a 
special tour, to inspect, with his own practiced eyes, 
the projected double-tracking of the Siberian Rail- 
road. Every brakeman and locomotive engineer, 
every traffic superintendent and division manager 
along the route knows he could step down from his 
private car and handle the levers and give them 
directions. His mind is a very vortex of ideas, and 
his range of conversation reflects world-wide inter- 
ests. The talk gets to the American political situa- 
tion and the race-problem. Later it shifts to the 
Japanese War, and he tells of some of his experiences 
getting the troops into Manchuria. A mention of 
the overland road to China awakens reminiscences. 


IN IRKUTSK 113 


‘Tt was long before the railroad that I went over 
that route first,’’ he says. He tells of his months- 
long horseback ride beyond Baikal before the rail- 
road went through, inspecting the trade-route and 
the prospects of the country. By and by the con- 
versation has got to the special problems of the 
Slav. With the straightforward frankness of a great 
nature which wishes the best for his country, he 
tells of the Russian aspirations from the stand- 
point of those who are facing the problems of the 
nation in their fact and practice. 

““T too,” he says, ‘‘was once for changing much in 
a little time, and worked to free the serfs and to 
start the elective Semstvos throughout the Empire. 
Alas! so much that they want is possible to no gov- 
ernment! One cannot by enactment abolish want 
or bring all men to a niveau. We are trying to give 
every man the chance to rise, unchecked by any 
administrative barrier. But one sees as he lives 
longer that all which one wishes cannot come at a 
coup. Great changes, great improvements, I have 
witnessed, but they have not come by violence. We 
must keep order, and hand on to our sons an un- 
divided Empire of the Russias.” 

You leave this patient builder of the new order 
alone amid his maps and studies in the idle Sunday 
city. As you descend the steps, a black-capped 
student passes the door. He is humming the for- 
bidden Marseillaise. 


IV 
SLEDGING THROUGH TRANSBAIKALIA 


HE sledge-route that leads to the Chinese 
frontier goes southward from Verhneudinsk 
across the territory of Transbaikalia. In old days 
one reached its starting-point by traversing the 
frozen Lake Baikal in sleighs, muffled in furs against 
the sweep of the terrible winds, with plunging ponies 
at full gallop. 

Now, after mighty effort and at monumental 
cost, the line of the great railroad has been driven 
through the last obstacles that blocked an open way, 
and trains carry the traveler through the deep cuts 
and tunnels that pierce the barrier crags around 
the Holy Sea. 

It is not the express that one takes at the Irkutsk 
station to reach the ancient fort, but the daily post- 
train, the servant of local traffic. Luggage-cumbered 
passengers crowd into the cars wherever there is 
a place. A few, and these mostly officials, establish 
themselves in the blue-painted first class. Many 
press into the yellow second class — merchants, 
lesser chinovniks, tradesmen, popes, and children on 
their way to the city schools. Swarms pour into 
the green wooden-benched third, where the throng- 
ing tousle-headed emigrants patiently huddle closer 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA § 115 


to give room to newcomers. Next to the engine, 
with its big smokestack, is the mail-wagon, on 
whose sides are painted crossed post-horns and 
the picture of a sealed letter. Behind this, with a 
sentry on guard, is the baggage-car. The sinister 
compartment of drawn shutters and barred windows 
is for the prisoners. In this princes or artel-workers, 
their identity unsuspected, can be run across a con- 
tinent to their unknown places of exile. 

The post-train starts from Irkutsk occasionally on 
time. In general, along the local line the time-table 
is about as reliable a guide as the calendars sold to 
the mujiks, with weather prophecies for each day 
of the year. Fifteen miles an hour is mean speed. 
Stops may be for minutes or for hours. One settles 
down therefore in the attitude sacred to a yachting 
cruise, — foie gras and bridge, if it is calm; double 
reefs and pilot-bread if it blows up. The high 
heavens alone know when we are to getin, and 
nobody cares. It is not unpleasant withal to sprawl 
over a great broad couch, and as the train crawls 
forward watch the white highlands slowly unroll, 
the towering cliffs and peaks with spear-like pines 
driving up through the snow, and the icy lake 
below. 

For meals, one dashes out during the station- 
stops, and before the third bell gives warning of the 
start, devours meat-filled piroushkies and swallows 
lemon-tinctured tea at the long buffet-tables decked 
with hollow squares of wine-bottles, and beer from 


116 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the seven breweries of Irkutsk. If one has a teapot 
he can get boiling water from the government- 
furnished samovar, and milk from the peasant- 
women who stand in booths hard-by. He can add 
salt fish and hot fowl, together with rye-bread and © 
butter, and then consume his rations at leisure in 
the compartment. At night the seats are let down, 
and one sleeps in fitful naps among the hills of bag- 
gage. When morning comes, an hour-long proces- 
sion forms to take turns at the wash-bowl with its — 
trickle, valve, in a towelless, soapless, and cindered 
lavatory. 

We leave Irkutsk at ten in the morning, and reach 
_Verhneudinsk at’ seven next day, covering in 
twenty-one hours the 446 versts. Here is the last 
of the railroad. With troika, sledge, and tarantass, 
by highway and byway, over frozen rivers and 
camel-tracked trails, we must now follow the old 
road into the heart of Asia. 

The post-station that serves as point of departure 
for the sledge journey lies some distance away, at 
the edge of the town. An dsvoschtk, after due bar- 
gaining, proceeds to transfer thither us and our 
dunnage-bags. 

As we ride through the town, just waking for the 
day, the streets, the lamps, the telegraph-wires, the 
comfortable houses, — each and every symbol of 
civilization takes on a new significance now that it is 
to be left behind. On the parade-grounds the recruits 
are at the morning drill, shouting lustily in unison, 





THE HIGHLANDS OF TRANSBAIKALIA 


‘FD ee 
J 1 : 


~~ 


bat 








SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 117 


“* Ras, dua, tre!’’ to keep the step. We pass the bar- 
racks, the shops with their brightly illustrated signs, 
and ride under the wooden yellow-painted Alex- 
ander Arch. 

Soon we reach a street of low log houses, and a 
lofty boarded enclosure is ahead. At its gateway is 
swinging a black signboard, painted with post-horn 
and the Czar’s double-headed eagle. ‘‘Postava 
Stancie,”’ is inscribed over the lintel. Between the 
black and white-striped gate-posts we swing into 
the courtyard. To the left stretches a low log house. 
To the right, along the wall, are ranked sledges. In 
front are the stalls. Grooms, whip in hand, stand 
around in the courtyard, muffled against the cold. 

“‘Is the gaspadine going on?’’ one of them asks. 

On the reply, ‘‘ Yes, at once,” he scurries off to 
start harnessing, and you shoulder open the low 
felted door of the post-house and enter the big 
waiting-room. 

“Three horses ?”’ asks the young black-mustached 
agent within. 

“Yes, a troika sledge.”’ 

He turns to the book of registry attached to the 
rough table by a long cord fastened with a big red 
seal, and begins to write. 

“The name?’”’ he asks. It goes down. 

“The destination? ”’ 

“The Chinese frontier at Kiahta.”’ 

“Your first relay-station is Nijniouboukounskaia, 
twenty-seven versts.” 


118 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The fare is set out in a printed placard posted up 
on the wall; as is the price of a samovar, fifteen ko- 
pecks, and all the other items that the traveler may 
require. 

The agent hands you the slip: ‘“‘One rouble, 
eighty-two kopecks, for two persons, the gaspadine 
and his courier’’; something under three cents a 
passenger-mile. 

As you wait for the harnessing of the post-sledge, 
the courier overlooks anew the bags and counts 
out again the parcels. As light as possible must 
be the impedimenta. Now is the last chance for 
change. 

The big station-clock ticks on. The agent moves 
about in the warm dusky silence of the house. The 
courier straps tighter the dunnage-bag. | 

“Look that your furs are snugly fastened,” he 
says. 

There is trample of footsteps by the door. A fur- 
clad, ruddy-faced driver stumbles in, makes the 
sign of the cross before the ikon on the further wall, 
and beckons to you. 

‘Ready!’ he says. 

Three shaggy ponies stand hitched to a wooden 
sledge, not high like those of city zsvoschiks, but 
low and shaped like a wide bath-tub. The bottom 
is cushioned with hay and you are to sit some six 
inches above the runners. The bells hanging from 
the big arched duga over the centre horse jingle as 
he frets. The side horses, that will run loose be- 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA | 119 


tween rope-traces, look around at the yamshik who 
stands by. He holds in his mittened hands four 
reins of leather, twisted into ropes— two for the 
centre trotter, one each, on the outside, for the gal- 
lopers. 

You climb into the nest of rugs and furs super- 
imposed upon your baggage! The yamshik leaps 
to the precarious perch that serves as his seat. 
The whip falls, and with a bound the horses are off. 
Always one starts at top speed, however bad the 
way. Always one finishes at a gallop, however jaded 
the horses. It is the rule of the Russian road. 

With bells jingling, the driver shouting to clear 
the way, and a white cloud rising behind, the sledge 
skims out between the log houses which flank the 
straggling street. Dogs bark and the idle passers-by 
stare. Fur-covered pigs scramble up with a squeal, 
and scurry from their resting-places in the road. 
Girls, with shako-capped heads, peer through the 
windows. Little chubby boys, in big brown felt 
boots, cheer. 

Soon the uttermost houses of the town are left, 
and emerging we plunge into the country road 
through open fields, dazzlingly, blindingly white. 
The trotter’s legs seem to move too fast, as if seen 
in a cinematograph. The gallopers, free of all weight 
and held only by the two traces which fasten them, 
outrigger fashion, swing on like wild ponies of the 
steppe. Crude and massive as the sleigh may look, 
its burden is almost nothing on the hard compacted 


120 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


snow. The horses in the rush through the bracing 
air seem to be the incarnation of the wind. A rut in 
the glistening road does not produce a disjointing 
shock, for, as a huntsman’s bullet glances from the 
skull of a wild boar, so the sleigh glides into the air 
and swiftly down again at a long low angle. It is 
a fact of “flying.” 

The cold is intense. After an hour of riding you 
have learned a certain lesson which adds to your 
experience. Whether the traveler shall make this 
winter journey equipped with full camp-kit, port- 
able stove, folding-forks, thermos bottles, and shell- 
reloading tools, or Tatar fashion, with a rifle and a 
haunch of mutton, is important but not vital. Let 
him make sure, however, that the huge all-envelop- 
ing sheepskin overcoat is at hand to supplement the 
coats beneath, and that a shaggy sleeping-rug is 
provided in addition to the blankets. One obstinate 
newcomer started with the insistence that a mink- 
lined Amerikanski overcoat, with two heavy rugs 
as lap-robes, would be ample. After an hour on the 
road, he turned into a peasant’s hut to thaw out 
upon boiling tea, while the driver went back to the 
town to buy the hairiest robe and coat obtainable. 
These were thenceforth worn on top of thé initial 
outfit. Siberia for a midwinter sledging journey 
exacts this tribute of respect. 

For versts the winter road follows down along the 
river between towering pinnacled rocks, where in 
summer eagles nest. The cliffs are vividly spotted 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA iar 


with orangeand green lichens ; below they are fretted 
with the scourings of ice brought down in the spring 
freshets. All along beside the road are the familiar 
pine-saplings planted in mounds by the villagers to 
guide the way. In the vast monotony and drifting 
snows travelers would be lost but for these land- 
marks. Along the fertile river valleys hamlets are 
thick. A cluster of houses is met every six to ten 
versts. Presently the road leaves the river and bends 
to the left, cutting across fields. When it quits the 
bank, it climbssharply a five-foot ascent. Thedriver 
does not even slacken speed. At the turn he swings 
the sure-footed ponies suddenly, and takes the 
slope, letting the outrigger bring up against a stiff 
clump of bushes. There is a crash, the sleigh has 
caromed off at right angles, nothing has befallen, 
and we are on again. 

Verst after verst of plateau goes by, with rounded 
rolling hills of dimpled snow, treeless, houseless, a 
barren waste. Then comes a crest so steep that the 
horses can only toil up it at a walk, and the passen- 
gers must climb beside them. The forest closes in 
as the height is mounted, — white leafless birches 
and dark green pines. The light snow is seamed with 
rabbit-runs, and here and there are the far-spaced 
tracks of deer or wild goats. 

A mound of stones and a small pole with a Buddh- 
ist prayer-flag — for here is the ancient home of 
the Buriats — mark the top of the ascent. There is 
a moment’s halt while you climb in and the driver 


122 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


tightens the saddle of the centre horse; then down 
the giddy descent we sweep, in full gallop once 
more. The pines flash past, and you hold your 
breath in fear of the smash that must come should 
a horse fall, should a trace break, should a side rut 
swing the sledge over. One is, however, so close to 
the ground that an overturn is usually harmless, 
save to the clothes and the nervous system, both of 
which are at a discount in Siberian sledging. Then 
too the outrigger arrangement is such that the craft 
turns a quarter of the way over and slides on the 
supplementary runner until it rights. 

The cold is intense. One wipes away the snow 
from his fur collar, and the dampness on the hand- 
kerchief has caused it to become frozen stiff. Itisa 
crackling parchment that goes back into the pocket. 
Eyeglasses are unwearable, for the rising vapor 
from one’s breath is caught and frozen on them in an 
opaque film. Fingers exposed but a moment become 
numb and useless, and uncovering the hand is an 
agony. Gradually as you ride, through the great 
felt boots, the triple flannels, the camel’s-hair stock- 
ings, the fur-lined gloves, the coats and rugs, the 
cold begins to bite. You have become fatigued and 
depressed of a sudden. The driver points to your 
cheek, where the marble whiteness is eating into the 
flesh, and bids you rub it with snow. An involun- 
tary shudder grips and shakes you relentlessly from 
head to foot. 

It is time to stop. If you try to go on beyond the 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 123 


next station you will, if the gods are lenient and you 
do not freeze, get out nerveless and trembling, not for 
hours to rally strength and energy. The chill will 
cling, however hot the post-house oven. Even now 
you are weak, beaten down, querulous, in a sudden | 
feeble old age. The shudder means that the human 
animal is near his endurance limit. 

On an urgent call, with special preparations, you 
may travel for a hundred hours, night and day, 
without halt save for change of relays. Physically, 
it is possible to fight cold for a time. You can run 
along in all your furs beside the horses, you can beat 
your arms together, and rub nose and cheeks to 
keep the blood in motion. You can drink copious 
glasses of scalding tea in the post-houses, and live 
by stimulants on the road. Through ceaseless vigil- 
ance and resolution you can keep from freezing, even 
while intense fatigue creeps on and vitality is going. 
But the persistent awful shudder is Nature’s red lan- 
tern. Run past it if you must, —itis at your peril. 

Dark against the snows, now a low-lying village 
comes into sight, — Nijniouboukounskaia, — and 
among its first log houses is one bearing the post- 
horn signboard. A cry rouses the jaded horses to 
a gallop, and covered with snow, the sledge sweeps 
into the yard. Steaming and frosted white, the 
animals stand with lowered heads. Stablemen run 
to unharness them. Stiff with cold and muffled like 
a mummy, you clamber out, and on unsteady legs 
mount the steps to the felted door of the posting-inn. 


124 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


In the big bare room, beside the warm oven, robes 
and overcoats can be thrown off. A red-capped girl 
loads the samovar with glowing brands from the 
fire, and sets it humming for tea. Brown bread is 
produced and eggs, and a great bowl of warm milk. 
With these, and the contents of your bag of pro- 
visions, can be eked out a welcome obezd. 

For the night’s rest one need not seek a bed. 
There is never a spring to ease the bones from 
Verhneudinsk to Kiahta. There was discovered 
just once on the journey — at Arbouzarskie — an 
iron skeleton, bearing to a spring bed about the rela- 
tion that the three-toed Pleistocene prairie trotter 
holds to a modern horse. The post-keeper had care- 
fully hewn with his axe five pine planks to cover the 
gaunt limbs of it. The voyageur slept on the soft 
- side of these timbers. Bed and board are synonyms 
in Siberia. 

For a couch there is to-night the narrow wooden 
law-provided bench, or —a less precarious perch, 
and equally resilient — the sanded floor. For bed- 
ding, one has one’s own blankets and coats. What 
if the shoulder slept on numbs with one’s weight, 
or the corner of the soap-box in the traveling-bag, 
serving as a pillow, dents the tired head! One 
draws off felt boots and some of the outer layers 
of clothes, rolls the sheepskin about one, covers 
the head with a blanket, and sleeps like the forest 
bears in their winter dens. 

Just before daybreak is the best time to start, so 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 125 


that one can cover the most road possible while the © 
sun is up. At ten or eleven, an hour’s stop for lunch. 
is advisable, and then on again until sundown. It is. 
better not to travel after nightfall, as the cold is so 
much more intense. We dedicate the evening to 
hot tea, and then turn to the blankets and the 
bench. 

The stretch between Verhneudinsk and Troitz- 
kosavsk, officially rated at two hundred and 
eighteen versts, is really somewhat longer. A run of 
average record took from 4:20 Pp. M. Tuesday to 
11:30 A.M. Thursday — forty-three hours and ten 
minutes. This included all relaying, seven hours a 
night for sleeping, dinner and breakfast halts, two 
accidents (an overturning and a broken runner), 
and one calamity — a Siberian who snored. The 
actual driving-time, over a road for the most part 
hilly, was twenty-two hours, five minutes, or just 
about ten versts per hour. 

Horses stand always ready, with special men at 
hand to harness. Drivers swing on their shaggy 
greatcoats, and with almost no loss of time one is 
out of the shadowed courtyard and on the road 
again in the dazzling whiteness of the winter day. 

In traveling ‘‘post,’ however, with relayed 
sleighs and big empty guest-rooms, one does not 
become acquainted with the life along the way. One 
has only hurried glimpses of slant-eyed Buriat 
tribesmen, of galloping Cossacks, trudging peasants, 
post-agents, girls who carry in samovars and 


126 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


silently steal out, rosy-cheeked boys on the streets, 
and women at the house-windows. To know the 
people and see their daily life one must get away 
from the beaten highroad, strike out from the gov- 
ernment-regulated inns, and blaze one’s own path 
into the interior. 

First, you get a low passenger-sledge, long enough 
to admit of stretching out, and without too many 
projecting nails on the inside; then, three good 
ponies of the hardy Cossack breed, that are never 
curried or taken into a stable through the bitterest 
winter. The best animals procurable are none too 
good for climbing the passes away from the river- 
courses. The whole outfit can be bought for three 
hundred roubles in any of the interior towns. 

For drivers, there is a class of yamshik teamsters, 
who spend their lives guiding the sledge-caravans 
which carry the local traffic. One of these men, Ivan 
Kurbski, can guide you through a whole province, 
and lodge you every evening with some hospitable 
friend or recommended host. Whether he has him- 
self been over all the changing by-paths in the 
wilderness of the Zabaikalskaia Oblast, or whether 
he mentally photographs the directions of his friends 
regarding each village, is an unsolved mystery. 

When the day’s journey is done, Ivan will drive 
slowly down the crooked street of the village he has 
settled upon for the night’s repose, looking keenly 
for landmarks visible only to him in this country, 
where every village and every house is mate to all 





SLEDGING SOUTHWARDS 


ii 





SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 127 


the rest. Sometimes he will ask a question of one of 
the innumerable urchins. But generally he seems of 
himself to hit upon the desired domicile. Day after 
day he will take you the sixty versts, lead you to the 
village stores to replenish the supply of candles or 
sugar, bring you surely to food and shelter at night, 
and take off all the burden of care for the outcome 
of each day’s journey. 

If for the third member of your personal suite you 
can get an old-time servant to keep the guns clean, 
build the camp-fires when midday tea is to be taken 
out of doors, bring in the baggage and rally the best 
resources of each halting-place, you are doubly 
lucky. You will be sedulously tended, and be 
treated partly as a prince, partly as a helpless baby. 

Of this order is Jacov Titoff. Not the smallest 
_ personal service that he can render will you be per- 
mitted to do for yourself. The telling of unpleasant 
truths will be carefully avoided, however certain the 
ultimate revelation. Though honest beyond ques- 
tion, he pays you the naive compliment of relying 
upon your generosity in all the little matters that 
concern provisions and petty luxuries. He will open 
the package which he is carrying back from the 
torgovlia to extract matches and cigarettes for his 
own delectation, and will rifle unstintingly the re- 
serve of canned sardinki. He cheerfully freezes 
himself waiting for deer, and stumbles up miles of 
snowy mountain in the beats. He is always in good 
humor, and without complaint for whatever comes. 


128 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


He is ready anywhere, at any time, to sleep or drink 
vodka. 

Thus outfitted and manned, take your place, muf- 
fled in furs, and seated on the felt sleeping-blankets. 
Guns are at your side, the bag of provisions is in 
front, your own little ponies paw the snow. They 
start off now, trotting and galloping beneath the 
duga. The air is frosty, clear, and thrilling as wine ; 
the snow is feathery and uncrusted, as when it fell 
months back; bells are jingling, and the driver is 
crying his alternate endearments and curses upon 
the shaggy ponies. Down the long rock-flanked 
river valleys, amid birch and pine forests, you will 
skim, by unwonted paths, through out-of-the-world 
villages, to see in their own homes the red-bloused 
peasants, the women spinning at the wheel, the 
peddlers and priests, the traveling Mohammedan 
doctors, the rough Buriats, miners and merchants, 
along the white way. 

The smooth main road is left now for newly 
broken sledge-trails across fields and over snow- 
covered marshland. Every available river is util- 
ized as a highway, for along its winding length the 
path, smooth and level, is marked like a boulevard 
by the evergreen saplings planted by villagers to 
guide the winter traveler. One can pierce the dis- 
tricts flanking the Chickoya’s gorges, reachable at 
other seasons only by breakneck climbs. And one 
can see the real Siberia. 

On this first night of his incumbency, Ivan Kurb- 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 129 


ski lodges us with friends. He leaves us for a mo- 
ment while he enters the yard by the wicket-gate to 
make due announcement, and the ponies hang their 
tired frost-covered heads. Your own bows under 
an equal fatigue. But the wait is very brief. Soon 
the big double gates of the log-stockaded courtyard 
open. The horses of their own accord turn in, and 
swing up to the steps of the house. You are handed 
out like an invalid grand duke, and are welcomed at 
the threshold, with a hard hand-shake, by a red- 
bloused peasant who ushers you up the steps, across 
the low-eaved portico, and through the square felt- 
padded door into the big living-room. 

As we all enter, Ivan and Jacov, caps in hand, 
bow and make the sign of the cross toward the 
grouped ikons high up in the corner opposite the 
door. The saints have guarded you on the way 
— are not thanks the devoir? Then you, as head 
of the party, must salute, with a ‘‘ Zdravstvouitie,” 
your host, the old Hazan father of the peasant who, 
wearing a gray blouse sprayed with vivid flowers at 
breast and wrists, sits on a bench beside the window. 
Now you may sit down beside the massive table on 
the other bench, which is built along the whole 
length of the log walls, and survey the curious world 
into which you have fallen. 

A woman of middle age, clad in bright red, is busy 
with a long hoe-like instrument pushing pots into 
a great square oven six feet high, ten feet to a side, 
and spotlessly whitewashed. To her right, in the 


130 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


room beside the oven, isa girl of fifteen or sixteen, © 
rolling brown rye-dough on a little table, in perilous 
proximity to a trap-door leading into some dark 
nether region. An old bent woman gravitates be- 
tween the two. Glancing up, one meets the wonder- 
ing eyes of three sleepy blinking urchins, who peer 
down in solemn interest from a big cushion-covered 
shelf, two feet beneath the ceiling. Looking about 
to locate the muffled sound of crows and clucks, one 
discovers, beneath the oven, a corral of chickens, 
pecking with perky bills at the whitewash for lime. 
On the floor is sitting a little girl crooning some 
endless refrain to a baby in a sapling-swung cradle. 

“The gaspadine will take chaz?”’ asks the patri- 
arch. From the woman’s room beside the oven the 
girl brings a samovar. She sets it on the floor, be- 
side an earthenware jar standing near the door, and 
dips out the water to fill it. Then with tongs she 
takes a long red ember from a niche cut in the side of 
the oven, and drops it down the samovar funnel. 
Round loaves of frozen rye-bread are brought out 
and set to thaw. A plate of eggs is produced from 
the cellar. One rolls off as the girl passes, and falls 
to the floor. Instinctively you start. Not so the oth- 
ers. The egg has dropped like a stone and rolled 
away. But it is quietly picked up and put to boil 
with the rest. It is frozen so solidly that there is 
not even a crack on the shell. 

Jacov meanwhile is making earnest inquiry of 
the ‘‘old one.”’ 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 131 


“How are your cows, Dimitri Ivan’ich? Your 
horses, are they well? And your sheep? All well? 
And have you had good crops? Is there still plenty 
of pasture-land in this village? Good! Goop!— 
and how is your wife?” 

Poor withered wife; she is bustling around looking 
after the children, and trying to help her daughter- 
in-law. Not so the ‘‘old one,” the ancient man of 
the family to whom these courteous questions are 
addressed. The patriarch stopped his labors at fifty, 
and sits slumbering away his second prospective 
half-century in honored idleness. ‘Everybody 
works but father !’’ 

The samovar is humming now, and the table is 
decked with a homespun-linen cloth ready for the 
obeid. The first formality, as dinner is about to 
begin, must be observed. The various members of 
the family turn, one after another, toward the 
ikons, reverently crossing themselves. Then the host 
produces a bottle of a colorless liquid, shakes it up 
and down, and brings the bottom sharply against 
his palm. The cork shoots out, and he pours into a 
little glass a drink of the national beverage, vodka, 
which one is supposed to swallow at a gulp. 

Every time a guest enters, a bottle of vodka is 
brought out, costing 49% kopecks, half the average 
day-laborer’s pay in this district. On feast-days the 
visitors go from house to house drinking, — and 
these prasdniks number some fifty-two days in the 
Russian year. Every business deal is baptized with 


132 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


vodka. Every family festival, the return of a son 
from the army, the marriage of a daughter, — all 
are vodka-soaked. As one passes through villages 
on a saint’s day, he may meet a dozen reeling figures 
and hear the maudlin songs from the courtyards 
where the men have gathered. The part played by 
vodka in the people’s life is appalling. 

In the house now, all, beginning with the ‘old 
one,” partake of this stimulant, solemnly gulping 
down their fiery potions. Then the family sits down 
in due rank and order, the ‘‘ old one”’ in the cosiest 
corner, with the samovar convenient to his hand. 
You, as the guest, are beside him on the bench that 
lines the wall, then comes Jacov, next the son, then 
Ivan Kurbski the yamshik, and on stools along 
the inner side of the table, the grandmother and 
assorted infants. The mother alternates between 
the table and the oven. 

The samovar is tapped for tea as the first course 
of the evening. For all who come, tea is the obliga- 
tory offering, in a cup if the visitor be familiar, but 
for special honor in a glass with a ragged lump of 
sugar hammered from a big cone-shaped loaf. This 
one nibbles as he drinks, for sugar is a luxury, not 
to be used extravagantly. The brown rye-bread, 
which has been thawed at the gaping oven-door, is 
next brought out, and raw blubber-like fat pork, in 
little squares, eaten as butter, and boiled potatoes, 
and the boiled eggs, curdled from the freezing. 

At Little Christmas, the prasdnik day which 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 133 


comes in early January, pelmenis, or dumplings, egg- 
patties (grease-cooked), and meat will be served, 
with cranberries and white bread. In Butter-Week 
everybody gorges on buttered blinnies, or pancakes, 
garnished with sour cream. Even a substance show- 
ing rudimentary traces of a common ancestry with 
cake may be produced. 

As the shadows of the northern evening closedown, 
a piece of candle is lighted to-night in our honor. 
Generally the burning brands for the samovar, 
propped in a niche cut at the height of a man’s 
shoulder in the outer edge of the oven, throw the 
only light. Presently the candle is used up and 
the brands give a fitful flame, leaving the corners 
black as Erebus. 

From the baby’s cradle comes now a plaintive cry, 
and one of the little girls goes over to dandle it. Up 
and down, to and fro, for hours together she works, 
singing her monotonous lullaby. The children, who 
have been lifted down from their eyrie above the 
oven, play on the sanded floor. The men remain 
oblivious and smoke their pipes, letting fall an oc- 
casional word, which comes forth muffled from their 
great beards. 

Ox-like, all sit for a while, sipping occasional cups 
of tea. Then the woman and the girl go out and get 
wood, remove the pots from inside the oven, and 
build up a roaring fire. The children are rolled up 
for sleep in their little blankets on the floor. The 
men reach for their furs and felts. They go to the 


134 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


left of the oven, the women to the right, and the 
children are between, making a long row in front of 
the fire. Soon all are sunk in heavy sleep. The little 
girl alone sits up to rock the baby. As you doze off 
in the genial warmth of the newly-stoked oven she 
is still crooning her lullaby in the dim fitful light of 
the firebrands. 

Through the long night all lie like logs. Toward 
morning, as the oven’s heat dies down and the bitter 
cold creeps in, sleep becomes uneasy. One stirs and 
then another. Finally the woman rises and wakes 
the girl, and they go out into the cold for wood and 
water. Presently the men bestir themselves, get up, 
and wait for their tea. The rising sun of another day 
casts its rays through the windows. 

As the sleepers one by one arise and stretch, their 
blankets are folded by the watchful woman of the 
house, and thrust up on the children’s shelf. Some 
of the men go across the room and let the water 
from the little brass can in the corner trickle over 
their hands. Some do not do even this. 

For the outlander of washing proclivities, peculiar 
problems are offered by a country of no wash-bowls, 
no soap, only occasional towels, and the tea samo- 
var as the only source of hot water, a copious draft 
on which not only postpones breakfast but compels 
some of the women of the family to go out and chop 
ice for a new supply. Necessity evolves the tea- 
tumbler toilet method as our solution. You borrow 
one of the precious tea-glasses from the old woman, 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 135 


fill it to overflowing with warm water from the sam- 
ovar, and prop it up on the window-sill. The top 
inch of water is absorbed into a sponge which is put 
aside for future use. Into the remaining two and 
a half inches a soaped handkerchief is dipped, with 
which one washes one’s face, touching tenderly the 
spots recently frozen. The reserved sponge will do 
to rinse off the detritus of this first operation. Two 
and a quarter inches of water are left, of which half 
an inch may be poured over the tooth-brush. With 
an inch and three quarters left, one has ample to 
lather for a shave, as well as to wet the nail-brush 
which is to scrub one’s hands that will be rinsed 
with the sponge. Half an inch remains finally to 
clean the brushes and razors. ‘‘ There you are!” 
With two glasses one may have a bath. 

When the breakfast of rye-bread and tea is ended, 
the men go out to their various winter tasks, of 
which the most serious is felling trees in the forests, 
cutting them up, and getting home the wood. The 
women keep stolidly at their cooking, cleaning, 
child-tending, and turn to the spinning-wheel and 
hand-loom when other work does not press. 

In the weeks that follow, each night brings us to 
a different home, but never to a changed environ- 
ment or atmosphere. This type of life is found, 
not only among the Trans-Baikal peasantry, but 
throughout all Siberia. The log houses down 
the long straggly village streets look out upon the 
same wooden-walled courtyards, —the women peer- 


136 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


ing from their little windows as the sleighs jingle 
past. The same ikons with burning lamps look 
down as you enter; the same whitewashed oven 
and shelf and cradle are there as you push open 
the felted door. The women of each district wear 
the same traditional costume. The bearded host 
produces the same vodka. One of the most im- 
pressive sights, when one drives out before dawn 
into the frosty air, is to see at almost the same 
moment from every chimney the black smoke roll 
upwards, then dwindle toa thin gray streak. Each 
woman has risen and heaped green wood into the 
cooking-oven. It is as if one will actuated simul- 
taneously all the people. 

At places the master of the house has a trade, 
shoemaking or saddlery, and the big living-room 
is littered with pieces of leather and waxed cord as 
he stitches. Sometimes there are hunters in the 
family, and ancient flintlock muskets rest on the ~ 
antlered trophies. The men gather together oc- 
casionally to drive deer. But in general, as the win- 
ter is the men’s idle time, a little wood is cut, the 
cattle are seen to, and for the rest, talk, tea, and 
tobacco, until it is time to eat and sleep once more. 
The women on the other hand seem to be always 
occupied, but they are not discontented. 

The customs and institutions which bind together 
the household group are unique. In all families the 
Hazan is supreme. To him first of all, strangers pay 
their respects. To him every member of the house- 





PEASANT 





VILLAGE STOREKEEPER 


SIBERIAN TYPES 





SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA § 137 


hold comes for advice as to whom he or she shall 
marry, and which calf shall be sold. Howsoever 
hard of hearing he may be, there is related to him 
all the events of the neighborhood with infinite 
minuteness. He is the repository of all moneys 
earned by logging for a neighboring mine-owner, or 
for bringing out to the railroad the sledge-loads of 
rye. As head of the family he can summon a forty- 
year-old son from the merchant’s counter in Kras- 
noyarsk, or his nephew from the fur-traffic in Irkutsk, 
and bid him return to his peasant hut. If a grand- 
son wishes to go to Nerchinsk to seek his fortune, 
the ‘‘old one’s’’ consent must be obtained before the 
youth receives his passport. It is all at the patri- 
arch’s sovereign pleasure. 

We come one day upon a vexatious example of 
this ancestral authority. A report reaches us, by 
chance, of a hibernating bear’s hole some fifty versts 
away, which one of the peasants has located. The 
host, noting our interest, asks : — 

“Would the gaspadine like to hunt him?” 

There is no question on this score, so the peasant 
is quickly brought to the hut. Numerous friends 
crowd in with him, for one person’s business is 
everybody’s business in these primitive commun- 
ities. For a liberal equivalent in roubles the man 
agrees to act as guide, and the start is to be made 
early next morning. All is arranged and he goes out 
with his body-guard to make the necessary pre- 
parations. By and by there is a stir. Our sledge- 


138 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


driver comes in with a long face. Then half a dozen 
peasants add themselves to the family quota in the 
hut. Soon more come, until the stifling room is as 
populous as a Mir Assembly. They are all talking 
at once, and there is a great hubbub. At length one 
voice louder than the rest seems to call a decision 
for them all. They turn backward again, and with 
many gesticulations bustle through the felted doors 
into the snowy streets, and through the village toa 
house which they enter in a body as if with intent of 
sacking it. Instead they bring out and over to our 
hut a slight bearded old man, bent with the weight 
of many winters— the father of the peasant guide. 

Humble but resolute, he faces the assembly. 

‘No, I cannot consent that he lead the gaspadine 
to the Medvetch Dom.” | 

‘“‘But assure the ‘old one’ that his son will only 
point out the den and then go away.” . 

The ‘old one’’ answers : — 

‘The bear does not come to steal my pigs. Why 
should I get him shot? Besides, a bear chewed up 
three Buriats last year. It would be sad to be de- 
voured even for the gaspadine’s fifty roubles.” 

The reward is doubled, and forty kopecks’ worth 
of vodka produced. Many advisers give aid, and one 
suggests that “the son may mount a tree one hun- 
dred sagenes from the mansion of the bear!” 

But still the father refuses. ‘‘ No, I will not allow 
him to take out his horse and hunting-sledge.” 

The son, whose half-dozen full-grown children are 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA — 139 


looking on, shakes his head dolefully. A big eagle- 
nosed peasant, of hunting proclivities, comes in. 

“T will give my hunting-sleigh if he will go,” he 
calls. 

But the shrill voice of the ‘‘old one’’ rings out 
again, ““I donot consent. I donot consent. My son 
shall not go to the mansion of the bear.” 

The guide shrugs his shoulders. We have hit the 
ledge of Russian authority. No one will budge. 
The old man has his way. 

As is the management of the household, so is that 
of the village. While the Hazan rules over the com- 
mon property of the family (zzba), the village elder 
(Selski Starosta) is guardian over the grouped 
households which make up the Mir. As the house- 
hold goods belong to no one individual, but are com- 
mon property, so the land farmed by the villagers 
is a joint possession whose title rests with the com- 
mune. The family is held for the debts and behavior 
of all of its individuals; and similarly, with certain 
limitations, the village community is answerable 
for the taxes and discipline of each of its members. 

On a humble scale it is the spirit of socialism 
incarnate. Within the commune no capitalistic 
employers, no wage-taking worker-class, no castes 
exist, and no individuals are born with special priv- 
ileges. No distinctions of rank or fortune lift some 
above their fellows. The manner of living is the 
same for all. Each head of a family has a right of 
vote, and elects by the freest, simplest means hisown 


140 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


judges and village rulers. The land, the source of 
livelihood, is divided among the producers by their 
own unfettered suffrage. 

The chief man of the community —he who 
drums out the voters to the Mir, lists those who do 
not work sufficiently on the pope’s field, and reports 
the toll of taxes to the Government — is simply an 
elderly peasant clothed with a little brief authority. 
There is no household in the average village which is 
looked up to as more genteel than the rest. No such 
distinctions as prevail in America will reveal that 
such a farmer’s family is musical and well-read, such 
another has traveled to Niagara Falls, such a third 
has blue-ribbon sheep. In Russian peasant circles 
all is equality, almost identity. 

Here is presented the best example in the world 
to-day of an applied system based upon the commun- 
istic as opposed to the individualistic theory. It is 
therefore of more than local interest. Most appar- 
ent of all results is the economic stagnation which 
has accompanied the elimination of special rewards 
for special efforts. The man, more daring or more 
far-sighted than his fellows, who would take for him- 
self the risk of a new enterprise, who would mort- 
gage his house to buy a reaper, or would seek a 
farther market, is fettered by his plodding neighbors. 
His financial obligations, if he fail, fall on the others 
of a common family, whose members have a veto on 
his freedom of action. His own and his neighbor’s 
fields by the allotment are proportioned in extent to 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 141 


the old hand-labor standard. A machine has few to 
serve until the fields are readjusted toa new stand- 
ard. While technically a man may buy or rent 
lands outside the commune and may introduce a 
new rotation of crops or agricultural tools, actually 
the inertia of the peasants bound to him by the 
brotherhood of the Mir weighs the adventurous one 
hopelessly to the earth. Who can persuade an as- 
sembly of bearded conservatism-steeped ‘‘ old ones”’ 
to buy for the Mir the costly new machines? Per- 
haps, with the visible demonstration of profits which 
private enterprise could make under an individual 
régime, the doubting elders might consent. But who 
is there to show them when every village checks 
back the swift to the lock-step of the clod? 

Nor is it simply in material things that communism 
manifests its lotus-fruit in these country hamlets. 
Ignorance, unashamed, broods over them one and 
all. What a dead level is revealed by the fact that 
one peasant in a populous village on the Chickoya, 
our guide upona shooting-trip, could not tell time 
by a watch, and had never seen such an invention. 

Some instances are related where the more ambi- 
tious men of a Mir have clubbed together to bring in 
a teacher at their own expense. The Semieski, or 
“Old Believers,’ big, red-bearded, obstinate men, 
settled in Urluck in the Zabaikal, who dissent from 
the sixteenth-century revisions of Bishop Nikon, will 
not send children to Slavonic schools and may have 
schools of their own. But these cases are rare. 


142 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


There is among the peasantry almost no education 
and comparatively little desire for it, yet how far 
this sentiment is from being a racial or national 
failing the crowds that come to the city universities 
bear ample witness. In one of the villages a teacher 
from Chita is established in the side room of a peas- 
ant’s house, wherein one night we sojourn. He has 
been appointed by the Commissioner of Schools of 
the Cossack Government. He is of a good Nerchinsk 
family and is brother to an elector of delegates to 
the second Duma. He is one of the ‘‘ Intellectuals” 
— the student class which forms almost a caste by 
itself. A free-thinker, keenly interested in the rights 
of man, a Social Democrat by politics, he goes shoot- 
ing on Sunday with some peasant cronies. He plays 
Russian airs on his balilika and gets the peasant’s 
daughter to dance for the guest. He produces speci- 
mens of antimony and chalcopyrite, and discusses 
the geological probability of finding silver or plat- 
inum ores in these districts. Photographs of the 
amateur-kodak variety are along the walls, and on 
a table in the corner are a mandolin and a pile of 
books. We pick up a volume, — “‘L’ Evolution de la 
Moralité,”’ by Charles Letourneau. The young 
owner, who consumes a prodigious number of Mos- 
cow cigarettes, tells of the indifference to education 
among the people. 

‘Here we have a school in a big village, with twe 
other communities near by. There are easily five 
hundred households, — with how many children in 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 143 


each, you can see. Yet we have but thirty boys at 
school. What can we do?”’ 

He is discouraged, this single ‘‘Intellectual’’ of 
Gotoi. Profoundly solicitous for the future, an 
idealist, boundless in hopes for the good of his race, 
he sees the younger generation submerged at the 
threshold of opportunity by the inertia of the old. 

‘What good will it do for him to read?’ ask the 
peasants, when I urge, ‘Send your boy to the 
school.’ What can I say? The boy comes from my 
class after two years, and goes out with the men. 
He has no money to buy books if he wants them. 
No newspapers come to the village, no printed mat- 
ter whatever, save that on the pictures which they 
buy in the fairs. In a few years all I have taught is 
forgotten. The darkness is over these villages. One 
must lift them despite themselves.” 

Beyond the range of the village communes, no 
people show a more eager zeal for knowledge and 
study. In the cities almost all of the younger gener- 
ation can read and write. The school-boys, with 
their big black ear-covering caps, smart blue coats, 
brightened with rows of brass buttons, and knap- 
sacks of books, are one’s regular morning sight. 
‘“‘Realistic’”’ and ‘‘ Materialistic’’ schools are estab- 
lished in many towns. 

The apathy of the rural element is to be laid 
at the door of the system which hinders those 
within the confines of the communes from reaping 
the fruits of special sacrifice and effort. No one 


144 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


attempts to raise himself in the Mir, where the 
dead weight of those bound to him is so hopeless. 
If any boy, brighter than the rest, follow some 
lodestar, it must be toa city. The aspirant must 
bury ambition, or leave the drudging Mir with its 
toll of taxes and recruits. He will not study law 
before the wood-fire as did Lincoln in his log cabin. 

The cloud of deadening communism over their 
lives utters itself in the words continuously on 
the peasants’ tongues. It is the northern equival-_ 
. ent for that buttress of despotism — “manana.” 
The possibility of the Russian condition is ‘‘nief- 
chevo!’’ If the red cock (Rkrasnaz petuk) has crowed 
and has left the forty householders with charred 
embers where stood their homes, ‘‘xietchevo !”’ 
They build it up of wood and straw, with the oven 
chimney passing through as before. Does a raging 
toothache torture, “‘It is the will of God, — niet- 
chevo!’’ If the weary day’s climb sees a gameless 
evening, “ntetchevo!’’ If the son is frozen in the 
troop-train, “‘nietchevo!l’’ If the Little Father send 
to Yakutsk the other one who has gone to the city, 
“‘nietchevo!l’’ Is the unrevised tax for a family of 
ten men pressing down upon three, ‘‘It has got to be 
borne, —nteichevo!’’ It is this bowing to fate as a 
thing begotten of the gods, when it is a force to be 
fought here on earth; the long-taught submission to 
evil, when evil is to be conquered, to limitation 
when opportunity is to be won, —it is this spirit 
which is holding rural Russia still in her Dark Ages. 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 145 


The origin of the present village-system goes back 
to the time of serfage, when the overlord held his 
dependents herded together for easy ruling. That it 
extended to unfettered Siberia, where the rewards 
of individual effort were so obvious, cannot be laid 
entirely to old custom or government compulsion. 
Nor is it to be explained by the early necessity for 
protection against wild beasts or hostile natives. 
The same dangers threatened the pioneers of our 
own country. Perhaps the Russian spirit of gregari- 
ousness lies at the root of the fact that in the Czar’s 
domains the peasant lives away from his fields to 
be near his neighbors, while our people live away 
from their neighbors to be near their fields. What- 
ever the cause, the outcome is that practically the 
whole rural population, even in the most thinly 
settled districts, is gathered into villages, and owns 
the lands in common. 

The system makes enormously for homogeneity, 
welding, solidarity. The people are a ‘ mass.” 
Units are lost in unity. Nothing save Nature’s im- 
print and law of individuality, that decree under 
which every created thing is some way different 
from every other, keeps the Russian peasant from 
quite losing his birthright. The commune, vodka, 
and resignation are the incubi of Siberia. In the 
towns and cities gather the energetic natures that 
have climbed out and above them. What these 
have done, their allied people — the peasants — 
can do. Beyond the horizon of the latter’s narrow 


146 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


lives lies still the borderland of possibilities. One 
cannot doubt the vigor of the stock, nor the cer- 
tainty of its rise. This quality of rugged worth is 
the basis of all the great advance that the pioneers 
and the city populations have made. It is only 
in the Mirs, frozen fast in their lethargy of com- 
munism, that resurrection seems such a far-off 
dream. The way is long for the peasants of Siberia 
—long and toilsome. But their vast patience is 
allied to as vast a courage, and both will lift them 
into the larger day. 

The measure passed by the last Duma, decreeing 
the division of the Mir lands in severalty, and 
private ownership of property, will be one of the 
most momentous and far-reaching enactments ever 
legislated for a people. It should end for rural 
Russia the stagnation, and open an era of mighty 
endeavor and achievement. 

There are many races here among the serenely 
tolerant Siberians, undiscriminated against and un- 
coerced. While one of the Orthodox may not abjure 
the state religion without severe punishment, those 
born to an alien faith are unmolested by official or 
proselyting pope. ‘‘God has given them their faith 
as he has given us ours,” is the Russian rule. 

This medley of races beneath the Russian banners 
gives to one’s earliest contact the conception of a 
heterogeneous disorganized jumble of nations and 
peoples. But closer acquaintance impresses upon 
one the dominating and surviving qualities innate 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 147 


in the Slav, whose unalterable solidarity is beneath 
and behind the kaleidoscopic types of aboriginal 
tribes and exiled sectarians. By race-absorption, 
like that which has evolved Celts, Danes, Saxon, 
and Norsemen into English; British, Dutch, Swedes, 
Germans and Italians into Americans, the Slav is 
dissolving, transmuting to his own type and mould- 
ing to his own institutions the varied peoples. 

Though the heterogeneous blood adds to the total 
of Siberian country life, it is the Slavic race that 
determines the permanent order of this great land. 
Primarily too it is the peasantry who shape its 
destiny. Their possibilities are the limit of Russia’s 
ascent. Their condition is therefore of far deeper 
than sightseeing interest to the student. Unlike the 
picturesque peasantry of Holland, here they are the 
foundations of the state, forming not an insignifi- 
cant minority but ninety per cent of the population. 

Somewhat of a new spirit flickers here and there 
in Siberian hamlets. The peasant is superior to his 
Russian brother. The traditions of serfdom were 
broken by his severance from the old environment, 
and wider lands give him an abundance unknown 
save in a few favored parts of Europe. The political 
exiles have through the centuries added an upsurge 
of independence and personal self-consciousness, 
which is markedly higher than the Oriental humility 
of Occidental Russia. 

The influence of the criminal, as distinct from the 
political convict, is felt primarily in the cities, suchas 


148 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Irkutsk and Vladivostok, to which the time-expired 
men drift. The convict element is always met with. 
It has been customary to billet a condemned, who 
was not wanted at home, upon some out-of-the-way 
village, giving him a passport for its confines alone. 
The victim might have been a Moscow professor or 
a locomotive engineer, but in the Mir he must farm 
the land given him. Naturally such seed as this 
planted in Siberian hamlets does not produce the 
traditional peasant faith in God and the Czar so 
faithfully preached by the popes. 

Another influence making for upheaval is the 
returning recruit. We are in a peasant house when 
a soldat comes back to the family from his service. 
If he has not brought any great burden of salary, he 
has accumulated tales enough of the outer world to 
hold in breathless excitement the circle of friends 
and relatives which gathers at once when the tink- 
ling sleigh-bells and the barking have announced to 
the village his return. 

Far down the street is heard the jingle of his 
sledge. It brings every girl to her peep-hole window, 
and every boy from his sawing to the courtyard 
door. At the gateway where the newcomer turns in, 
he is heralded by the commotion of the household 
guardians, wolf-like in appearance and nature. 
Everybody within the important house runs to the 
door. The village knows now which family is mak- 
ing local history. The arrival is accompanied al- 
ready by two or three men who have recognized him 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 149 


as he descends. He tramps in with military firmness 
of tread, head erect. Before he greets the grand- 
father even, he makes the sign of the cross to the holy 
ikons, and, bowing down, touches his lips to the 
floor. Then comes the respectful kiss to the old man, 
next to the mother, while the younger brother, soon 
to go to service himself, stands awkwardly by, and 
the little children look half-dubiously at a form 
scarcely known after his four years of absence. 

Then there is a scurrying of the grown and half- 
grown daughters to prepare chai and to produce the 
pelmenis and brown bread. The villagers drift in 
one by one, cross themselves, and speak their greet- 
ings, until the little house is packed, and as hot as 
the steam-room of a banno. The vodka-bottle is out 
and everybody has settled down for an indefinite 
stay. The soldier’s tales of war and garrison duty 
and government and revolution hold the family and 
the audience breathless through the long evening. 
As you drop asleep, the hero is still reciting and 
gesticulating. The guests in departing will be care- 
ful not to stumble over you, so nietchevo. 

In one of the houses where we put up, a shop 
adjoins the big living-room. It has dingy recesses 
from which hatchets and the commoner farm uten- 
sils can be produced, shelves of homespun cloth, 
and gaudy cottons for the men’s blouses, and beads 
for the women’s bonnets. Here, as in the country- 
stores of our own land, during the long idle winter 
days there is always a crowd and endless discus- 


150 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


sion of the village events, —the health of each 
other’s cows, births, marriages, deaths, drafts into 
the army, taxes. Even in this remoteness something 
of the echo of great Russia’s struggle is heard over 
the shopkeeper’s tea-cups. We hum, unthinking, a 
bar of Die Beide Grenadier, in which a refrain of the 
Marseillaise occurs. 

A peasant looks quickly up. “It is not allowed, 
that song,’’ he says. 

‘Why not?” 

“That is the song of the stilbene 

“But the gaspadine is a foreigner. He may sing 
iting 

““Yes,”’ says the peasant, ‘“‘he may sing it, but 
I may not. Would that I might!’’ 

One meets quaint characters in this inland jour- 
neying — veteran soldiers of the Turkestan ad- 
vance; ‘‘sabbato sectarians,’’ who keep Saturday © 
holy rather than Sunday; austere ‘‘ Old Believers,” 
traveling peddlers, teamsters who have tramped 
beside their ponies over three provinces. One comes 
upon peripatetic Mussulman doctors, in snug- 
fitting black coats and small black skull-caps, who 
show their Arabic-worded road-maps and much- 
thumbed medical works bound in worn leather. Be- 
side their plates at table the kindly hostess puts piles 
of leathery bread, unleavened, and made without 
lard in deference to their caste rules. 

A shop in one village is kept by a Chinaman, 
who, lettered like most of his race, seems a far 





PEASANT TL YPES 





F. ' 

a 

cS 
, 
- 
le 

~ 4 . 

- - 

: 7 

be ' » “= 4 - 

F e - 4 - jw = os 
= > . 3 ‘ aay Z —-. > 2 . - AJ a = or 
=< ee he Ae. 3 1 tls ee es eee 





SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 151 


shrewder and more intellectual person than the 
uneducated Russian peasants. He invites the 
stranger to drink tea that his special caravan brings, 
and presents Chinese candy with the courtesy of 
a grandee. When, in reciprocity, the traveler buys 
sugar for his chai, he receives it wrapped in paper 
covered with hieroglyphics and exhaling the faint 
unmistakable Chinese odor. 

Going always southward, one begins to meet 
more and more frequently the villages of the Mon- 
gol-descended Buriats. ‘‘Bratskie’’ (brotherly peo- 
ple), the Russians call them, for despite the forbid- 
ding aspect that flat Mongolian features, high thin 
noses, yellow-brown skins, and big squat bodies 
give them, no more peaceful, harmless, and hos- 
pitable people exist. They are great and fearless 
hunters, unexcelled riders, and though still only on 
the threshold of civilization, are rapidly moving to 
better things. 

All phases of the advance from the nomad to the 
agricultural stage may be studied among them. 
The pastoral Buriats, decorated like the Chinese 
with queues, ride around after their flocks. Their 
villages lie far away from the lines of convoys, un- 
marked on the Ministry map, which one is supposed 
to be following. Each family occupies a little 
windowless wooden hut, some fifteen feet in diame- 
ter. In front of it is planted a pole, carrying at the 
top a weather-faded pennant, the colors of which 
in Buriat heraldry indicate the tribe and name of 


152 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the occupant. Behind the hut are stacks of hay 
and a wooden corral with sheep and horses. Beside 
it stands the summer tent, of felt, looking like a 
great inverted bowl. It is empty in winter, save 
for a shrine with grotesque pictured gods, fronted 
by offerings. 

In the homes of these least advanced Buriats we 
loiter no longer than we must. The wooden house 
which shelters them is hermetically sealed, and is 
crowded with people and animals.. Fenced off in a 
corner of the first that receives us is a corral of thir- 
teen lambs, which at uncertain moments begin to 
bleat suddenly in unison, producing, with startling 
effect, a prodigious volume of sound. When one has 
been roused from sleep half a dozen times a night by 
this chorus, he is strongly inspired to move on. The 
men are out during the day looking to their flocks. 
The women spend a good part of their time sewing 
furs or making felt. They are very unclean, and it 
is a decided relief to get out of their homes, to which 
the cold compels one to have recourse on a long 
journey. In spring, with great and understandable 
relief, these semi-nomads take to their felt tents and 
move where fancy and pasturage dictate. 

One grade higher are those Buriats who have 
learned some rudimentary farming from the Ortho- 
dox. You will see the men threshing on a level floor 
beside the corral. They are dressed in long blue or 
magenta fur-lined cloaks and colored cone-shaped 
hats. Other Buriats are permanently resident in 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 153 


the Slavonic settlements, and send their rosy-faced 
children to school. They mix with the Russians, 
subject to almost no disabilities, and their better 
classes contract inter-racial marriages, which seem, 
to an outsider, at least, completely happy and 
successful. 

It is no small thing, this which Russian rule has 
done for the Buriats. A people whom any other na- 
tion would spurn in racial ostracism, perhaps would 
eliminate, live side by side with the good-natured 
Slav in perfect accord, progressing in civilization 
and material well-being as high as the individual 
can aspire to and attain. 

They are ruled by their own chiefs, whose sway 
is tempered by the benevolent supervision of the 
general government. They are represented in the 
Duma by men of their own selection. They freely 
worship the Buddhist Burhan in their lamasery 
near Cellinginsk, without pope to preach or mis- 
sionary to proselyte. Their easy citizenship is un- 
harassed by money taxes, and their only obligation 
is Cossack service in the army. But Cossack service 
to a Buriat is what a picnic is to a boy. Riding 
around on horseback, rationed by the Government, 
visiting a city with real tobacco and vodka some- 
times attainable, sleeping on a straw-stuffed mat- 
tress with no tethered lambs to murder sleep, when 
they are used to a sheepskin on the dirt floor, — all 
this is luxury of blissful memory, during the years 
of the reserve. The net result is that the Buriats 


154 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


are entirely content. They are progressing all along 
the line, and are being made useful to the nation, 
not by unpayable taxation, but by the service which 
they are so especially fitted to render. 

As one nears Chinese territory, by the lower 
waters of the Chickoya River, the villages of Slavic 
colonists who hold their land on tax-paying peasant 
tenure, have given place to the Buriat tribesmen and 
to the staniizas of the Cossack guard that occupy 
the pale of land flanking the frontier. Within this 
border-belt, every village staniiza holds its quota of 
Cossacks. These soldiers are for the most part de- 
scendants of the levies from the Don region, trans- 
planted to the Trans-Baikal by the Government’s 
despotic hand in the eighteenth century, and since 
then forming an hereditary military caste. Many 
of them are bearded Slavs, indistinguishable, save 
for their accoutrements, from their more peaceful 
neighbors. Others are of a peculiar cast of counten- 
ance, due to the mixture with the Asiatic tribes in 
ancient times, when the hunted people fled to their 
ancestors’ asylum, the territories beyond the Volga 
and on the Don. There is great variation in type 
- among the imported Cossacks. Most are Orthodox, 
but a very large number are ‘‘Old Believers,’”’ or 
Semieski. In all the houses now hang the yellow cap 
and the uniform coat, which must be ever ready 
against the call of duty. Arms are in the corners of 
the rooms, and everything has a military look, in 
marked contrast to the peasant homes. Crude, 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 155 


highly-colored prints of Japanese defeats, which 
circulated broadcast in Russia during the war, share 
the attention usually devoted excusively to holy 
ikons. Portraits of Generals Linevitch and Kuro- 
patkin, and Admiral Alexiev, are tacked to the 
walls. In one house we saw hanging a prized silver 
watch, one of those distributed by General Rennen- 
kamp among the soldiers of his command. 

One of our Cossack hosts is an old man, Orthodox, 
and of Russian origin, but with some ancient Asiatic 
blood, for only a stringy beard grows on his kindly, 
wrinkled face. With reluctant pride he tells of his 
three sons away on service, leaving but himself and 
two daughters at home. With frank happiness he 
shows you his medals. Every soldier at the front 
received a round brass service-medal; his, however, 
a silver cross with St. George and the Dragon on it, 
is given for valor. He will not drink the vodka he 
offers you, — rheumatism. But in order that you 
may smoke some alleged tobacco that greatly inter- 
ests him because he gathered it himself by the road- 
side, in Manchuria, he starts up his pipe despite the 
dust-induced coughs that it begets. He is a kindly, 
loquacious old man. 

Another Cossack, privileged to the broad yellow 
top on his cap and the yellow stripe on his trousers, 
is, for the time, our guide and gun-carrier. His 
flat strongly-mustached face is open and ingenuous. 
He tells of his sotnia in Manchuria. 

“‘T was with Mitschenko at the front during the 


156 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


war, in his great raid,’’ he says. ‘‘Ten of our sotnia 
of a hundred were killed, forty wounded. We got 
behind the Japanese and burned four hundred of 
their wagons. We had two hundred rounds of car- 
tridges, and more when we wanted them. But food 
often not, and meat sometimes not for two months. 
We had thirty Buriats in our hundred, but the Verh- 
neudinsk Polk were almost all Buriats.”’ 

In one house where ikons, oven, bench, and 
stockade reveal the Slav peasant’s home, the mir- 
rors are shrouded for their forty days’ veiling. It 
is a place of death. The owner was a full-blooded 
Buriat married to a Russian woman. In silent grief 
she plods through her mechanically-executed duties. 
Their son, in red blouse, is in prayer beside his 
father’s body. They have pressed us to remain. 
The advent of strangers seems to distract their 
thoughts a little. From outside comes a hail, and 
heavily there dismounts from his pony an old griz- 
zled Buriat Cossack. He has ridden two hundred 
versts to pay this last respect to his friend. 

His military training makes the Cossack a little 
less gentle than the average peasant. When off duty, 
hen-roosts near a garrison are in some danger. For 
the rest, he is naturally brave, generous, and will 
share the chicken he has just ridden forty versts to 
lift. He will give his pipe to be smoked, and will 
behave with a thoughtfulness and courtesy that is 
not found in finer circles. His children have the free 
unrepressed air which speaks of genial home kindli- 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA — 157 


ness and sympathy. His wife is far from beinga 
mute drudge. 

Assuredly this is not the Cossack of legendary 
fame, the ‘‘implacable knout”’ of the czars. It re- 
quires almost courage, in the face of the savage of 
literary tradition, to assert that the Cossack is other 
than a dehumanized monster of oppression. Why 
then did he cut down with utter ruthlessness the 
helplessly frozen grenadiers of the Grande Armée? 
Why willhe massacre indiscriminately men, women, 
and children on his path from Tien-tsin to Peking? 
Why will he beat with his knotted whip the striking 
girl students of Kiev? Who shall tell? To a certain 
extent he is callous to suffering because of a defect- 
ive imagination. He will ride his best horse to death 
if need be. Loving it, he will yet leave it out in 
weather forty below. He is cruel, often, because he 
has not the substituting gift needed to translate 
another’s suffering into terms of his own. He is 
valorous because, even so far as regards himself, he 
cannot think beyond the immediate privation into 
the future of imaged dread, so he goes fearlessly into 
unpondered peril. Heoffends the traditional ideas of 
humanity and civilization in killing people, because 
of his failure to recognize a wider radius of sym- 
pathy than circles his own tribe. But if the tribe 
circumscribes his idea, the nation circumscribes the 
sympathies of others who make tariffs to crush an 
extra-national industry and raise armies to destroy 
a foreign liberty. But if outside the Cossack’s re- 


158 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


cognized circle, you are to him beyond the pale, in 
his home, you are, 7pso facto, a member of the tribe, 
a brother in whose defense he will gayly risk his life, 
and spend his substance. 

The deeds that are recalled to the Cossack’s 
discredit often fall for judgment really to those 
who plan and issue the orders which loyalty makes 
him obey. Where his allegiance has been once 
given, there it remains. His hataman is more than 
a superior officer; he is the chief of the clan, the 
head of all the tribe, and the subordinate is united to 
him by the traditions of centuries of mutual depend- 
ence. Where other than blood-kin officers are put 
over the Cossack he mutinies, as when, in Man- 
churia, Petersburg-schooled lieutenants were drafted 
and raised to command. But give him his own right- 
ful chief, then if the Cossack is told to do something 
it is done. He will cross himself and jump from the 
tower, as in Holland did Peter the Great’s guards- 
man at the word of the chief to whom he had given 
his loyalty. 

The savage valor of the warriors in Verestchagin’s 
picture, The Cossack’s Answer, is typical of the 
spirit of these soldiers. Surrounded by battalions of 
the foe, fated to annihilation when the summons to 
surrender is rejected, the leaders, laughing uproar- 
iously in approval, hear their hataman dictate the 
insulting reply that dooms them all. If one would 
ride to China he can have no better guards and com- 
rades than the Cossacks. 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 159 


We are close to the border now, climbing the last 
crest which separates the Chickoya from the Cel- 
linga Valley, our toiling tired ponies white with frost. 
All day the long sweep of the hills has been taken 
through heavy snow. The landscape is barren, de- 
solate, and lifeless save for the occasional sight 
of a distant Buriat horseman. The sun is slowly 
sinking. 

The crest at last! The driver points with his whip 
to the dark masses of houses below, wreathed in the 
curling smoke of the evening fires. Here and there 
is a brilliantly painted building or tower, and sleighs 
and horsemen are passing in the streets. ‘ Troitz- 
kosavsk!’’ he says. He points further ahead to 
another more distant town, whose most dominant 
features are the great square tea-caravansaries and 
a mighty church, green-domed, with a gilded far- 
glimmering cross. The huddled houses end sharply 
toward the south, as if a ruler had marked off their 
limit in a straight stretch of white. Along this pale 
are little square sentry-boxes, striped black and 
white. In the evening sun a distant glint of steel 
flashes from the bayonet of a pacing sentry. ‘ Ki- 
ahta!’’ the driver says. Then, across the white 
strip where a wooden stockade girds a settlement 
of gray-walled compounds, fluttering with tiny flags, 
gay with lofty towers and temples flaunting their red 
eaves, he points a third time: ‘‘ Kitai!’’ (China). 

He picks up the reins, and lifts the whip; 
“Scurry !” he cries to the horses. The ponies leap 


160 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


forward, throwing their weight against duga and 
collar, and we sweep down the hill toward the near- 
est Russian town, Troitzkosavsk, four versts from 


~ the border. 


As we come down to the main road hard-by the 
town, officers of the garrison drive past with their 
spick-and-span fast trotters, city-wise, as one sees 
them in Irkutsk. Behind rolls a Mongol cart driven 
by a burly Chinaman. A Buriat, come to town to 
replenish his supply of powder and ball, follows on 
his shaggy pony. 

Down a long street, flanked first by log cabins 
with courtyards and fences like those in the peasant 
villages, then by stucco-plastered houses, cement- 
walled government buildings, and great white- 
washed churches, we pass and reach the centre of 
the town. Then we turn up a side street to the house 
of a mine-owner, to whom we are accredited. 

Nicolai Vladimirovitch Tobagov meets us at the 
door of his log house, clad in gray flannel shirt and 
knee-boots. A not unnoteworthy product of Siberia 
is this man, — squarely ‘built and yet wiry, with 
nervous strength expressed on his bearded face. He 
is self-made, risen from the masses. A peasant-boy, 
he started life as assistant to a surveyor, learning 
to read and write by his own efforts. During this 
apprenticeship he studied his chief’s books on geo- 
logy, by the light of the brands for the samovar 
in the peasants’ houses where they were billeted 
nightly. 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 161 


He located placer gold in a number of spots, at 
a time when the oblast was a lawless ‘‘no man’s 
domain,” without any legal means in existence for 
acquiring title to property. Guarding in silence his 
secret, he waited years, until at last a mining-law 
was enacted for the oblast where his prospects lay. 
When this law ultimately made private ownership 
possible, he started in to realize. A friend lent him 
the money for a mill, which he constructed, accord- 
ing to book-descriptions, on the model of those in 
California. At first it failed to work, and broke 
again and again. His riffles were set too steeply. 
They had let the gold scour away, and his neigh- 
bors reported that there was no gold to collect. 
But he fought it through to victory, returned every 
borrowed kopeck with interest, bought new ma- 
chines, and prospered; till now, besides controlling 
several mines, he possesses a great domain in the 
river valley, some hundred versts away, with fields 
of wheat and rye and hay-meadows. 

When the visitor has stamped the snow from his 
felt boots and emerged from his shaggy bearskin 
coat and hooded fur cap, he enters the main room, 
with its walls of great logs bare of ornament and 
showing the scorings of the axe, but clean as new- 
planed wood can be. Between the chinks straw and 
moss are packed to keep out the cold. Two great 
benches flank the sides of the room. Not a picture, 
not an ornament, not a curtain, not a drapery, not 
a shelf, breaks the plainness of the log wall, but here 


162 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


and there are hung guns and rifles. In essentials 
this large house does not greatly differ from the 
typical peasant’s dwelling. But a copy of the 
‘Sibir’? newspaper lies on the table, and photo- 
graphs of the female members of the family are 
added to the many reproductions of relations in 
military dress, which the photographer has touched 
up with brilliant dashes of red, to pay tribute to the 
coat-lining, and white to indicate the gloves.. Lamps 
replace the lowly tapers, and they burn before more 
gorgeously gilt ikons. The windows are double, 
with cotton-wool and strips of colored paper be- 
tween. This is a great improvement on the single 
ice-crusted window, with its perpetual drippings 
down along the sill. There are the little sheet-iron 
stoves, whitewashed after the tradition of the oven; 
chairs with backs, as well as the square stools; and 
small rooms curtained off from each other. A clock 
hangs on the wall, and there are carpets on the floor. 
A large table stands at one end, on which is the 
ever-boiling samovar, which is nickel instead of 
brass. 

We are made acquainted with the wife of the 
host, a stout matron of fine domestic proclivities. 
Though of humble origin, she has discarded her 
peasant shako and bandana-handkerchief headdress 
fora bonnet, and dispenses, as to the manner born, 
many luxuries. On the other hand, she has lost the 
robustness which keeps her peasant sisters fresh and 
hearty. Sewing-machines, and beds, and servants, 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 163 


must exact toll even in Siberia. Her boys are clean- 
cut and intelligent. They go to school and are the 
future ‘‘Intellectuals’’ that are seeding Siberia. Six- 
teen children — eleven Nicolai Tobagov’s own, five 
adopted in open-hearted generosity — sit down to 
four very solid meals a day in the big hall. Ivan 
Simeonski, optovie and argove merchant, and Nicita 
Baeschoef the lieutenant, traveling west on fur- 
lough, are stopping in this friendly house, and many 
other guests are here. The hospitality of the house- 
hold is conducted on a scale of patriarchal magni- 
ficence. 

Before our furs are fairly off, the host has called 
aloud for obeid. One’s first formality is, as usual, 
to salute the ikons and the guests. One’s second 
is to escape the scalding vodka, seventy proof, and 
then begin with the zakuska of ten cold dishes on 
the side table. There is black caviar from the 
Volga, though the rapid diminution of the supply 
has raised the price to ten roubles a pound. There 
is red caviar from the Chickoya, cold mutton, cold 
sturgeon, sardines, ham, and sliced sausages made at 
home. The latter must be abundantly and appre- 
ciatively sampled, because they have been specially 
prepared under the direction of the souprouga her- 
self. One stands before the zakuska and dips from 
dish to dish. Next, the guests take the square 
wooden stools and draw up to the great table, 
where the plates are set for the real dinner. Each 
one helps himself to the smoking soup, which is 


164 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


passed in the tureen. As this is being ladled, a plate 
of round balls comes by, the delicious piroushki, 
dough-shells filled with hashed meat, always served 
with soup. We have entered upon a typical Siber- 
ian meal, with the boiled soup-meat eaten as the 
second course, and madeira, champagne, claret, and 
rum, indiscriminately offered. A perfect babel of 
conversation goes on, and one is pressed to try this, 
try that, try each and everything of the long menu, 
under the watchful eyes of the kindly host and 
hostess. 

At all times of the day the samovar is left simmer- 
ing, ready for any one of the multitudinous house- 
hold to brew tea, and constantly replenished zakus- 
ka dishes deck the sideboard. Guests, attendants, 
children, and friends come and go in the utmost 
freedom. Such is the Hazan’s life. 

In another part of the building there stufis to re- 
pletion an army of dependents. Servants, artisans, 
drivers from the caravans which pass up from China 
by the road below the house, a whole other below- 
stairs world is here. Twenty caravan teamsters, 
kareiniki or isvoschniki of the sledges and carts that 
fill the ample courtyard, huddle in the back rooms 
for tea. An old bespectacled maker of string-net 
doilies, who reads Alexander Pushkin’s poems, is 
working out a week’s board in the room where the 
chickens are kept. The housewife does not disdain, 
either, to find a place for the traveling sapojnik, 
who will put leather reinforcements on the felt 


INAGCALS ASAVSONZLIOML TALDSVAO MOTHS, 





‘iy ~~ qv iC 
2 oO t 
i ; f a : 


0 (ya es CaS ol 





: * 
' 
. 
. 
f 
2 + 
i : 
t 
fe 
yi 
i 
x 
. 
- 
f 
. 
, 
a ~ 
pA* Z 
l 
‘ 
’ 
é i 
\ 
‘ 4 
‘ 
‘ 
eh 
’ 
y 
; 
\ 





SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 165 


boots which have been worn through at the heel. 
It is a large easy way of living, this of the man who 
holds a leading place in the border city. 

A mixture of crudeness and culture, of luxury and 
hardship, of Orient and Occident, runs through the 
quaint fabric of frontier society, with its medley of 
races and types. Fine avenues flanked by stuccoed 
houses pierce the main city. Back of them lie the 
log houses of the plainer citizens, while the out- 
skirts are occupied by the felt huts of the Buriats 
and Mongols. Students in uniform elbow Cossacks 
of the Guard, and maidens from the seminary brush 
the Mongol wood-choppers. 

“Téatre?”’ suggests one evening the twenty-year- 
old son of your host. Of course the invitation is ac- 
cepted. At eight o’clock you put on your felt boots, 
and tramp down past dark-shuttered log houses and 
the silent white church into the field, where stands 
a barn-like building placarded with the programme. 
The young guide secures seats at the ticket-counter 
of rough lumber. Seventy-five kopecks they are, 
each. With them are handed out eight numbered 
slips of red paper. Then together you break a way 
to the front rows, through the crowd of burly Cos- 
sacks of the garrison, bearskin-capped students, 
citizens with shiny black boots, and here and there 
a husky stolid-faced Buriat. Keeping hat and coat 
on, as does every one else, we find seats on the rough 
benches wheresoever we like or can; for nothing is 
reserved save the elevated perch of the musicians, 


166 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


where a four-piece orchestra drones out a mono- 
tonous Russian march. Whata fire-trap! is the first 
thought. To each of the posts that sustain the 
rafters is fastened a lamp shedding an uncertain 
light on the hangings of bright-red cotton cloth, in 
dangerous proximity to which, utterly disregarding 
the ‘‘no smoking”’ signs, stand the crowd of forty- 
kopeck admissions, rolling and smoking perpetual 
papirost. 

As the impatient audience begins to pound and 
stamp, a bell rings, and the curtain rises on two 
comic characters busily engaged in packing fora 
hurried departure from their lodging. The stage 
has become a room, with red-cotton-covered walls 
and bright green curtains. A merchant comes with 
a bill for comestibles six months due. He is quieted 
with extravagant tales of forthcoming change for 
a hundred-thousand-rouble note. The landlady 
enters, and the shoemaker’s apprentice with a pair 
of mended boots. Both are likewise cajoled and 
bullied away. The Jewish money-lender is more 
difficult, but at length, to the manifest delight of the 
audience, he, too, is staved off, and the pair draw the 
vivid green curtains and go out through a window 
for parts unknown, amid much glee and applause. 

We now go out to the “‘buffet’”’ and contribute to 
the dangers of conflagration by smoking an offered 
cigarette. We also add to the theatre’s income by 
buying a glass of hot chaz for ten kopecks. Some- 
thing special is in the air for the next act. The audi- 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA § 167 


ence is buzzing and moving in eager expectancy. 
We return to our seats. The curtain rises upon a 
double row of two-pud (sixty-four-pound) weights, 
such as are used at the bazaar to sell frozen beef. 
Amid a thunder of stampings on the plank floor 
one of the escaping debtors of the last act, dressed 
in tights, comes out from behind the green curtains, 
and lifts one of these above his head. Then he poises 
one with each hand. Finally a wooden harness is 
adjusted to his body, and sixteen weights (or about 
half a ton), are heaped upon him by the jack-booted 
Buriat stage-attendant on one side, and the de- 
frauded merchant of the first play on the other. It 
is the most unspectacular performance possible, this 
athletic test, but it takes the place of a football 
match in Siberia. The applause is ferociously ap- 
preciative. 

More chai and cigarettes, and we come back to 
hear a very pretty girl, dressed in the peasant’s 
costume of Little Russia, head a chorus, and to seea 
boy in red blouse and boots dance the wild dervish 
whirl which the peasants of tradition are supposed 
to execute. The boy is in the midst of his perform- 
ance when there is a tumult among the forty- 
kopeckers under the musicians’ eyrie. The latter, 
being human, try to watch what is going on below 
and play jig-music at the same time, and sharps and 
flats fly wide of the mark till the sounds become 
frightful. Everybody jumps up on his bench to see 
a peasant having a turn with a Buriat, and further 


168 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


trouble brewing with a Cossack who has got upset 
in the mélée. There is a chaos of tossing hats and 
brandished fists, and the two armed soldiers who are 
on guard as policemen press in, with gruff shouts to 
make them way. The tumult finally goes out the 
door and into the street, and we turn back to the 
poor dancer still trying to beat out his stunt. 

The curtain rises next on the manager, who has 
been up to date weight-lifter, escaping boarder, and 
part of the peasants’ chorus. He is seated at a table, 
looking very ordinary in his street clothes. Behind 
him is another table covered with an assortment of 
crockery, mirrors, spoons, vases, pieces of cotton 
cloth, and a big striking clock. He calls for a volun- 
teer from the audience for some unknown purpose, 
and a little rosy-cheeked uniformed Buriat school- 
boy, who has been peeking behind flapping curtain 
between the acts, responds. The boy reaches into 
a box and pulls out a slip of paper. The manager 
reads a number from it, “ Sto piatdeciet sem.” An 
eager voice from the rear answers ‘“‘Jes/” The 
stage-attendant takes a glass tumbler from the table 
and carries it solemnly to the man who has an- 
swered. Your host nudges until you comprehend 
that you are to excavate the eight theatre-slips, 
which you do, to find that two only are seat-tickets. 
The rest are numbered billets, and you are liable at 
any moment to receive a perfumery-bottle or a can- 
dlestick from the lottery which is in progress. The 
scene now takes on an imminent personal interest 


a 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 169 


shared with the banked forty-kopeckers behind. A 
breathless strain accompanies the drawing of the 
numbers. It mounts to a climax as the big musical 
clock is approached. The fateful billet is at last 
drawn in intense silence. Every eye is fixed on the 
reader. Nota Cossack speaks, not a Mongol moves. 

“ Deesti ivi!” and a sharp “ Moz!’ tells that the 
clock goes to ornament the table of a burly peasant, 
who grinningly receives it. The tense breaths are 
let out, the forms relax, and the crowd straggles to 
the door, lighting cigarettes and pulling down caps. 
The drama is over. Next morning at eight a soldier 
visits your host with a message from his chief. 

“‘Bring to the police-station the passport of the 
stranger seen with you at the theatre last night.” 

A town droshky will take one the few versts to 
Kiahta, where in the Geographical Society’s museum 
is the celebrated sketch of the Dalai Lama made at 
Urga by a Russian artist, when the young Tibetan 
monk had fled before the English expedition to 
Lhassa. Here, too, are ore samples and recon- 
structed Mongolian tents. But it is hard to look at 
fossil rhinoceros-heads and at stuffed sabre-toothed 
tigers and musk-deer when the camel-trains are 
passing and China is a verst away. A courier is 
necessary now, for resourceful Jacov and driver Ivan 
are strangers beyond the border. Perhaps our host 
knows of a man acquainted in Mongolia? He will 
inquire. Next day there presents himself a slight, 
bearded, intellectual man, Alexander Simeonovich 


170 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Koratkov, usually called, for short, ‘“‘ Alexsimevich.” 
Bachelor of forty, educated in the Troitzkosavsk 
‘“‘ Realistic”? school. He speaks, as well as Russian, 
Mongolian, English, French, German, and some 
Chinese. He has translated for the English engin- 
eers who were brought in to work the Nerchinsk 
mines. He is deeply read in Buddhist mythology 
and sociology. Will he go down into Mongolia with 
you? Yes; and so it is arranged. 

Provisions are cheap and abundant in the Siber- 
ian towns. Sixty kopecks buy a pound of caravan 
tea, seventeen kopecks a pound of sugar, the sort 
that comes in a cone like a Kalmuck hat. It isa 
luxury by warrant of public opinion, so much that 
it has, of note, been served on baked potatoes. 
Before the Buddha pictures of the Buriats, a few » 
Jumps may be the choicest offering. Flour costs six 
kopecks a pound. Beef, if a great pud-weight fore- 
quarter is bought at the market, twenty kopecks. 
Frozen butter will cost twenty-five kopecks per 
pound. Eggs, of the Siberian cold-storage variety, 
forty-eight kopecks a dozen. For thirty kopecks 
one gets a piece of milk as big as one’s head. But 
do not try to go beyond the native produce, for 
canned goods, coffee, or sardines. It is bankruptcy 
speedier than buying bear-holes. A big magazine 
will sell paté de foie gras, imported from France, 
at two roubles the tin; while beneath the Chinese 
caravansaries’ arcade, bales of tea will be sold at 
a few kopecks a pound. One gets cigars in a glass- 


SLEDGING IN TRANSBAIKALIA 171 


covered box, with the government stamp, for a 
rouble and a half, and they will be worth about as 
much as the strings of twisted tobacco-rope which 
the Mongols carry off as their single cherished luxury. 

And now for transportation. The sledge can serve 
no more, for the snow goes bare in places along the 
caravan trail. We must have a tarantass, and in 
time one is produced for inspection. A cask sawed 
in half, lengthwise, is the image of its body, a 
lumber-cart the model of its clumsy wheels and 
framework. To the tarantass is hitched the trotter, 
with his big bow yoke to bring the weight of collar 
and shafts on his back rather than against his neck. 
At each side of him, with much such a rig as is used 
to tow canal-boats, are made fast the two galloping 
horses. 

When one goes beyond the post-route with his 
own equipage he has, fastened under the driver’s 
seat and behind his own, bags of oats and hay, 
which must serve as emergency-rations for the 
horses against the days in which none can be se- 
cured along the often deserted trail. Personal pro- 
vender must be likewise stored away, bags of bread, 
frozen dumplings to make soup with, tea, sugar, 
milk-chocolate, milk, candles, cheese, matches, 
kettles, and whatever else one can think of, or that 
the ingenuity of Alexsimevich can devise. Hay is 
piled into the tarantass bottom to supply the want 
of springs. 

A driver who knows the trails has been found, 


172 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


André Banchelski, a tall Siberian, of timbering and 
hunting antecedents, who has a small stock of 
Mongol idioms regarding the price of hay and the 
location of water. He has reached a very good 
understanding with Katrinka, one of the household 
dependents, and Nicolaiis taking an interest in him. 
To-night we go to sleep on Nicolai’s plank couch, 
ready for the march of the next day. All is ready. 
To-morrow we cross the Chinese frontier. 


V 
IN TATAR TENTS 


HE shaggy ponies, white with the frost of the 

morning, stand harnessed to the tarantass; 
André in his belted sheepskin shuba, whip in hand, is 
perched on the bag of oats; Alexsimevich sits in 
a greatcoat of deerskin, with only a nose and a tri- 
angle of black beard visible. The host, in his gray 
surtout, and the red-bloused drivers of the sledges 
scattered in the courtyard, all have left their sam- 
ovars to see the start. The children of the family 
peep from behind the mother with her gray shawl- 
covered head. They group at one side, under the 
eaves of the doorway, while Josef, one of the house- 
hold servants, swings back the ponderous gates. 
The reins are drawn in, the whip is lifted, the horses 
are leaning forward into their collars, when the 
cry of “André!”’ comes through the opening door- 
way. 

From behind the gathered onlookers, who turn at 
the sound, runs out Katrinka, dressed in her best 
red frock. ‘‘André!” she cries. He pulls back the 
starting horses, and Katrinka lifts up to him a little 
bag embroidered with his initials in blue and red. 
“For your tobacco.” 

He looks down into her eyes and smiles. ‘‘ Spasiba 


174 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


loubesnaia,”’ he says, and pushes it into the breast 
of his shuba. 

‘De svidania, André!’’ she whispers, then runs 
back, confused. 

The teamsters laugh, pleased and amused as big 
children at her blushes, and her brother shouts a 
commentary from the gateway. ‘‘ Vperiod! vpe- 
riod !’’ says the interpreter. He has reached forty 
now without falling before the charms of any Siber- 
ian girl, and he does not sympathize. ‘On! on!” 

The horses swing out of the great gateway into 
the snowy streets, with ‘‘Good-bye! Good road!” 
called in chorus after us. 

At a slow trot the lumbering carriage rolls 
through the quiet town, misty in the cold of the 
morning. The row of shuttered shops, with their 
crude pictures of the wares within, are opening for 
the day. The little park with the benches, which 
are trysting-places of summer evenings, cushioned 
now with six inches of snow, and the low log houses 
beyond, loom up and retire rearward, as we pass. 
The white church and the fenced cemetery of — 
Troitzkosavsk are left behind, and we are on the 
broad paved road by which a sharp trot of half an 
hour brings us to Kiahta. 

Its scattered houses now in turn begin. The big 
tea-compound, of four square white walls, flanks us 
and is gone. The officials’ residences and the bar- 
racks of the garrison appear and vanish behind. 
The street opens out into a big square, where, shim- 


IN TATAR TENTS 175 


mering against the white ground, stands the great. 
church of Voskresenie, the Resurrection. On its 
green dome, lifted high in appeal and in promise, 
gleams the gilded cross. In white and green and 
gold Russia raises inspiringly the symbols of Slav- 
onic faith before the doors of the heathen empire. 
As we pass the white Russian church, the litany of 
the popes and the answering chant of the choir 
come faintly wafted from within. But even as the 
Christians sing, the clash of distant cymbals and 
the roll of a far-off prayer-drum meet and mingle 
with the echoes. On the hill across the border, in 
vivid scarlet against the snow, with painted walls, 
sacred dragon-eaves, and flapping bannerets, flames 
a Chinese temple. 

Here now is the borderland of empires. The neu- 
tral strip is in front, a hundred sagenes broad. The 
Cossack sentries stand at ease before their striped 
boxes, which face toward Mongolia. Far to the 
east and far to the west are seen stretching the 
long lines of posts marking the boundary. The 
outmost sentry, as the tarantass rolls across the 
strip, hails you with a last ‘‘ De svidania!’’ (God 
speed !) 

Past the Chinese boundary-post, covered with 
hieroglyphic placards and shaped like the lotus- 
bud, we drive, and in under the painted gateway 
of the gray-plastered wall. No Mannlicher-armed 
Chinese regulars, like those that in Manchuria 
throng to hold what is lost, guard this half-forgot- 


176 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


ten road. No sentry watches; no custom-officer 
bids the strangers stop. Through the open gate we 
ride into the narrow street of the trading city of 
the frontier — Maimachen, the unguarded back 
door to China. 

In life one is granted some few great impressions. 
None is more striking than that experienced in 
passing beneath the shadow of this gabled gateway. 
Behind are kindred men, the manners of one’s own 
kind, police, churches, droshkys, museums, theatres, 
the whole fabric of European civilization. From 
all these one is cut away in the moment of time 
taken in passing the neutral strip. Two hundred 
yards have thrust one into the antithesis of all 
western experience, into an utterly strange environ- 
ment, where the most remarkable of the world’s 
Asian races lives and trades, works and rules. - 

Everything which is made sensually manifest by 
sight, by sound, by scent, by action, is weirdly 
alien. You three in the tarantass are as men from 
Mars, isolated, and moving among people foreign 
to your every interest and experience. The solitary 
strangeness of your little party in the tarantass, 
started into a forbidding land, the first confronting 
vision of the eternal Orient — these are the things 
for which men travel. 

As you go slowly down the narrow lane-like 
street, you catch glimpses of banner-decked court- 
yards seen through great barred doors in the gray 
mud walls. Here and there a sallow blue-coated 


IN TATAR TENTS 177 


Chinaman, with skull-cap and queue, passes by, 
his folded hands tucked into his long sleeves, fur- 
lined against the cold. Chinese booths and shops 
are open. Waiting traders, seeing yet invisible, 
behind the many-paned paper windows, look out- 
ward through the peep-hole. 

In the city square a halt is made before a Chinese 
store, for a last provisioning. At the entrance half 
a dozen Russian sledges are drawn up. Here can 
be had the supply of small silver coins indispensable 
for the road, canned goods of European origin, and 
a bottle whose contents may be less like medicine 
than is vodka. Though the goods come all the way 
from Peking on camel-back, they are much cheaper 
than the tax-burdened provisions over the border 
in Russia. Indeed many of the main Chinese stores, 
with their surprising stocks of wines and patés de 
foie gras, candies, and Philippine tobacco, are sup- 
ported by Russian inhabitants of Kiahta and Troitz- 
kosavsk. It is amusing to watch the enveloping of 
champagne-bottles in sleigh-robes, and the secreting 
of cigars beneath fur caps for the return journey. 

We stroll a little way down the street, among 
the Chinese booths for native wares, where sturdy 
shuba-robed Mongol tribesmen are bartering sheep- 
skins for blue cotton cloth, metal trinkets, quaint 
long-stemmed metal pipes, and wool-shears with 
big handles. They are probably getting deeper in 
debt, as usual, to the wily traders. We pass the 
haymarket in the shade of a ruined temple, where 


178 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the Mongols have heaped their little bundles of 
provender. 

All the while one has an eerie undefined senti- 
ment that something is lacking. It is not that the 
houses which face the narrow main street are low 
and poor, that the gray mud-walled compounds 
are grimly unwelcoming with their closed iron- 
studded gates. It is not that the small stocks of 
goods in the shops tell of a vanished prosperity, 
now that the bulk of the tea-trade has left. It is 
not anything material, but an oppressive indefinable 
feeling that something is lacking. Only when Alex- 
simevich makes a chance remark, do you realize 
consciously what it was you instinctively felt, ‘‘It 
is queer to be in a city where there is not a woman 
or child.” | 

Some have explained the exclusion law which 
controls the situation by the self-sufficiency of the 
Chinese, who wished no real settlement of their 
people here, — the fruit of a pride deep-rooted as 
that underlying the custom which brings every 
corpse back to China for burial. Others, by the 
desire to avoid transmitting to the Empire the dis- 
eases that are rife in Mongolia. Whatever the basis, 
the regulation is in full force to-day. At one time 
merchants in Maimachen kept their wives across 
the border in Russia, which under a subterfuge was 
not technically forbidden. But the ability to hide 
behind a technicality is a blessing enjoyed especially 
in democracies. It did not go with the chief of 


ATdWNUL ACISAVM V 





IN TATAR TENTS 179 


police, who came down for a squeeze which made 
it more profitable to pay the women’s fare home 
than to continue to offend. 

Associating with the native Mongol women is 
here precluded by the fact that there are no settle- 
ments near by from which the Chinese might get 
indigenous consolation. A deserted tract lies behind 
the town. Only camel-drivers, wood-cutters, and 
sellers of cattle come into Maimachen, and they 
leave at night. For though the Mongols, in their 
pointed hats, pass along the streets, none may law- 
fully live within the stockaded walls, and none 
keep shop beneath the carved eaves of the houses 
which flank its narrow streets.. This is the prerog- 
ative of Chinese traders from beyond the far-off 
Wall. 

The spectacled merchant Tu-Shiti, who has be- 
come prosperous from the sale of Mongol wool, 
retakes for a visit, every two years, the long camel- 
trail to Kalgan and China. The tea-trader, Chan- 
tu-fou, drinks his wares alone. The slant-eyed 
clerks and booth-keepers trotting down the streets 
in their skull-caps, hands tucked up the sleeves of 
their blue jackets, plan no theatre-parties or amity 
balls, or sleigh-rides in the biting air, as over the 
way in Kiahta. The seller of sweetmeats will never 
be told to be sure and inclose the red and black 
New Year’s card. There is no red-cheeked Chinese 
boy to smile as he munches your sugar; to puzzle 
over your ticking watch as at Kotoi, or to tease 


180 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the tame crane in the courtyard. Nota girl appears 
on the narrow streets. It is the sentence passed 
upon the generations of Chinese who have gone to 
Mongolia, that no woman of their race shall pass 
the Wall. And so it must remain, for never a home 
will be founded till China, the unchanging, shall 
change. 

Back and forth through the thoroughfares go 
the little men with the queues flapping against their 
backs and their sallow uncommunicative faces. 
Are they thinking of the time when they will have 
made their little fortunes and can get back to 
China to enjoy them? As they wait for customers 
in the little booths, do they plan the homes which 
none of their blood may ever possess in Mongolia? 
When they sleep on their wooden platforms, do 
they dream of faces in the Kingdom of the Sun? 
Never will one know. Around the thoughts of the 
Chinaman arise the ramparts of his isolation. What 
he believes, what he hopes, what he dreams are not 
for you. The soul of China is behind the Wall. 

The tarantass rolls out of the quaint weather- 
worn gateway of the woman-less city of Maimachen. 
‘How much they miss!”’ says André, filling his 
pipe from the new pouch. ‘‘How much they es- 
cape!’’ retorts Alexsimevich. 

When in hot haste Pharaoh ordered out his great 
war-chariot to pursue the rebellious Children of 
Israel, and thundered through his pyloned gate- 
way with plunging horses urged by the shouts of 


i ee Se eee ’ 


IN TATAR TENTS 181 


his Nubian charioteers, he must have experienced, 
despite contrasts, much the same physical sensa- 
tions as those which we feel when the tarantass 
starts in full gallop across the level plain to the 
distant range of mountains; but where Pharaoh’s 
robe was white with dust, ours is white with snow, 
and the sun, which baked his road, makes ours 
endurable. 

The horses leap free under the knotted lash of the 
Siberian driver. With the rumble of low thunder 
the ponderous wooden wheels bound over the rutty 
road, hurling the springless tarantass into the air 
and from side to side. You brace yourself with 
baggage and hold to the sides, but toss despite all, 
like corn in a popper. The hay on which you sit 
shifts away to one side, leaving the bare boards to 
rub through clothes and packs. A sudden splinter 
makes you jump like a startled deer beside the 
way. In this noisy tarantass, down the narrow 
road grooved with the ruts of the Mongol carts 
and sledges that have gone northward, you tumble 
and groan and bump and roll out across the open 
country. 

There is a wide plain from Maimachen. It climbs 
into the first barrier-range and the forest belt of 
Mongolia, whose plateau is the third terrace in the 
rise of land from the low frozen flats of the Northern 
Lena to the Roof of the World, —the Himalayas 
of the south. The northern city of Yakutsk is at 
a very low elevation, only a few feet above the sea. 


182 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Irkutsk on the fifty-second parallel is 1521 feet in 
altitude, Troitzkosavsk on the fifty-first is 2600, 
Urga on the forty-eighth 3770, Lhassa 11,000 feet. 

Far to the northwest, Mongolia is a forested fur 
region; far to the south is Shama — the desert. 
Here at the north and east the forested belt of the 
Siberian highlands south of Baikal breaks off al- 
most at the boundary. 

Snow is over everything, but thinly. It has been 
worn away on the road, leaving brown patches 
over which the tarantass, mounting the long slope 
with horses at a slow trot, lugubriously thuds. A 
long stretch of straggly trees and stumps tells of 
Kiahta peasants going over the border to cut wood 
where no timber-laws limit. Up and up we go, 
the way steeper every sagene,—afoot now and the 
horses leaning and pulling at the traces. Finally 
silhouetted against the sky appears a rough pile 
of stones. At its top bannerets are waving from 
drooping poles. It is the Borisan on the summit of 
the pass to which every pious Mongol adds an 
offering, until the pile is many feet high, with stones, 
sticks, pieces of bread and bones. Some throw 
money which no one save a Chinaman will com- 
mit the sacrilege of touching; some give a Moscow 
paper-wrapped sweetmeat, some a child’s worn hat 
or yellow-printed prayer-cloths waving on their 
sticks and fading in the wind; — everything is 
holy that is given to the gods. 

A piercing wind, searching and paralyzing, 





IN TATAR TENTS 183 


meets ‘the tarantass beyond the crest at the south- 
ern border of the forest: it is Gobi’s compliments 
to Baikal, the salute of the great desert to the great 
lake. The horses stumble through the drifted snow, 
scarcely able to walk. The driver, blinded, half- 
frozen, keeps to the general direction of the oblit- 
erated trail. Barely one verst an hour is made, 
until, under the shelter of the bald white range of 
hills, the road reappears and the wind is warded off. 

A rolling plain between the heights is the next 
stretch of the way. The afternoon sun, dimly 
bright, creeps haloed through the lightly falling 
snow. Deepin the mist appears a dark moving mass. 
It grows, focuses, and takes shape into a shaggy 
beast of burden, and camel after camel emerges 
from the haze, loaded with square bales of tea. 

‘Ask if there is shelter near,’’ you shout to the 
muffled head of the interpreter. 

‘“‘T will ask,” he replies. Then to the caravan 
leader: ‘‘ Sein oh!”’ he cries in greeting. 

The foremost camel stares stonily as its Mongol 
driver twitches the piece of wood which pierces its 
upper lip, and the whole train stops. 

““Gir orhum beine?”’ 

“Ti, ti, orhum beine!’’ comes the answer. ‘‘It is 
close at hand.” 

Forward the caravan slowly paces, each camel 
turning his head to stare as he passes out into the 
mist again. One of them has left a fleck of blood in 
each print of his broad spongy foot which the driver 


184 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


will cobble with leather at the next halt. Along their 
trail you drive southward. The mist is clearing as 
you rise, and the sun shines down on the snow which 
has crystalized in little shafts an inch high. These 
spear-shaped slivers have a brightness and a sheen 
of extraordinary brilliance, and like prisms show 
all the colors of the rainbow. They cast a gleam, 
as might a mirror, a hundred yards away. It is as 
if upon the great white mantle had been thrown 
haphazard treasuries in rubies and emeralds and 
diamonds and opals, — myriad evergrowing rivals 
of Dresden regalias. —The sun goes down with its 
necromancy. Beyond, the soft blanket enfolds the 
rolling hills. It drapes the rocks and weaves its 
drooping festoons about the barren mountain-sides. 

‘‘Mongol yurta/’’ calls André, turning to point 
out with his whip the low dome-shaped hut, black 
against the darkening sky. On its unknown oc- 
cupants we are to billet ourselves, sheltered by the 
rule of nomad hospitality. As the tarantass nears 
the wattled corral, the watchful ravens stir from 
their perches. The picketed camels turn to stare. 
A gaunt black hound stalks out, with mane erect 
and ominous growls. 

‘* Nohoi,”’ cries out Alexsimevich, to the inhabit- 
ants of the hut; then adds to you, “ Very bad 
dogs! It is a Mongol proverb: ‘If you are near a 
dog, you are near a bite.’ ”’ 

Beneath an osier-built lean-to a woman is milk- 
ing a sheep, with a lamb to encourage the flow. 


IN TATAR TENTS 185 


She calls a guttural order to the dog, which slinks 
back. Then she comes to the wattled fence, while 
the sheep which has been getting milked escapes 
to a far corner of the yard. The woman’s head is 
curiously framed by a triangular red hat, and 
silver hair-plates, which hold out like wings her black 
tresses. The shoulders of her magenta dress are 
padded up into epaulettes two inches high. She 
is girded with a sash. 

“* Sein oh!’’ says Alexsimevich. 

‘* Sein !/’’ she answers, and opens the gateway to 
the enclosure around the hut. 

André drives in among the sheep and cows, and 
you climb lumberingly down with cold stiffened 
limbs. André puts his whip upon the felt roof, for 
it is a deadly breach of etiquette to bring it into 
the house. 

‘You go in,” said Alexsimevich. 

It is like entering a kennel, this struggle through 
the narrow aperture, muffled to the eyes in double 
furs and awkward felt boots. As you straighten up 
after the crawl through the entrance, a red glare 
from the fire just in front meets the gaze. Stinging 
smoke grips the throat; you choke in pain. It blinds 
the smarting eyes. You gasp and stagger. Then 
some one takes your hand and pulls you violently 
down on a low couch to the left, where in course of 
time breath and sight return. There is no chimney, 
nor stack for the fire of the brazier, which stands in 
the centre of the hut. One can see the open sky 


186 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


through the three-foot hole above. The smoke, 
finding its way toward this aperture, works along 
the sloping wooden poles which form the framework 
of the felt-covered tent, filling the whole upper 
section with its blinding fumes. To stand is to 
smother. Sitting, the head comes below the smoke- 
line. 

With recovered vision, one can look around within 
the hut. The couch of refuge, raised some six inches 
above the floor, is the bed by night, the sitting-place 
by day. Against the wall at the left hand, and 
directly opposite the door, is a box-like cupboard, 
along whose top are ranged pictures of grotesque 
Buddhist gods, before whom are little brass cups 
full of offerings, millet or oil, in which is standing 
a burning wick. Beside the door is a shelf loaded 
with fire-blackened pots and kettles. Branches of 
birch for fuel are thrown beneath. On the far side 
of the room, three black lambs, fenced off by a 
wicker barricade, are huddled together, quietly 
sleeping. 

Seated beside the fire close by is the girl of nine- 
teen who has just saved you from asphyxiation. 
The long fur-lined working-dress, common to all 
ages and sexes of Mongols, is buttoned on her left 
side with bright brass buttons, and is belted in with 
a sash. She has not the padded shoulder-humps, 
nor the spreading hair arrangement, which gave to 
her mother, who welcomed us, so weird an appear- 
ance. 


LVIANG VIVASTVAIVAVZ V VLYNA YAH ANV ATTAG TODONOW V 





IN TATAR TENTS 187 


Her complexion is swarthy like an Indian’s, not 
the Chinese chalky yellow, and she has red cheeks 
and full red lips. Her eyes are large and black. 
The rest of the party have stayed a moment out- 
side to ask about hay and water. You have made 
this solitary and awkward entrance. The girl has 
no more notion than a bird who the strange man of 
another nation may be, who has stumbled into her 
home. But it does not trouble her in the least. For 
a moment she looks you over calmly, with a smile 
of amused curiosity, rolling and wringing with her 
fingers a lambskin which she is softening. Then 
composedly she bids you the Mongol welcome, 
“Sein oh!’ and holds out her hand. Her grip is as 
firm and frank as a Siberian’s. 

Now Alexsimevich .comes tumbling through the 
door, and next André. Both are used to these huts, 
and artistically stoop below the smoke-line. All our 
impedimenta — blankets, furs, pots, kettles, bread- 
bag, rifles—are heaped ina mound within the space 
between the couch and the tethered lambs. The 
girl has not stirred from her work. 

“They are friends of yours then, Alexsimevich ?”’ 
you ask. 

“No, no, I never saw them,’ he answers. ‘“‘ Any 
one may take shelter in any yurta in Mongolia.” 

A small head suddenly makes its appearance 
from the pile of rugs on the sofa opposite on the 
women’s side of the tent. There emerges, naked save 
for a bronze square-holed Chinese cash fastened 


188 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


around her neck, a little slant-eyed three-year-old. 
The water in the small cups offered to the dokchits 
has long been ice, and one has full need of one’s 
inner fur coat and cap in the hut, where the en- 
trance, opening with every visitor, sends a draft 
of air, forty degrees below zero, through from the 
door to the open hole which serves as chimney. 
And still this tot can step out naked and not even 
seem to feel it. | 

“The child’s name?”’ asks Alexsimevich. 

“Turunga,”’ replies the girl. 

‘‘And your own?”’ 

“‘ Sibilina,’’ she says, and smiles. 

Turunga carefully inspects you, and solemnly 
accepts a lump of sugar which she knows what to 
do with, even if it is a rare luxury offered to gods. 
She sits down, in an evidently accustomed spot on 
the warm felt before the brazier, to play with the 
scissors-like fire-tongs, carefully putting back the 
red coals that have fallen out on the earthen plat- 
form. 

The tarantass-driver, having piled up your imped- 
imenta, excavates from its midst the bag of rye- 
bread, which he sets to thaw. He gets next the 
little bag of pelmenes, the meat-balls covered with 
dough-paste which you carry frozen hard. The 
mother comes in from under the yurta’s flap, and, 
placing a blackened basin over the brazier, puts 
into it a little water and scours diligently with a 
bundle of birch-twigs. She brushes out this water 


IN TATAR TENTS 189 


on the earthen floor near the entrance. This is 
the picketed lamb’s especial territory, to which the 
felt rugs before the couches and the altar do not 
extend. A big bag of snow which she has brought 
from outside is opened and the chunks are piled 
into the basin, where, while one watches, it melts 
down into water. 

“‘ Bouizela! boutzela!’’ she cries soon, holding a 
lighted sliver over the basin to see by: “‘it boils.”’ 
Into the Mongol’s pot go our pelmenes, to brew for 
a few moments. An accidentally trenchant descrip- 
tion of Siberian pelmenes was given on the quaintly- 
worded French bill of fare in the hotel at Irkutsk: 
‘“‘Meat hashed in bullets of dough.’”’ They come 
out, however, a combination of hot soup and 
dumplings, very welcome after the long cold day’s 
drive across the plains, the frozen marsh, and the 
rolling hills. The wooden Chinese bowls from the 
bazaar at Troitzkosavsk are filled now with our 
hostess’s big ladle, and the application of warmth 
inwardly gradually thaws the outlying regions of the 
body. 

But there is trouble in camp. Turunga is moved 
by the peculiar passions of her sex and her age, 
curiosity and hunger. It does not matter in the 
least that she has home-made pelmenes every two 
or three days — she wants these particular meat- 
balls. The little mouth begins to pucker and the 
eyes to screw up. No amount of knee-riding by 
the mother takes the place of the pelmenes. We fill 


1909 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


a heaping ladlefuland André furnishes his own bowl. 
The mother receives it, holding out both her hands 
cup-fashion as is the etiquette, and Turunga is 
satisfied. 

The mother looks kindly to the stranger and 
smiles at André, then throws more sticks of the pre- 
cious firewood on the embers. André has caught, 
likewise, the not unadmiring glance of the young 
maid. The girl who waits in Troitzkosavsk is not 
the only one who appreciates our six-foot Siberian 
hunter. 

The dog barks in the yard, but without the menace 
which hailed us, and the crunch of a horse’s hoofs 
sounds on the frozen ground outside. The flap 
opens, with its inrush of freezing air. Stooping, 
there enters a typical Mongol, squat of figure, round 
of head, with broad sunbrowned face and a short 
queue of black hair. He wears a funnel-shaped hat, 
magenta-colored, and is enveloped in a long shuba,. 
with brass buttons down one side like a fencer’s 
jacket. About his waist is a sash with jingling knives 
and pouches. He is the head of the family, come in 
from herding his horses. He turns back the long 
fur-lined cuffs which have protected his gloveless 
hands, and stretches out both his arms for you to 
place your hands over his. It is the man’s ceremony 
of welcome. Then he produces a little porcelain 
snuff-bottle. This must be received in the palm of the 
right hand withabow. Itis to be utilized, and passed 
back. If the herder is out of snuff, the bottle is 


IN TATAR TENTS IQI 


offered just the same and you must appreciatively 
pretend to take a pinch. Such is etiquette. 

The soup is gone now; the pot, cleaned out for 
the tea, is again on the boil and the leaves are thrown 
in. André has borrowed a hatchet from his host, 
and has chopped off a piece of milk, which goes in 
as well. 

It is in order to ask the new arrival, Subadar 
Jay, to pass his wooden cup for some of the bever- 
age. He takes it and the lumps of sugar without 
a word of thanks. The Mongol language has no 
expression to signify gratitude. Silence does not, 
however, mean that he does not appreciate. The 
dozen pieces of Mongol sandal-sole bread which 
he gives you later are worth two bricks of tea in 
open market, and this current medium of exchange 
— caravan-brought tea —is worth sixty kopecks 
the brick. No small gift, this bread, to an inter- 
loping stranger who is brewing tea by his fire, and 
camping unasked on his bed. A Tibet-schooled 
lama knows the Buddhist maxim, ‘‘ Only accomplish 
good deed, ask no reward.” But the unlettered 
Mongol layman knows its practice. 

Little Turunga has played naked before the fire 
long enough now; she is caught up; her reluctant 
feet are put into the boots with pointed upturned 
toes, and her body into a miniature sheepskin 
“daily,’’ such as her mother and father wear. The 
little girl is as smiling and shy and coquettish as 
any child of white skin and complex clothes. 


192 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


“Will you sell Turunga for a brick of tea?” 

‘No, no,’ says the mother, gathering the little 
one quickly up into her arms, while the rest of the 
family smile at the offer and her solicitude. ‘No, 
no, not even for ten bricks!” 

Everybody laughs, Turunga with the rest, in a 
child’s instinctive knowledge that she is the centre 
of admiring attraction. — 

Far more petting than the Russian babies get is 
lavished on the little Mongols. Perhaps the much 
smaller families (only twoor three children to a hut) 
allow more attention per capita. The mother hands 
Turunga over to her father, — unheard-of in Siberia, 
—and he plays with the child, giving her pieces 
of sheep’s tail to eat from his mouth, answering her 
prattle or baby-talk and endless questions. Atnight, 
about eight o’clock, the mother takes the child to 
the couch and they both go to sleep, Turunga 
cuddled warmly under her mother’s shuba. 

Meanwhile we men sit cross-legged by the fire 
and talk of many things,—of the pasturage for 
the sheep, of the snow on the road, of the beauty 
of the housewife’s silver headplates, of water and 
roads, of whether or not the Mongol dokchits on the 
altar are like the Gobi wolves that hate Chinese. 

It is interesting to note how some of the words 
used (few, however) have a familiar sound —al- 
though there is said to be no common ancestry 
with the Indo-Germanic tongues; perhaps it is only 
the instinctive sound-imitation which makes the 


IN TATAR TENTS 193 


Mongol baby cry ‘“‘Mama”’ to its mother, as does 
the child in Chita and in Chicago. ‘‘ Mine,’ for 
instance, is mina; ‘‘thine”’ is fenez. A horse or mare 
is mart. The word for “‘it is,” ‘‘they are,” is beine, 
a fairly respectable form of the verb ‘“‘to be” in 
Chaucer’s English. 

The grammar is delightfully simple. In the ver- 
nacular there is no bothering about singular or plural. 
“One hut” is niger gir; ‘two huts,” hayur gir. 
“Milk” is su, and apparently the word for ‘‘ water”’ 
was formed from it — ou su. If one wants to know 
whether it is time to throw in the meat-balls he says, 
“Ou su bouizela?”’ with a rising inflection (‘‘ Water 
boils ?’’) and the answeris, ‘‘ Boutzela.’’ The‘ moon”’ 
and a “month”’ are sara, and the years go in cycles 
of twelve. If one wants to compliment the host on 
the excellence of the sandal-shaped bread which he 
hands out, loaded with gray chalky cheese (hourut), 
one says, “‘ Bread good be” (Boba sein beine) ; this 
gives him great pleasure. 

Some of the written numbers are somewhat like 
ours: 2 and 3 are nearly the same, but they have 
fallen forward on their faces; 6 has an extra tail. 
When the teapot overturns, they say “ Harlab!” 
to relieve their feelings. There is no word for ‘“‘so 
good,” ‘‘ farewell,” or ‘‘much obliged.’’ These are 
just squeezed into the heartiness of the final ‘‘ good”’ 
(sein). So when one leaves, he holds out both arms, 
palms up, for the host to put his own upon, and 
says loudly, ‘‘ Sein oh!” 


194 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


A not unbarren amusement is to study out one’s 
own derivations for some much-explained words. 
Tamerlane is often given as meaning “the lame.” 
Why does it not rather come from temur (iron) 
and mean “‘ man of iron,”’ as the ruler of the Khalka 
tribe was called Altan Khan, the golden king? The 
Amur River has khara-muren (black water) usually 
given as its derivative root. Why not the Mongol 
word amur, which means simply “‘ quiet’’? 

In the hut to-night, while we are comparing 
mother tongues, the brazier-fire has burned to red 
brands. The girl reaches into a basket beside the 
door for pieces of dried camel-dung, and puts them 
on, that the embers may be fed and live through 
the night. These argols do not smoke; she may 
close the chimney-hole with the flap of felt, and the 
hut will be kept somewhat warm through the night. 
The Mongols prepare for sleep: they take off their 
boots, and slip their arms from the sleeves of their 
fur shubas, in which they roll themselves up as we 
in our blankets. But how hardened they are to the 
cold! A naked arm will project and the robes be- 
come loose, but they do not wake. 

We keep on all our inner clothing and roll our- 
selves about with skins until we are great cocoons. 
André gives a good-night look to his horses; then 
he, too, lies down. With our heads beside the altar 
of the gods, we sleep, in the Mongol’s gir. 

How cold ‘it is in the morning when we wake! 
The embers have burned to a gray ash; the iciness 


IN TATAR TENTS 195 


of the waste outside has gripped like an octopus 
the little hut, and sucked its precarious warmth 
through the night-long radiation. The chimney- 
hole is open again, and the mother is starting a blaze 
with her few pieces of birch firewood. André has 
gone out to harness the horses. He has left the 
door flap a little wrinkled, and the wind whirls 
through it and up the chimney, keen as a scimitar. 

Alexsimevich is getting out the tea-bowls and the 
bread. You put a reluctant hand from under the 
blankets and seize your fur cap. Then you disen- 
gage the inner fur coat from its function of cover- 
let, and struggle, sleepy-eyed, into it. If you have 
the moral courage to take off these friends in need, 
and the inner coat and sweater, to get a bowlful of 
snow-water, and hunt among the baggage for soap 
and a towel, all at five o’clock in the morning of this 
freezing weather, then you have full license to call 
the Mongols dirty degraded heathen. If, however, 
you sit and shiver, and promise yourself that you 
will bathe at Urga, it is elementary fair play to be 
discreetly silent about the little failing of your 
hosts. You will rejoice, too, in open admiration 
of courage, when you find, as you sometimes will, 
a clean-shaven well-groomed lama, or a washed and 
combed village belle, on the road to the sacred city. 

“Ready,” says André. You finish a goodly 
portion of rye-bread and several bowls of Alex- 
simevich’s tea, while he is carrying out the luggage 
and making a pyramid of it in the tarantass. You 


“196 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


put both hands out to shake those of Subadar Jay, 
of his wife, and Sibilina. You give a last chunk of 
sugar to little Turunga, and crawl out under the 
tent-flap. The family calls ‘‘good-bye” from the 
gateway as you climb in. Then up the hill you start, 
for the next day’s ride. 

It is slow to travel by this schedule. One can ad- 
vance by day and rest by night, but daylight travel 
and night sleep, while most comfortable for a man, 
are the least efficient for a horse. If progress be 
the aim, one must adopt the teamster’s system. 
This involves a start at midnight, and eight hours 
of travel at a slow trot, — six to seven versts per 
hour. Then, at eight in the morning, a halt for 
the ponies. One hour they stand in harness, be- 
fore getting their quarter pud of hay; after which 
comes water, and finally, seven and one half pfunde 
of oats. Four hours of halt are involved, in which 
one can roll up in his blanket and sleep. Then off 
again for eight hours of trot, and another four hours 
of halt at eight in the evening. So the watches go, 
with some hundred versts made daily. 

Noon to-day finds us climbing the hills on foot, 
to stretch our cramped limbs and ease the horses, 
as in old times the English tourists climbed the St. 
Gothard on the way to Italy. We are chilled, and 
racked by the jar of the road, and glad of even 
strenuous freedom. Presently we get on again, and 
ride down the far slope. It is the camel-boat of the 
steppe, this tarantass. 


IN TATAR TENTS 197 


A solitary gnarled tree shows in the waste of 
snow — the one seed that lived, on the barren waste, 
of all that the Siberian winds had brought. An 
eagle is watching from its upper branches. Further 
on are higher hills, with trees growing on their 
northern declivities alone. No foliage can stand the 
sun, which steals the moisture and bakes the rocks 
on the southern slopes. As we pass one of these iso- 
lated groves, the bald trees are seen to be packed 
with old nests; for the birds from miles around come 
hither, as the only refuge for their eggs. Deer watch 
us, standing ten yards off; for these Mongols are 
poor hunters and their religion sanctifies life. A lama 
may not kill even a fly: it might be his own father, 
transmigrated into this form for insufficient piety. 
A big white hare starts through the trees, stops, 
and runs again. Thousands of little marmots scurry 
to their holes in the plain at the alarm of the tink- 
ling bells. A kite soars with a marmot writhing in 
his claws. Big gray jack-rabbits bound along the 
road ahead. A troop of partridges let us pass 
their wallowed holes six feet away. They peer up, 
their heads protruding from the snow, their yellow 
aprons glistening like shields, tame as guinea-fowl. 
At length we drive into Zoulzacha village. 

One becomes after a time somewhat of an adept 
regarding quarters. To-night the village gives a 
chance. The most promising exterior is selected, 
and driving up, we prepare to enter. Cold and 
cumbersomely muffled, you worm under the felt 


198 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


hut-flap, and see through the pungent smoke of 
the brazier a dim figure seated to the left of a veiled 
altar. Bowed over a red-beaded rosary, he is 
chanting in a low voice, a weird oft-repeated phrase. 
He ceases as you struggle in, becomes silent, and 
looks up. ‘‘Amur sein!” he salutes in quiet greeting, 
and motions you to a place on the low sheepskin- 
covered couch, to the right of the altar, opposite 
him. 

The open smile of his welcome shows white teeth 
hardened by the tough biscuit of his daily diet. 
You note next, with the pleasure born of seeing 
anything good of its kind, the light color and un- 
wrinkled features of this young man of twenty- 
five. The gaze of his brown eyes is direct and frank. 
He is clean-shaven, his hair is close-cropped, and 
he has the appearance of a well-groomed horse. 
In contrast with the smoke-blackened, hardship- 
wrinkled faces of the older Mongols, his is as a drink 
from a clear mountain spring after stale drafts 
from a long-carried canteen. His color is that of 
an athlete trained under the suns of the running- 
track. His features are defined, the nose not so flat, 
the eyes larger than the usual Mongol type. His 
expression is earnest and sincere as he now stands 
up in his robe of rich orange, trimmed and girdled 
with red. 

He welcomes the guests without question, — it 
is the rule of Mongol hospitality, but you feel for 
the first time what an intrusion it is for your great 


IN TATAR TENTS 199 


Russian tarantass-driver to shoulder his ponderous 
way into the home of a stranger, loaded with your 
bearskin rugs and rifles and bags of bread, and to 
pile them loutishly on the native’s couch. At the 
other huts wherein you have lodged, this sentiment 
has not come so strongly. Poor places they were: 
the hardship-lined faces ; the soiled and ragged robes 
of the women, the threadbareness of the heaped-up 
sheepskins on the couch, all these revealed that 
your two-headed eagle of silver was needed, and your 
coming a windfall. But here are no sheep fenced 
in, making one feel that standards are superfluous. 
The fuel is put away in a basket, the bright fire- 
irons are ranged in a row. The couch of polished 
_ wood is orderly, and the skin-rugs on it are folded 
in their places. The little chests of drawers are 
brightly polished, and the yellow cap, with its 
lining of fox-fur, on one of them is new and clean. 

But most of all, in the proprietor himself is there 
an air of freshness and cleanliness, of youth and 
vigor, and of self-confidence. When you burst 
into a place like this, covered with snow and muffled 
up in furs, disturbing the master of the house at 
his prayers; when your driver lays the uninvited 
mattress down in the warmest place, a man can- 
not but feel like a thrice-dyed barbarian bounder, 
even if the home be a fifteen-foot felt hut open 
at the top, and situated on the borders of the Gobi 
Desert. So feeling, the first impulse is to let the 
host know that you are not quite, of intent, what you 


200 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


are by accident, — a big hulking foreign savage. So 
you hastily think over what you can give to put 
yourself less at a disadvantage. The prized reserve 
of milk-chocolate comes to mind. “Will the host 
have some?” you ask. 

“Da blagodarioul’’ he answers in Russian, to 

your surprise. | 
With mixed gladness at having made good thus 
far in any event, and regret at the diminished store 
of this commodity, you take a little spoonful of the 
snuff which the host is now offering in a beautiful 
porcelain bottle, patterned in flowers. Then you 
come back with a cigarette. Most of these people 
know what cigarettes are, though some smoke them 
with their noses. 

‘“‘ No, thanks!” and he points to his closely-cropped 
head. 

Alexsimevich, who has followed into the hut, ex- 
plains: ‘‘ You speak to a priest, he does not smoke.” 

A screen hangs before the altar opposite the door. 
You look hesitatingly at it. Without demur, the 
lama, at the visible interest, draws back the veil. 
There, in painted grotesqueness, is Janesron, the 
red god of Thunder, and bearer of the lightning 
sword. He glares down with his three eyes upon 
the sunken orbits of a sheep’s head, laid out as an 
offering. Black Gumbo, the six-armed good spirit, 
is also there, and both are surrounded by attend- 
ant demons. All are pictured artistically, the 
minute detail of Tibetan workmanship showing in 


IN TATAR TENTS 201 


their squat bodies. The polished wood of the frames 
is as finely wrought as a Japanese sword-hilt. 

On the box-top, beneath the gods, are set out in 
neat array the best of Mongol dainties. These are 
disposed in little polished brazen cups shaped like 
wine-glasses. There are raisins and dried plums, 
caravan-carried from the far-off Middle Kingdom, 
and lumps of sugar brought down from Russia in 
some trader’s pack. Millet fills one cup, water an- 
other; each symbolizing some ancient seizin. <A 
wick, sunk in oil, flares in the centre, and casts a 
flickering, uncanny light upon the deities. Spread 
on a low seat, six inches above the felt rug on the 
floor, are rows after rows of boba, the gray Mongol 
biscuits, in shape like the thick soles of a sandal. 
As a centre-piece between the stacked loaves rests 
the brown roasted sheep’s head. It is the feast of 
the New Year that this unusual volume of offerings 
betokens. The old year of the Horse passes with 
the rise of to-night’s new moon. The leap-year — 
that of the Ram — will then begin. All the fami- 
lies in the ezmucks of Mongolia will feast on the 
grosser part of the offering which now lies in its 
ranked regularity undisturbed. For the present the 
priest takes light refreshments while waiting for 
his midnight rite. 

“Will you have some of the tea that has been 
brewed for you by the old mother while you were 
looking at the altar ?”’ asks Alexsimevich. 

It has been made, not from the loosely-packed 


202 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


leaves, but from the hard tea-bricks. A chunk of 
this has been cast into the great iron bowl over 
the brazier when the fagot-fed fire has melted the 
ice and has brought the water to a boil. 

Solemnly you are presented a wooden bowl of 
tea, which you receive in both hands, and as solemnly 
sip. The evening meal is cooked and eaten, your 
sugar reciprocating the lama’s tea. 

As the evening wears on, amid the smoke of 
cigarettes and brass-bowled pipes, the lama brings 
out quaint paper slips of Buddhist prayers. 

‘You are interested ?’’ He will write for you a 
charm. ‘“O mani padmthom,” he tells you. “‘The 
Buddhist prayer.”’ 

“Oh, thou jewel in the lotus-flower, hail!” says 
the interpreter. 

It is mighty, this ancient Buddhist prayer, which 
is murmured by so many millions from Japan to 
Persia, from Malay to Siberia. It is symbolic, 
esoterically, of much. The jewel is the soul, the 
lotus is Buddha, the prayer, a wish that the spirit 
be in them which was in Saka-muni, their Lord. 
On endless rosaries this prayer is told. It is on the 
lips of priests and women, it is carved around 
the stones which travelers throw upon the obos, the 
‘‘high-places’’ of Old-Testament record. It is 
murmured by the pilgrims as they prostrate them- 
selves. The disciplined body, the praying tongue, 
and the mind intent on sacred things, all incline 
the soul to the acquirement of merit. 


IN TATAR TENTS 203 


The lama draws now with his quick hand,trained 
to the Tibetan script of the Urga monastery-school, 
sketches of his temple, Zoulzacha Soumé, of his 
people’s summer tent of cloth, and winter hut of 
felt. He writes out the Mongol numerals, and ex- 
plains the cycles of years, in answer to questions 
regarding the New-Year festival. He describes the 
puzzling element-and-animal system, by which the 
chére mari, or earth horse, is 1907, the chére khoni, 
or earth ram, is 1908, and so on through a sixty- 
year epoch. 

He quotes Mongol proverbs come down from 
old priests and rulers: ‘‘One may buy slaves, but 
not brothers,’ and, in the spirit of Macchiavelli, 
“You can govern a State by truth as well as you 
can catch a hare with an ox-cart.”’ 

Now itis nearing moonrise. From his rolled purse 
the priest draws a small slip of paper ruled into 
a half-inch checker pattern, in every square of which 
there is a symbolic group of letters. The lama con- 
sults this. Then he brings from the chest beneath 
the altar a long narrow box in which are strips of 
faded paper thick as parchment. On these in red 
and black are traced quaint characters, written, as 
is our script, from left to right. The priest selects 
a dozen of his long sheets and puts them carefully 
on his couch. He touches the box to his forehead 
and restores it to its place. Then he turns and speaks 
to the interpreter. 

‘The lama must make ready for the night of the 


204 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


New Year,”’ you are told; and as you look, off comes 
thered sashand yellow robe. The young priest stands 
up in his vivid blue jacket and walks to the entrance 
of the giv. From a cupboard he takes a towel, and 
from the fireplace, ashes. Pouring warm tea into 
a wooden bowl, he scrubs hands and face with the 
vigor of an athlete after a run. Then back to the 
cupboard he goes, and off comes the blue jacket for 
a clean new silken one. A rich yellow robe is donned. 
A bright silver knife is slung upon a new red sash 
which girdles his waist; and smart and erect as an 
officer of the Guards, the lama steps over, pro- 
strates himself before his deities, then goes out 
into the night to his temple service. 

‘‘Creeds are many, but God is one,’ murmurs 
Alexsimevich. 

It is regrettable that the rule of lama celibacy 
prevents the arrangement of the usual kidnapping 
marriage-ceremony between this young priest of 
Zoulzacha, and Amagallan (blissfulness), the belle 
of the Odjick encampment. It is early in the first 
moon, Sara, of the year of the Ram, and holiday 
still reigns in Mongolia. Doubtless she, too, is a 
sooty Cinderella at other times; but to-day she is a 
reigning princess, dressed in the best that a father, 
owner of a hundred sheep, can furnish. A bright 
new blue coat, lined with fine white lamb’s-wool, is 
belted around her rather ample waist with a red 
sash. Her boots are of evident newness. But the 
triumph, the chef d’ceuvre, is her pointed red hat 


IN TATAR TENTS 205 


made of the brightest Chinese silk. It is topped 
with a gold and black knot and is garnished with 
gold braid. The flaps, turned up at the sides and 
the back, are of a long silky dark-gray fur. A broad 
red ribbon fastened behind is brought forward and 
rests on her breast. She has a feminine eye to its 
brilliant contrast against the blue dress. Two long 
tassels of pearls, set in coral-studded silver earrings, 
frame a rosy, laughing face; for Amagallan is ex- 
hilarated with the consciousness of being very well- 
dressed. 

The presence of two young herdsmen in dark red 
and blue, and one lama of the first degree, — and 
consequently not estopped from the race, like a full- 
fledged priest, — bears testimony to the effective- 
ness of the costume and the girl. The wiles with 
which she distributes a smile to one, a dried Chinese 
plum to another, and a mild frown to a third, reveal 
even more the universal woman. Amagallan is not 
at all averse to adding to her string three mascu- 
line Russians. There are only two foreign nations 
in Mongolia, Chinese and Russians. Into the latter 
class come all stray visitants — Americans, Buriats, 
and Troitzkosavsk teamsters. The girl stands up 
now and greets this American with a frank hand- 
shake. She invites him to sit down with the rest. 
Since there is scriptural permission to eat meat of- 
fered to idols, the fact that the evening’s feast has 
stood at the feet of Buddha need not deter one from 
partaking of the little dumplings, gray cheese, and 


206 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


dried fruits. Amagallan hands them out on one of 
those sole-shaped biscuits, which serve as plates 
until one has eaten what is on them, after which 
they go down themselves. A fat sheep’s-tail is sliced 
for your benefit, while a coarse lump of dusky- 
looking sugar is an ultimate delicacy, eatenas candy. 
Muddy brick tea follows, of course. The Mongol 
bread is good, but it takes resolution to do one’s 
duty by the gray cheese, the resin-like desiccated 
milk, and the sheep-fat just seethed. 

A chatter of conversation goes on, the neighbors 
drift in and out, and those of our gir, as the even- 
ing wears on, make excursions to the other huts and 
exhibit and drink more muddy tea for politeness’ 
sake. The hostess in each tent shakes your hand 
before feeding you. The formality makes you tem- 
porarily one of the tribe and family, to be treated 
with courtesy and hospitality. Thus you are taken 
into the social life of a simple affectionate people. 

We meet in one hut a traveling friar who has 
tramped sturdily from Tibet, pack on back and 
prayer-beads on arm, begging, praying, selling relics 
claiming to cure rheumatism, and the eye-diseases 
which the smoky huts induce. He carries on a pole 
an image of Gumbo and others of the dokchits, to- 
gether with a hodge-podge collection of rosaries, 
strips of silk, bells, beads, pipe-picks, etc. These 
are jingled during parts of his prayer, where it is 
necessary to keep the god attentive. 

In one hut they are playing the age-old game of 





A MONGOL “BLACK MAN” 


3 a 
makes / 
ae : 


y_** 





yey 
ar ~~ 
' ‘ 
a 
phe ‘ 
me A 
‘ 
Pa eg me 





Ld 
ale 
0 /an 
ae 

b 

fx » 
ae 
~ 
Ls 
i 
By 
y 

a 
2 

ne 

’ 

f 

* 








ae + aa F . fe oe i f ‘ 





IN TATAR TENTS 207 


tawarya. A bag is produced containing hundreds 
of sheep’s-knuckles, colored blue. Everybody gets 
a handful. Then a girl holds out her fistful of them, 
and each man guesses the number. There is a rapid 
fire of shouted numerals, — “niger, hayur, urbu, 
durbu!’’ The one who guesses correctly gets the 
handful of knuckles. This person next holds out 
his fistful, and so it goes. It is an uproarious sport, 
interspersed with quite unnecessary grabbings of 
disputed handfuls, — part of the game that Ama- 
gallan is playing, even if not germane to tawarya. 
Finally through the darkness you make your way 
back to the gir in which you are billeted. The 
wreathing smoke from its dome is illuminated to- 
night by the beams from the fire below. It rises 
in dimly bright convolutions, beautiful in its small 
way as the great Northern Lights. You spread your 
felt on the floor of the tent and roll up in your rugs. 
The teamster needs a timepiece to regulate his hour 
of harnessing, for you must start at daybreak. 
Leave your watch for him on the altar of the dok- 
chits. It will be safe in this hut by the desert of 
Gobi, among the remnant of the Golden Horde. 


The days’ marches have taken us well up among 
the ridges of the Kentei Mountains. To the east- 
ward is the peak which, despite the claims of Urga’s 
Holy Mountain and of a site near Tibet, has the best 


authority for being the burying-place of Genghis 
Khan. 


208 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


In 1227 the great conqueror died. The confused 
records tell of his body’s being taken northward 
to a mountain which was the heart of his empire, 
from whose slopes sprang the sources of the three 
great Mongol rivers, — the Tola, the Onon, and the 
Kerulon. Beside its sacred lake the Manchu Amban 
of Urga sacrifices annually to the Nature-spirits. It 
is both a survival and a memorial to the bloody 
sacrifice of every living being on the road to the 
grave, —a tribute which tradition says the guards 
of Genghis Khan’s funeral cortége offered to their 
departed chief. 

Huts are far apart in these highlands now, and the 
whistling winds pierce the very marrow. The tired 
horses can hardly crawl forward on the doubtful 
trail. Far up in the heights, beside an old caravan- 
route, superseded by a newly-cut artery of travel, 
we come very late upon an ancient wooden shrine. 

The worshipers have gone. They lived their time 
in a village near by, but with the exhaustion of 
pasturage for the flocks, under nomad _ necessity 
they moved. A new camel-road was tramped out 
by drivers, who must find shelter amid habitations. 
So in the shrine, long unpainted, the smiling Buddha 
presides now over his famished altar. 

Very, very old, very, very poor, is Archir the 
warden, who welcomes you. For forty years he has 
watched in his gir by the dragon-gargoyled gate. 
The spear with which he stood to his post of old 
is blackened, and its red tassel is dulled and faded. 


IN TATAR TENTS 209 


A tattered fringe is along the edge of the felt door 
to his yurta, and holes are under its walls close to 
the ground. His pile of wood is pitifully small, and 
few are his sandal-sole biscuits. His shuba, sheep- 
skin-lined, is blackened with the soot of years. 

Archir refuses courteously what he knows is a 
rare foreign delicacy, a Russian cigarette. ‘‘ Alama,”’ 
he says, “‘may not smoke.” But his own hospitality 
is of the thoughtful kind which comes from the 
heart. He hands you a sheepskin softened by 
long massaging between his trembling old hands, 
that his own covering, not your coat, be burned 
by the sparks from the brazier. He notices that 
your tea-bowl is awkwardly held, and he brings a 
little table to put before you. He sees your driver 
fumbling for a match to light his pipe, and reaches 
him a coal with the fire-tongs. He clears his couch 
that you may sit in comfort. He offers you the 
first use of his fire for cooking. 

In the old days many came to pray to the smiling 
Buddha. The drivers of the tea-caravans from far- 
off China left their offerings of fruit and silk scarves. 
The herdsmen whose lambs had lived well through 
a bitter winter gave sheep fat of tail to the two 
yellow-robed priests who chanted and clashed the 
cymbals through the long days and into the nights. 
The little boys dedicated to the gods, shaven- 
headed, rosy-faced, crooned their lessons in the 
Tibetan tongue, sitting on the floor of the big blue 
school-giy beside the shrine. Every day pilgrims 


210 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


on their way to Urga stopped to pray in the soumé, 
and filled the tent of the young guardian with eat- 
ings of noodle-soup and drinkings of tea, with gos- 
sip and with song. 

But all is changed now in his little hut. The rule 
of non-marriage he keeps in the spirit, where so 
many lamas observe it only in the morganatic let- 
ter. This has left him alone in his old age, and 
pitifully solitary now that even the dwindling 
camel-trains, of whose tea-traffic the Manchurian 
Railway has robbed them, pass by no more. The 
priest is unfed even by pilgrims. These have gone 
with the rest to the routes of a better prosperity. 

Archir has seethed his evening meal of sheep-meat 
and flat pieces of dough. He has let the fire die down 
to embers, and has pulled the covering over the 
round hole. The freezing winds very soon make 
his hut so cold that one feels like a thin shaking 
uncovered creature even beneath the heaped furs. 
One’s ungloved hands grow numb as he lies by the 
brazier. 

In the morning we too depart, and like the Ro- 
man legionary beside the Vesuvian gate of Pom- 
peii, the old priest waits, alone, unquestioning, 
uncomplaining, till a greater God than he of the 
soumé shall send the summons of relief. 


The mountain-ranges, one after another, stretch 
their towering barriers across the path. They trend 
northeast and southwest, as in Siberia. First comes 


IN TATAR TENTS 211 


the Sharan Daba, the white range, whose pass leads 
down to the Iro River, rich in alluvial gold. The 
streams flow westward into the Cellinga, whose 
waters empty into Lake Baikal, and thence by the 
Angara River, into the far-off Arctic Ocean. 

Ridge follows ridge now, and valley follows 
valley, — narrow cuts, with shallow streams, and 
huts clustered upon their sides. Out from the almost 
deserted borderland, the Mongol encampments are 
not unfrequently pitched where there is water for 
the flocks. If any wood be near by, it is well, since 
then the dried dung can be reserved for the smoke- 
less evening fire when the top hole is closed. 

When the steep mountain climb has been passed, 
it is as if a gateway had been opened through the 
constricting ridges. The broad valley of the Hara- 
gol stretches out. Down, down, we go, ontoa plain, 
in the centre of which we come to an enclosure with 
a high mud wall and a peaked gateway, gaudily 
decked with red banners and vivid placards. Out- 
side the mud walls of the compound, far and wide, 
are checker-board squares with irrigation ditches 
between. Huge stacks of hay and straw are piled 
up near the gate, the wonder and envy of the 
nomads, who never have more than the scantiest 
store. Within are booths facing the courtyard. A 
little temple occupies one corner. Two-wheeled 
carts are drawn up along the wall. Troughs and 
picket-poles are ranged in line, ready for the cara- 
vans. 


212 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Now, around the tarantass, there gather from 
their threshing the dwellers of the compound, — 
coolies from the far-off Pink Kingdom, with puffy 
blue trousers and tight-buttoned jackets, flail in 
hand and metal pipe in mouth. They stare stolidly 
without comment at the frost-covered horses, the 
robes, and the bearded strangers. Expressionless 
they stand watching every movement. Alexsime- 
vich asks a question; no one answers. We sit for 
a moment mutually expectant. Not one of the 
Chinese stirs or speaks. 

Then André swings down and leads the team 
through the gateway into the compound. Alex- 
simevich leads the search for shelter. We cross 
the courtyard to the building which serves for the 
lodging of travelers. Its walls are of mud, and a 
big adobe chimney projects up one side. Beneath 
low eaves a small window with white paper panes 
blinks like the sightless eyes of a blind man. We 
stoop, pushing open the crudely pivoted door, 
enter the smoky chamber, and the door swings 
back behind. 

We are standing in what seems an unreal world 
—a stage-scene or a cavern from the Arabian 
Nights. In front and on each side close in dark 
windowless walls. Behind comes a feeble light | 
from the little paper-paned window. In the dimness, 
a flickering fire throws fitful gleams on dusky figures, 
idols, and wearing-gear hung on pegs driven into 
the wall. 


IN TATAR TENTS 213 


As your eyes become accustomed to the gloom, 
the details take shape. A clay stove is to the left. 
Fagots are heaped beside it, copper kettles rest 
upon its top, pigtailed figures are crouching around. 
In front, a platform, raised four feet above the clay 
floor, occupies the whole width of the room and ex- 
tends back into the darkness. A group of men are 
seated, cross-legged, around a little brazier, smoking. 
Others are lying rolled in blankets. 

With our luggage André staggers in. No one 
stirs. Some of the group around the stove turn their 
heads to look, but that is all. André heaps the food- 
bag and blankets in a vacant spot on the kang. We 
make room on the stove for our pots to boil the 
water for tea. On this self-elbowed place amid the 
rest we sit cross-legged, propped against the clay 
wall. The smoke from the oven, led under the kang, 
warms it so that the outer coat can come off. A 
little tabouret some six inches high stands in a cor- 
ner, and serves as a table for the repast. 

The shelter is far better, as comforts go, than any 
of the Mongol tents. The icy wind that sweeps the | 
latter is barred off. There is a stove to replace the 
nomad’s brazier; a warm kang instead of the floor 
to rest upon. But how different is the spirit of the 
hosts! There are no frank hand-clasps here, no in- 
terested gossip and inquiries of the adventures by 
the way. No generous bringing out of fat sheep’s- 
tails and snuff-bottles for the guests’ delectation. 
You cannot but have the feeling that these people 


214 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


are as indifferent to your existence as they are to 
the pariah dog that howls outside the walls. They 
are exclusive, non-welcoming,— these Chinese. 
They are strangers to the land, self-sufficing in their 
toilsomely cultivated rye- and wheat-fields, an iso- 
lated, womanless, working settlement. 

Despite the better quarters and comfort which 
these inns afford, one prefers to go to a Mongol tent 
and be among men more human, if less civilized. 
When the bread is thawed and the tea is boiled, we 
eat, pay the Chinaman who gave the wood, and 
with a sense of relief go out again to the tarantass 
and the road. 

For versts now the wayis along the alluvial plain, 
seamed with irrigation-ditches and dominated by 
several of these walled Chinese factories. As the sun 
goes down, however, there appears a solitary build- 
ing, and André gives a glad shout, seeing that it is 
built of wood and has windows and big centre 
chimney. ‘‘ Russky dom !”’ he cries. 

A low mud wall surrounds the enclosure. Inside 
some quilts are hung in the air, that the cold may 
kill the vermin. A big black dog comes up, but unlike 
the scavenger beasts of the Mongol encampments, 
it signals welcome with friendly tail-waggings and 
good-natured barks, approaching at once as if ac- 
customed to kindly treatment. 

The quilted door of the house opens. A booted 
figure appears with the familiar red blouse, and the 
Russian greeting hails you, ‘‘ Zdravstvouitie!” 


IN TATAR TENTS 215 


“An Orthodox Buriat,” says Alexsimevich. 

We mount his wooden steps, shake his hand, and 
enter the big warm room. 

It is as if one were back in Siberia. The Buriat’s 
Siberian wife, in shawl and kerchief, is busy at the 
whitewashed oven. Brilliantly-colored comic prints 
detail the misadventures of the young recruit, with 
doggerel ballad rhymes beneath. Chickens peck 
beneath the stove, the samovar hums on the table, 
and figures sipping tea are grouped around it on 
the benches, or are lying on the floor enjoying the 
genial warmth. 

“‘Hail, Alexsimevich!’’ comes a voice; and a tall 
bearded Siberian, dressed in a Mongol robe, rises. 

“Aha, Vladimir Vassilivich!’’ answers our inter- 
preter. ‘‘Good-day!”’ 

A volley of questions at once overwhelms him. 
The party has been long away from Kiahta, and we 
have the latest news. 

“‘A Kiahta merchant, my friend, and his son,’ 
Alexsimevich explains. 

Overcoats are being doffed, mufflers unwound, 
and boots kicked off. The babble of talk continues. 
A place is made for us at the table, and glasses of 
tea, with immense slices of cheese and ham, are 
placed before us. When more tea and cigarettes 
have completed the repast, Alexsimevich paces up 
and down, relating with dramatic gestures the latest 
gossip from Troitzkosavsk. 

In the midst of his narrative, which all are follow- 


216 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


ing with great interest, there comes an incident of 
heightened vividness. 

‘‘Sh—sh!’’ a warning signal sounds. One of the 
auditors points to a shape rolled in blankets, and 
lying on the bench. 

‘““Gaspaja”’ (a lady), they say. 

Alexsimevich completes his tale in a lower tone 
and with more artistic circumlocution. 

But it is the other side’s turn to tell a tale, for 
why, in the ferocious cold of midwinter, with — 
save for this one Buriat’s house — the Mongol huts 
only for nightly shelter, why does a lady come 
down here? 

The merchant explains: “She has twisted her 
knee-joint, and in Irkutsk, in Tomsk even, the 
Christian doctors cannot heal her. A lama tells us 
that warm sulphur-water will soften the sinews, and 
the bone can be brought back into place. We go to 
the warm springs of the Holy River. I have been 
there in old times, and I know the way.” 

With pathetic eagerness the party has gone to do 
the lama’s bidding, and bathe in the Mongol Jordan. 
Evening comes. The lady’s bench is pulled over 
close to the oven. The merchant and his son lie 
down beside it on the floor. Servants and drivers 
roll up at their feet, and all sleep, in amity. 

It takes resolution to awake at daybreak and 
leave the luxury of this shelter. But when horses 
are harnessed, riders must ride. The rising sun 
comes up over the white plain. The Buriat waves 


IN TATAR TENTS 217 


“good-bye” from his doorstep; the dog barks in 
farewell, and we lumber on southward. 

A sugar-loaf hill marks the end of the valley. We 
turn up now into the mountains, the driver some- 
what in doubt as to the way. A boy of about fif- 
teen years, a yellow-robed lama novice, rides by. 
Alexsimevich hails him to ask the road to Urga. 
A complicated explanation follows, hardly under- 
stood. 

“‘I show you,” says the boy. 

For a dozen versts he rides along on his pony 
beside us, chattering and laughing. When, after 
a devious trail, the pass is in sight, he starts off, and 
will not, at first, accept any present for his trouble. 

Valley follows valley now, the trail fairly well 
defined. Mongol huts give a chance for rest and for 
cooking. A welcome is bidden us in each, the nearest 
water is shown, and invitations to come back are 
freely extended. 

There is now one last range to cross, the Tolo- 
goytou, highest and steepest of all. Even the 
mounted Mongols, who have caught up with our 
toiling tarantass, swing off and climb afoot. Trees 
are on either hand, and the white wall-like face of 
the barrier passed in the morning seems a bare verst 
away. There comes a whole slope of boulders and 
rocks, jagged and broken, like the moraine of a 
glacier. And then, at long last, we reach the high- 
heaped Borisan at the summit, with its fluttering 
prayer-flags. The foremost Mongol throws on a 


218 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


rock, leaps upon his pony, and rides twice around 
the mound. 

“Argila ! argila !” (bridles free! bridles free!) he 
cries, and trots down behind the crest. 

We, too, throw on a stone, and take the steep 
descent. 

Beyond the low rolling ridges below is the white 
of the Holy Mountain, topped with green foliage. 
Here one may not kill the thronging hare and deer 
and pheasants. As we gallop down, the obos, the 
white memorial monuments, take shape from the 
snow. In the dark-gray dimness of the city beyond, 
green and gold roofs become distinct, lighted by the © 
last glow of the sinking sun. Huts cluster close now 
along the road, and the shadows of innumerable 
dogs pass and mingle and pass again, where the gray 
mud walls and houses begin to be continuous. In the 
dim twilight the tarantass thunders into the great 
wide way which ends in the main street of Urga. 

Two hundred feet broad is this street. Mud walls 
twenty feet high flank it. The gates to the en- 
closures are closed. The fast-fading light discloses 
hardly any passers-by. Save for a distant tom-tom 
there is deep silence brooding over the city. A great 
empty square is entered, where a few figures are 
passing in the distance. We approach one of these, 
who upon our question lurches up to the tarantass. 
He is a Russian clad in Mongol shuba, rather the 
worse for liquor. 

‘“‘T will show you,” he says amiably. 


IN TATAR TENTS 219 


Affectionately leading the horses, he reels down 
one dark alley, then down the next, until we come to 
a second broad street and to an enclosure with a 
lantern-lighted gate. A cry brings at length a stir 
within. The gate swings open. 

‘The Varlakoff house!”’ says the guide thickly. 

The tarantass is led in, and we stumble through 
the darkness into a Russian home of some preten- 
sions. In the main room is a lamp and a table 
covered with a red cloth. A glass of tea is available 
and is quickly swallowed. Then, tired out, we roll 
up in our blankets, on the floor, and drop off to our 
first night’s sleep in Urga, the Holy City of Mon- 
golia. 


VI 
THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 


HE murmur of many voices pierces the blanket 
T over your head. Sleepy-eyed in the warmth, 
you peer out from the chrysalis of coverings to watch 
the people moving about. Alexsimevich has extri- 
cated himself from the mound which he constructs 
nightly on the floor, out of luggage-bags, felt mats, 
rugs, and overcoats. Under all the heaped wrap- 
pings that he uses in the icy Mongol tents, he has 
camped and slept close up against the white wall 
of the oven. Truly the Siberian is brother to the 
salamander. He pulls on now his big felt boots and 
runs a pocket-comb through his beard. 

The wife of our host, come to the door for a sur- 
vey, notes progress and returns to the female region. 
The Hazan Varlakoff, gray-bloused and wearing 
deerskin boots, enters next. He lights his first cigar- 
 ette; his wife with the bowl of sugar and the plate 
of bread follows. She has gotten up earlier than her 
husband, so she is several cigarettes ahead, but he is 
cutting down the lead. 

Perhaps one had better get up one’s self. It is 
an easy operation here. ‘‘Getting up”’ consists in 
emerging from the rolled blankets and stretching. 
‘Dressing ’’ means pulling on boots. One can wash 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 221 


over in the corner, where the brass can lets out a 
trickling stream of cold water when the needle-valve 
underneath is pushed up. 

The samovar hums on the red cotton cloth of the 
table. Varlakoff moves along to make room. From 
the little pot of infused tea your glass is partly 
filled; then you place it under the spigot for hot 
water, and the beverage is ready for sipping. No 
lemons are here, as in Russia. In a few Chinese 
shops one can buy spherical citrons, but they are 
like unripe oranges, and are a luxury as great as 
pineapples in old New York. 

A wool-buyer from Kiahta reaches for the bow] of 
broken loaf-sugar, and holds it for you to choose the 
piece whose size pleases best. The housewife comes 
from the kitchen over by her oven-door, bringing 
some crestfallen cake which she has made in your 
honor. 

‘“‘Kuchete! kuchete!”’ she commands, arms 
akimbo, puffing contentedly on her cigarette. 

We revel in the luxuries of Varlakoff’s room; 
warmth such that we may take off the cumbersome 
outer coats; chairs to sit upon, instead of crouch- 
ing cross-legged; hot samovar-made drinks, and 
a chance to wash in water. The latter is a privilege 
which can be appreciated only after a period of 
ablutions in lukewarm tea. We stretch out and 
bask and sip, and whiff papirosi in epicurean idle- 
ness. 

As we luxuriate, one by one the neighbors of the 


222 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Russian colony come in, to hear the news of Kiahta 
from Alexsimevich. The expedition has become 
part of the gossip-transportation system. Half the 
population of Kiahta must have sent messages here, 
— half the Russian traders in Urga have come to 
receive them. First, there is the general news dis- 
pensed into the expectant ears of the group at Var- 
lakoff’s. Alexsimevich is for an hour the cynosure. 
Questions and answers flash back and forth, going 
off sometimes explosively like fireworks. Then fol- 
low the special events and the individual messages. 
At last these are all detailed. Now come invitations 
from various men to visit their houses ‘“‘ Will the 
gaspadine come?”’ — ‘‘ The gaspadine must see the 
city.”’ — “Da! da!”’ echoes the group. 

Varlakoff goes out for his stick and overcoat. 
The wool-merchant gets into his fleece-lined shuba. 
He achieves the feat by the usual Siberian method. 
Putting the garment over his head, he pushes his 
arms through the sleeves, and gradually struggles 
and writhes up into it as one getsinto a wet bathing- 
suit. Alexsimevich finishes his fourth glass of tea, 
lights one of the Hazan’s cigarettes, and worms his 
way also into his deerskin greatcoat. Then out we 
go into the bright sunlight and the snow-covered 
streets. 

The houses of the Russian quarter of Urga were 
only glimpsed in the dusk of last night. We have 
daylight upon them now. Squat whitewashed build- 
ings they are, with neatly paned windows and big 


VOuN ‘NIOID JO AIMWNaAL 





tf 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 223 


square chimneys. Across the mounds and hillocks 
of a broad street is the one-storied Russian Club, 
where one may drink vodka, play billiards or cards, 
and while away the winter evenings. Further on is 
a row of shops. The bearded owners stand behind 
their counters, dressed in belted Mongol shubas and 
Russian fur caps. The doors to all the shops are 
open, that the Mongols, perplexed with knobs, may 
not take their trade elsewhere. Enameled kettles are 
hanging in festoons down the walls. The shelves 
are crowded with bolts of vivid-colored cotton cloths 
to be sewed into shubas by the Mongols who ride 
in to buy. There are big cases of sweetmeats, Mos- 
cowski caramels, acceptable offerings to the gro- 
tesque dokchits on the family shrines. Russian 
monopoly tobacco is there, in stamped paper 
packets for the delectation of Muscovites and Bu- 
riats who have the taste and the means, and vil- 
lainous South-China tobacco and snuff for native 
purchasers. One can get vodka almost as bad as 
that of Siberia, and far cheaper, for it is com- 
pounded by a local distiller who rejoices in an excise- 
less market. Foreign brandies and wines fill big 
walls of shelves. 

‘“‘Zdravstvouitie!’’ one of the merchants calls, 
hailing our party. 

“It is Vassili Michaeloff, old friend of mine,” says 
Alexsimevich. ‘‘ Let us go in.” 

We enter and are led back into the private part of 
the house. 


224 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘Chat !’’ shouts the host to somebody behind the 
oven. 

‘“‘Haracho,’’ comes the answer. 

We all sit down. If any purchasers drift into the 
shop, they can wait until we get through our visit, 
or they can go down the line. For wherever the 
Eagles are planted, the Russian joyfully drops his 
business to entertain a friend. At the call of “‘tea”’ 
the shovel goes into the ditch, the ledger onto the 
shelf, the pen into the potato. If ‘‘chaz”’ interferes 
with business, cut out business. Nor does it matter 
in the least that we have just had breakfast; by the 
rule of etiquette we must be entertained. “Tea” 
consists first in a ceremoniously clinked toast 
drowned in vodka. Then appears the samovar in 
charge of the woman of the house, the glasses, and 
the sugar. Next follow the cigarettes. The talk is 
animated, for its local history absorbs each little 
world. The fact comes out that the cousin of 
Michaeloff has bought a new pair of horses for 
a hundred roubles. The price, the quality of the 
animals and of the man, all go into the crucible. 
Kiahta beer arrives as the conversation turns to the 
death of one Ivan Vladimiraef, which it is agreed 
was not unnatural, since he had reached the age 
of ninety-odd years. Still the provisions come. 
The good wife brings in a heaping plate of lard- 
impregnated Hamburger steaks, called “‘cotlet,” 
which Alexsimevich attacks as if his last meal were 
half a day instead of half an hour distant. Other 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 225 


bottles accumulate to help out the dwindling 
flagon of vodka. We enter upon Chateau Yquem, 
Pomeranian, and Caucasian claret. Then cakes are 
set out, and more tea, and finally a quart bottle of 
champagne. 

Alexsimevich stands to his guns like the 38th 
Siberians at Tien-tsin. But it is hard for any one 
of less rigorous training in this sort of thing to hold 
even the straggler’s pace at nine o’clock in the morn- 
ing. Mentally we hoist the flag upside down, and 
wink at Alexsimevich as the outward and visible 
sign of the inward and spirituous distress. He takes 
the rest of the champagne in a last gulp, and with 
a series of thanks we gain the entrance to the 
shop, where two Mongols and a Buriat are wait- 
ing patiently, looking vacantly around at the 
crockery. 

We are shown ceremoniously to the door, shake 
hands, remark about the weather, give our compli- 
ments to the wife, and depart. When at the corner, 
we glance back. Vassili Michaeloff is still standing 
on the threshold; his three customers too are look- 
ing out leisurely at the people passing. 

‘““We have thrown his business out of gear,” we 
remark to Alexsimevich. 

He seems surprised. 

“There is plenty of time. Why should they mind 
waiting? Nietchevo.” 

Another host is overjoyed to see us, for an engin- 
eering problem of great perplexity is, he tells us in 


226 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


due course, harassing his mind. No one in Urga can 
help him out, but perhaps we will. 

‘“The Chinese governor, the Zinzin, wants to 
make an automobile line from Kalgan,” the host 
announces. ‘‘I saw an iron bridge once, so I agreed 
to build him one over the Lara River. Have 
you ever seen an iron bridge? How shall I do 
jen 

You allow that you have seen an iron bridge, — 
that you have even gone across one. You suggest 
that much depends on the river. ‘‘ How wide is it, 
for instance?”’ 

‘‘T have not picked out the place for the bridge 
yet,’ answers the host; ‘“‘but the river is some- 
where between sixty and three hundred feet wide. 
Have some vodka? ” 

‘And how deep is the water?” you ask. 

‘Well,’ — after much thought, — “it is deep 
in the middle and shallow at the edges. Have a 
cigarette! Have some tea! If we build this bridge, 
the Zinzin will give us a decoration. How much 
will the bridge cost? ”’ 

‘That depends upon what sort of bridge you 
build, and how long it is, and how much material 
you use!”’ 

Alexsimevich comes in. 

‘You see, the more iron you use, the more the 
bridge costs,’’ he observes. 

‘‘ Navierno! navierno! you speak sagely, Alex- 
simevich. That is what I told the Zznzin.” 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 227 


“Tt must have piers and abutments,’ you ven- 
ture. 

“But the Zinzin does not like piers, because the 
water was not made to put such things into. Yet 
I said with you, one must always have piers. Here 
is brandy. Take a few sardines!”’ 

The problem certainly needs something special 
for its elucidation. You ponder, and Alexsimevich 
and the host breathlessly watch the hatching of your 
official pronunciamento. 

At last you deliver yourself. 

“Find out how wide and deep the river is. Then 
write to a steel-manufacturing company, to quote 
prices. They will send a blue-print of an auto- 
mobile bridge of the specified length, together 
with the weight of the steel. You can buy pieces 
to build it at so many kopecks a pound, just like 
butter.” 

‘Ah, my friend, you do not know how great a 
service you have rendered! What a providence is 
your coming! Pray, have some cognac! Will they 
send me a picture with piers, — a picture that I can 
show the Zinzin?”’ 

‘Yes, — yes, indeed.” 

“‘T go to-morrow to tell him of this.” 

We are once more in the street and the banded 
escort is turning into still another Russian’s house. 
Their idea of sightseeing is apparently to take tea 
with every Russian in the place. A mild desire is 
registered to come in contact with some of the other 


228 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


people. The idea strikes them in the light of a 
strange new doctrine. 

“You wish to see Mongols?”’ one asks. Though 
surprised, they acquiesce amiably. ‘‘To-day they 
have holiday; you are favored. Go see the doings 
and make me visit later,” says the disappointed 
third host. 

Then the wool-merchant speaks. 

“Near by is the great temple of Urga, which few 
have seen, for it is one of the most holy places of 
the Lama faith. It is the temple of Maidari, the 
Future God. If the gaspadine wishes to see it, I, 
who have bought wool from the uncle of the keeper 
of the gate, can gain admittance.” 

For this we start. The Russian section, made 
up of shops with posters and signs in Slavonic 
letters, and homes with centre chimneys and little 
square panes of glass, is left behind. Through a 
long dark lane we come out into the main thorough- 
fare of Mongol Urga. The town is in festival for 
the New Moon. The streets are ablaze with color. 
Red posters are on every door and wall. The bril- 
liant picture is framed by the snowy girding hills 
and the green trees of the Holy Mountain to the 
south. The tomb-like altars on the plain are daz- 
zlingly white against the gray-plastered fronts of 
the houses behind. The gilded gargoyles of the 
temples flash in the sun. Down the main street, 
a hundred feet broad, go bevies of girls, their hair 
bedecked with the gaudiest ornaments of silver and 


AWUSVAVIT VOUN AHL NI WIdNaL 





é 


ae ae ee a 
» 


LY, 


[= 


4. 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 229 


pearl, their silken robes striped and banded in 
green alternating with yellow and blue and gold. 
Lamas stride here and there dressed in bright 
orange robes and hats, their silver knives hanging 
at their sides. Great shaggy-haired dromedaries 
swing past. Horsemen, robed in vivid scarlet and 
blue and magenta, dash at full gallop across the 
wide open piazza in the centre of the town. A 
donkey-cart is driven slowly along, crowded with 
brightly-dressed girls. A squad of Chinese cavalry 
trot by in white jackets, red-lettered. Two of the 
Cossack garrison swagger past. A bearded Siberian 
trader strolls across, clothed in the dark Mongolian 
cloak which most have adopted, going toward the 
Russian quarter we have just left. A string of oxen 
plods by, drawing cartloads of wood. 

Walking on, we come to a long line of kiosks 
which a continuous procession of pilgrims in holiday 
attire is entering. In each booth is a cask-shaped 
prayer-wheel, a magnified model of those which 
women carry, twirling them in their hands as they 
walk. 

Along this main square of Urga, and girding her 
city stockade, are hundreds of these cylinders. All 
the day long, men and women are going in and out 
from one kiosk to another, turning. Some say that 
formerly one could enter a great Tibetan temple only 
after saying a prayer so long that even a Grand 
Lama’s memory could not carry it. So, for con- 
venience, a cylinder with the written text was set 


230 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


up at the temple gate. By degrees it became the 
custom, without reading it, to rotate the petition 
for a blessing. Others say that the wheels are 
whirled in literal obedience to Buddha’s precept to 
‘turn over and over his words.”’ 

Alternating with the wheels are stone shrines 
graven with Tibetan characters, before which, on 
wooden couches, silken-dressed women are abasing 
themselves in abject worship. A long line of pil- 
grims is doing the circle of the city. They stand, 
then drop prostrate in the snow. Rising, they 
move conscientiously forward to where their heads 
touched, and again lie prone, making thus a peni- 
tential circuit of the stockade. Most are in deadly 
earnest. Some, hired for a proxy service, steal for- 
ward a few inches on each prostration. 

Suddenly three distant guns boom out. 

“Scurry, scurry toda!’’ says the wool-merchant. 
“Quick, this way. He is coming.” 

You hurry forward to where a trail leads across 
the square. Afar off, in the direction of the Holy 
Mountain, is seen a band of galloping cavalry. The 
Mongols on horseback around you are drawing 
rein. The pilgrims are looking toward the approach- 
ing cavalcade. Brilliant red and yellow are the robes 
that flutter as the body-guard ride. Now a rumble 
of wheels is heard among the clattering hoofs. 
Preceded by twenty horsemen, followed by twenty 
more, rolls down a Russian droshky, with a yellow- 
robed Jama driving. Propped among the multi- 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 231 


colored cushions sits a clean-shaven, silk-robed 
man, with puffy cheeks and tired eyes. The Eu- 
ropean watch which he carries hangs in anomalous 
awkwardness at the breast of his robe; his leg is 
propped on the front seat, as if he were lame. 
Most turn their backs to him in Oriental honor- 
ing; many prostrate themselves in the snow; every 
horseman in the square has dismounted. 

“He drives from his palace beside the Holy 
Mountain to the temple on the hill beyond the 
city,’’ says the wool-merchant. 

“But who is it ?”’ we ask, as the last galloper rides 
by. 

The Russian looks at us as an old Roman might, 
if in the Forum we had not recognized Cesar. 

“That! That’s Gigin, the Living God! That’s 
Buddha come back to earth, — Gigin!”’ 

You stand a moment to take it all in. Then, 
despite your purpose of respect, a smile works to 
the front. 

At once the wool-merchant laughs gleefully. 
“Ask Varlakoff about the Buddha,” he chuckles. 
“Varlakoff sold him his ponies for ten thousand 
roubles. My friend showed him a picture of the 
ponies, little horses, you know, and Gigin told him 
to get them. They had to send to an island of 
Europe, Scotland. But Gigin was very pleased. 
He said Varlakoff was the only man who had never 
lied to him.” 

The expression of the wool-merchant was that 


232 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


worn according to tradition by the Roman 
augurs. 

‘When there is not a holiday, the people have 
the market here in this square,”’ the merchant con- 
tinues. ‘‘I was here in the bazaar with a friend last 
week, and we heard a commotion over by that 
prayer-wheel. We went up, to find that two of the 
Buddha’s lamas were borrowing a fine horse, worth 
three hundred roubles, which belonged to a Mongol 
woman. It was all she had, she told us, and it was 
being taken to the Living God’s stables. The woman 
was in great distress. 

““Tt is mine. I will appeal to the Consul,’ said 
my friend. 

“The Gigin’s men could not take a Russian’s 
horse, so they had to give it up. The Mongol woman 
came and wept on him, she was so glad. She brought 
a gift to my friend. Generally the Gigin returns 
such borrowed booty when he has used it a while, 
but often not. Anything that is new, the God will 
buy. These pilgrims, you see, bring him offerings. 
Kalmuks come all the way from the Volga, Manchus 
make pilgrimages, Buriats come down from north 
of Baikal, and tribesmen from Tibet. He has half 
a million roubles a year from his priests, and he 
does not care for anybody.” 

Becoming more and more steeped in celestial 
gossip, we go past the gray-plastered compounds 
piled high with wood and timber, a main export 
of Urga. Tall masts with logs suspended from 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 233 


them are the signs. We reach at last a big stock- 
aded courtyard, the beginning of the monastery 
quarters. 

““Come, look in here!’’ says the guide. 

You peer through the gateway at six of the big- 
gest bronze burgoo-kettles that ever existed outside 
an ogre’s kitchen. Each kettle can hold a couple 
of cows. : 

“‘Tt is to feed the monks,”’ says your companion. 

The Mongols are going up to the vessels, with 
buckets suspended to the end of a milkmaid’s yoke. 
They dip up a load. The soup looks like gray 
tapioca pudding. What it is made of remains one 
of the secrets of the monastery, whose chef is stir- 
ring the mixture with an oar. 

A big stockade, enclosing tents and peaked soumé, 
from which the sound of chattering is heard, ap- 
pears ahead. As we approach, a whole hive of boys 
swarm out and scatter in all directions. Some are 
in red, some in yellow, some wear ordinary Mon- 
gol caps, some wear high, yellow sugar-loaf fools’- 
caps, which fall over on one side. These are the 
novices in training for the lama hierarchy. 

The first-born of each family must by imme- 
morial custom become a lama. In babyhood and 
boyhood one of these dedicated children is clad in 
yellow robes and is especially tended. ‘‘ Ubashi,” 
he is called. When about ten years old the boy goes 
to school, at Urga. He becomes a bandzi, or student 
of the prayers and of the Tibetan language. He runs 


234 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


about as those we have just seen, and at about 
twenty he becomes a gztzul, or first-degree lama. 
Now he shaves head and beard, and wears a brilliant 
yellow and red robe. Next he takes the more ad- 
vanced examination and catechism, and becomes 
a full priest, or gilun, forbidden to marry, to kill, or 
to work. He may continue his curriculum in one of 
the departments of the lamasery, studying divin- 
ity, medicine, or astrology. 

In the divinity course a lama will memorize 
Tibetan prayers, and pore for years over the big 
holy books which lie within the chests of the lama- 
sery chapels. He will repeat the creed over his beads, 
in rapt self-hypnotism, meditating in celestial holi- 
ness. He will pray down rain for the grass, and will 
exorcise glanders from the ponies. 

A priest taking the medical course will gain a 
knowledge of the innumerable herbs that grow on 
the Tibetan mountains, many of which are of great 
value as drugs, and are known only to these mon- 
astic seekers. Massage, warm sulphur baths, and 
waters, are part of his pharmacopceia. Mixed with 
genuine instruction in anatomy and medicine, he 
will be taught the incantations that cast out ichut- 
gours, or evil spirits, the words of power to be written 
on rice-paper and rolled into a pill for the patient 
to swallow. He will learn what devil is responsible 
for the disease which has brought low the lusty 
herdsman, and the right order of image to make 
for allaying the infernal anger. He will be taught 





A PROSTRATING PILGRIMAGE 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 235 


when the fever crisis is at hand, so that the cymbal- 
clashers, the drum-beaters, and the prayer-wailers 
may assemble, and by these holy noises and a 
transcendental counter-excitement, lift the patient 
over the fever-point. 

If he elects astrology, he will be instructed in 
casting horoscopes of unfailing value, in reading the 
stars, predicting their future stations and the com- 
ing of eclipses. He will be prepared to declare the 
reasons for visitations of murrain and to track 
the trail of straying camels. 

Divers are the paths of knowledge, but all may 
lead to the honor of Grand Lama, head of a mon- 
astery, or member of the college of shabniars, who 
form the Council of the Living God. And when the 
great reaper has called the high priest from his 
earthly glory, a whitened tomb will be raised to 
his memory just outside some town along the camel- 
trail, while his ashes will be moulded into briquettes 
and godly images, to rest before the gods in the 
shrine of some soumé. 

We have arrived at the gateway to the great 
temple. The wool-merchant disappears inside to 
work his pull. A young lama comes out to the door, 
smiles at the foreigner, and then goes in again, and 
you tremble lest your advent is being announced to 
some other than the one man who can supposedly 
be ‘‘fixed.”’ This is the most important temple of 
Urga, forbidden to foreigners, and seen through 
good fortune by a few only of the old residents. 


236 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


But every gate they bar to hate will open wide to 
love — and a ten-rouble note. The merchant comes 
back. 

‘‘We can go in while the lamas pray,” he whis- 
pers. 

The uncle appears, with an expectant look on his 
face, and motions us in through the darkness to the 
anteroom of the temple sanctuary. 

From the chamber curtained off at one side comes 
a low swelling chant. 

‘“‘Service begins, you may see it from here,” the 
lama says, just above his breath. 

Your station isin darkness, but just the other side 
of the curtain are the lamas, and their apartment 
is lighted by windows. Two rows of benches extend 
the length of their chamber, leaving an aisle between 
them, reaching from the door to the altar. A score 
of priests in yellow robes, with red sashes slung 
tartan-fashion over a shoulder, are sitting on these 
seats facing each other. They are ranged evidently 
in the order of their ages. Two old giluns, fluent in 
the Tibetan litany, sit next the altar. Then come 
younger lamas, the gitzul, not yet full priests. 
Finally next to the door are bandi, ten or twelve 
years old, intense in youthful delight that their part 
in the ceremony is to pound as lustily as they can 
the big prayer-drums. The service begins with the 
chanting of a ritual in form not unlike the Slavonic 
litanies of Siberia. At appointed times it is neces- 
sary to call the god’s attention to the fact that 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 237 


something is going on in his honor. At once a most 
deafening clamor begins. The small boy with a 
drum is drowned out by his big brother, further 
up the line, who officiates upon a huge wooden 
cornet, and by his uncle with the conch-shell or the 
cymbals. The droning of prayers is like the buzz 
of hiving bees. There seem to be no responses, but 
all of them read together. Presently comes a sud- 
den clamor, almost like a fire-alarm; then the 
crash and the droning suddenly cease. 

‘“‘It is over!”’ says the guide. 

The lamas file out by a further door, and we tiptoe 
in to inspect the holy of holies at the heart of the 
great lama sanctuary. In the dimness one sees first 
before him the table for offerings, on which are the 
two main sacerdotal instruments, —a silver bell 
and a silver handle like a carving-knife-rest, — and 
row after row of targets made of dough-paste, of 
brass cups filled with oil to serve the tapers, of mil- 
let, rice, currants. Behind this altar, towering far up 
into the hollow of the dome, is the bronze colossus 
of the smiling Buddha, Maidari, the Future God. 

Fifty feet in height, the figure is, cross-legged, 
with open, painted eyes. From Buddha’s hands 
hang long silken streamers. One of very fine quality 
is embroidered with the ten thousand gods. 

‘This,’ the priest whispers, “‘is a present from 
the Dalai Lama.” 

A great festival takes place in summer in honor of 
this god, who will rule a myriad years hence, when 


238 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the race of giants descends to kill mankind and 
to people the earth with their own kindred. The 
Gigin’s elephant is brought out, and he himself 
takes the lesser dignity of a carriage in deference 
to Maidari. Even the gods of the present must 
honor the gods of the future. 

The Gigin’s throne is to the left of the statue. 
It has triple silk cushions. Around are twelve 
colossi of Buddha, some ten feet in height, and en- 
tirely gilt save for the red lips and the eyes. The 
hands are held in differing positions, folded, out- 
stretched, pointing. Here and there a silk scroll is 
hung. 

The walls of the sanctuary are lined with shelves 
like a book-store, and these are loaded with statu- 
ettes of the ten thousand gods. 

We tiptoe back the way we came, and are soon in 
the street of the monastery. The uncle has seen us 
safely away. We betake our route from the Mongol 
toward the Russian section. 

“You saw the throne cushion of Dalai Lama?”’ 
the wool-merchant asks. ‘‘They have put it back 
now. Gigin kicked it out of the temple when Dalai 
Lama left. The Angleski drove Dalai Lama from 
Lhasa, and he came to Urga to visit Gigin, because 
here is the second great Buddhist holy place. Now 
Dalai Lama is very monkish, very austere, and al- 
ways prays and fasts. But our Gigin ’’ — here fol- 
lows another expansive smile — ‘‘Gigin rode out 
with his Council, the shabniars, and took some 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 239 


of Pokrin’s best champagne in the cart, for they 
would not have it in Lhasa. Dalai Lama was very 
stiff. Gigin asked him, ‘Have a drink!’ Dalai did 
not understand, for drink is forbidden. Then he 
asked him again, and Dalai Lama refused rebuk- 
ingly. They came to Gigin’s palace at the foot of 
the Holy Mountain, which is built like the Russian 
consulate. After the prostrations, Gigin said to 
Dalai that he had come far and few women were on 
the road and those mostly old and ugly. Dalai Lama 
refused that too. Cigarettes and snuff, and canned 
tomatoes he offered, but Dalai Lama refused them 
all. Then, in the Assembly of the Lamas, Dalai re- 
buked Gigin, and made him sit below his servants in 
penalty, for Dalai Lama is more of a god than Gigin. 
All the pilgrims came to offer gifts to Dalai Lama, 
and Gigin did not get his. For months Dalai Lama 
stayed here. Afterwards he went away to China. 
Gigin came to this temple then and kicked Dalai 
Lama’s throne, throwing it down. He celebrated in 
the summer palace when Dalai Lama left, for he was 


very happy.” 


Mongol Urga is left behind, and we reénter the 
Russian town. A hail from one of the passers-by is 
not long delayed. ‘‘ Will you have chaz?”’ he ques- 
tions. He is an alert-looking Russian, smartly clad 
in a shuba of green leather trimmed with sable. 

‘““Must we eat any more dinners to-day?” we 
inquire. 


240 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


“Only tea,’’is the reply. Itisnot quite reassuring. 

‘That is Pokrin, the one that sells to the Gigin,”’ 
the wool-merchant whispers. ‘‘Go with him: he can 
tell you some tales.”’ 

Obviously one must not miss the acquaintance- 
ship of this modern Ganymede, cup-bearer of the 
many-bubbled French nectar and jugged ambrosia ; 
so on we march to his compound. 

Pokrin was on his way to a business appoint- 
ment; but no rendezvous will interfere with pro- 
spective chai. He hangs his coat back on its peg, 
bids his wife start up the samovar, and produces the 
vodka-bottle. Yes, his family is very well, and he 
is very busy buying hides. We talk up and down 
and roundabout numberless themes, and at last 
venture: ‘‘The Gigin!”’ 

‘‘Ah, the Gigin was here to see me only a week 
ago.” 

We bow our recognition of the host’s great im- 
portance, and he is started; soon he buckles down 
into the story. 

‘‘The Buddha came up in his carriage with his 
lamas riding beside him, and they tied their horses 
all around here in front. Then Gigin came in, walk- 
ing softly because of his gout, and he said, ‘Let us 
drink together like friends, without quarreling.’ 

‘“‘T brought out the drinks, and we sat down, — 
Gigin and I with the lamas around us. Gigin likes 
best the strong drinks, — not vodka, but cognac 
and sweet champagne. Very many bottles wedrank, 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 241 


Gigin and I. And at last I fell asleep. But Gigin 
drank still. Then he too fell asleep. In the morning 
the lamas carried him to his carriage, and back he 
drove to the palace, with the people lying down in 
the street as he passed. All the next day I had a 
very bad pain in my forehead, and it felt large.” 

By non-Siberian standards Alexsimevich should 
be on the way to similar symptoms in the near 
future. For the purveyor to the Divinity has pro- 
duced an assorted collection of his wares which 
are being sampled with due diligence. Cold meats 
and wheat-bread appear on the table with the sam- 
ovar. 

‘‘We must eat, or he feels badly,” whispers 
Alexsimevich, as he makes a sandwich, an inch and 
a half through, which is about the depth of brandy 
in the Siberian highball. 

Other neighbors drift in as the afternoon wears 
on. The talk turns to that greatest of local events, 
the Metropolitan Handicap of Mongolia, under the 
high patronage of the Living God. Things become 
decidedly stimulating, and the recitals lively. Every- 
body is living over the excitement, ejaculating and 
gesticulating. Thechild-quality in their minds keeps 
so vivid their impressions, that the scenes are pro- 
jected almost as by a cinematograph. 

From hundreds of miles around, the herdsmen 
have assembled. The plain before the city is a riot 
of color, as the horsemen ride here and there. In 
the centre of the field is the gay pavilion for the 


242 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


yellow-robed bishops and cardinals from distant 
lamaseries, guests of the great Gigin. 

All through the morning, hundreds of riders and 
horses have been making for the starting-point, 
twenty Jz (about seven miles) distant. The jockeys 
are the smallest boys available: young red-cheeked 
lamas, perched bareback on the shaggy racing- 
ponies. The monks, who are stewards of the course, 
have with much shouting finally, at the hour, lined 
them up in a long row, facing Urga. One thousand 
ponies have been reported as entering. It is a regi- 
ment of boys. A signal starts the whole cavalcade 
together. The thousand small jockeys shout at 
once. A thousand whips come down on flanks. Two 
thousand heels dig into the ponies’ withers. Over 
the irregular plain tear the racers, dodging around 
gullies, stumbling in marmot-holes, galloping helter- 
skelter amid furious yells. At length they come 
within sight of Urga. Crowds, mounted, have gone 
out to follow them in. The shouts redouble, the 
people become frantic; the riders yell at one an- 
other, and the horses are as wild as their masters. 

Shabniars and cardinals get to their feet as the 
cavalcade appears. The Living God’s heavy eyes 
brighten up with interest. His chief soul-mate 
waves a jewelled hand and chatters excitedly with 
a lama of the guard. The foremost rider is close at 
hand now, the jockey, wriggling like an eel and al- 
most on the neck of his pony, yelling and slashing. 
The field thunders behind. The leader nears the 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 243 


pavilion, his pony is on the fierce final spurt, —a last 
cut of the whip, and in triumph, amid the deafening 
roar of the populace, the winner passes the line. 
Many other riders come in at his heels, but most 
straggle off to either side of the course when they 
see that the finish is lost. The victor is caught up by 
the priests and is brought before Gigin, where he 
lies on his stomach in adoration. He receives a gift, 
and is pensioned for life. The horse’s owner receives 
a good price for the animal, which is added to the 
Gigin’s stable. The mule-cart of the Buddha is then 
brought up and he is loaded in. The yellow bishops 
mount their steeds, and back to his palace goes the 
Living God. Thus ends the great Urga race. 

There are other athletic tournaments during the 
season; most important of these is the champion- 
ship wrestling- bout, which every year decides 
whether laymen or clergy are the better sportsmen. 
The Gigin’s pavilion fronts a ring, with dressing- 
tents on either side. From one emerges a layman. 
He advances by huge jumps and prostrates himself 
before the deity. Next, palms on the ground, like a 
great frog, he leaps into the ring. The chosen lama 
executes the same pass from the other side. They 
meet, jumping like game-cocks, with quick breaks. 
At length the clergyman gets a leg. In an instant he 
heaves up on it, and over goes the black man, — 
out! The whole assembled populace raises a stu- 
pendous howl. Bout succeeds bout, with differing 
champions and varying issues. Partisanship is in- 


244 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


tense. The clergy usually win in these matches, and 
have long held the championship. 

One guest tells to-night of the photographer who 
bribed a lama, and got the first photograph of 
Gigin. The tale runs that this man, a Russian, se- 
cured admission among a crowd of pilgrims, and 
snapped the god, unawares, among his entourage 
of priests. This photograph, enlarged and colored, 
is the one now hawked to the Mongols, and which 
they set up for worship among their other gods. 
The lama was beheaded, they say. That was several 
years ago, however: since then Gigin has been 
photographed at the races and elsewhere. 

At last we break away from the group and return 
to our lodgings at Varlakoff’s. 

We are informed next day that among the in- 
vitations so lightly and uncomprehendingly ac- 
cepted was one to take dinner with the mayor of 
the Russian settlement. We are expected there- 
fore toward evening. So, late in the day, we gird 
on our greatcoat and move out heavily. Down the 
street we fare forth to the house of the host. A 
fine well-fed man is this mayor, with the cordial 
grip and the slow smile of good-fellowship. He wears 
a very long beard. He has taken a fancy to the em- 
broidered green and pink Chinese ear-tabs as a sub- 
stitute for the big fur cap of his own people. The 
ear-tabs are about as appropriate to his burgo- 
master build as baby-blue ribbon on the tail of a 
fighting bull-pup. Otherwise, deerskin boots and 








A GRAND LAMA 


Ts Tey OPA TST, oh eae 
; ‘ie. : i y |e - f wv ae 





> : - 
é 
, 
- 
‘ 
? 
' 
» 
. 
a 

i 
P 

' 

? 

‘ 

‘ ’ 

f , 4 
’ 
’ 

/ 

/ 

, 
. 
¥ 

a 5 ‘ 

oP ‘A 
\ 
’ 
‘ 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 245 


hunting-coat, he is the real Siberian. In the mayor’s 
large sitting-room, along the wall against which the 
table stands, is a rank of bottles of divers heights 
and fatness, like recruits out for their drill. The 
samovar of shining brass leads the array. Four 
different-sized glasses stand at each plate, and the 
intervening area is covered with platters of sausages, 
cheese, bread, sprats of every conceivable variety, 
and a medley of cold zakuska dishes. 

The mayor reaches for the vodka. 

**Please, none!”’ we blurt out. 

The mayor looks hurt. Then an idea takes form 
in his head, and he shouts something to his Chinese 
boy, who promptly shuffles through the door into 
the street. 

Out of the window we catch a glimpse of him turn- 
ing into the establishment across the way, where 
Pokrin’s clerk sells the wherewithal to make a 
Russian holiday. The Chinese boy emerges with 
a bottle, and trots back across the street with the 
curious gait made requisite by the unattached thick- 
soled slippers. He shuffles into the dining-room and 
makes space for one more bottle. Whiskey! The 
mayor has bethought himself of the English label, 
and has sent for it, on the theory that not to drink, 
like not to sleep, is unbelievable. 

Evidently one must again sidestep, so chai is 
besought and got down. Our virtue is rewarded, 
for the host smiles and is content. 

“Poor Pokrin!’’ he says presently, reminded of 


246 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the man by the beverage. ‘‘He made over a hun- 
dred thousand roubles from selling things to the 
Gigin. But now he can’t think of any more things 
to sell. You saw the Gigin’s new droshky? But that 
isn’t like selling an elephant or an electric-light 
plant. Pokrin is down to pelicans and fountain- 
pens.” 

He shakes his head sympathetically, and reaches 
anew for the vodka-bottle. He goes on reminiscing, 
half-cynically, half-regretfully, of the past, while 
dinner to serve the appetite of a Cyclops keeps 
coming on. 

In the midst of the repast cries arise outside. A 
Mongol with a flow of language is heard calling 
aloud for “‘ Bulun Darga!”’ (fat policeman.) 

‘‘They are after me,’’ says the mayor resignedly. 

The Mongol comes hurtling in, pushing past the 
Chinese boy. 

“Fat policeman,” he cries; “Red Mustache 
and Long Nose and Blue Coat are drunk, and are 
disturbing my gir. Come quickly, O Lord, fat police- 
man.” | 

The mayor sighs. “I go”; then he turns to us. 
‘Will you accompany me?”’ 

‘“‘Gladly, if we don’t have to eat any more.” 

The mayor considers this a back-handed com- 
pliment to the amplitude of his hospitality and 
smiles. 

‘“‘ Vperiod, it is not far.”’ | 

He puts on his huge greatcoat, draws on his pon- 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 247 


derous boots, takes a heavy stick, and in vividly 
embroidered Chinese ear-tabs stands ready to fol- 
low the Mongol. We shoulder open the felted door. 
From the low-ceilinged recess between this and the 
outer door he produces two other big sticks, like 
pilgrim’s staves. These he hands to his visitors. 

‘“‘For the dogs!” he explains. 

The Mongol’s hut is soon reached. It is in fright- 
ful disorder, and vodka-bottles are strewn around. 
The mayor looks up in a little book to see if Krasni, 
young Agueff, and Pugachev are not, as he sus- 
pects, the men who in native nomenclature are 
called Red Mustache, Blue Coat, and Long Nose. — 
He finds that he has rightly surmised. 

“I know them,”’ says the mayor. “They will 
come around to me in the morning. I will tell them 
to make the Mongol satisfaction. When they come 
back and say he is satisfied, I tell them to be good 
and to do this no more. Nietchevo!”’ 

The irate man is jollied along, and is told that it 
will be fixed up soon. Consoled and soothed by the 
protection of authority, he admits it was not so bad 
after all, and he bids us, as we leave, a grinning 
“Sein oh!” 

“Now,” says the mayor, “‘will you not come and 
see Urga at night?” 

He leads along an icy back street, black as a can- 
yon, with the bulging mud-plastered walls, twenty 
feet in height, so close that a cart can barely pass 
between them. Not a light is seen save as a ray 


248 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


pierces the shuttered planking of some compound 
door. Distant clanging of cymbals and far-off 
echoes alone break the stillness. Out from the gloom 
of the street we come into the open piazza, half a 
verstwide. Itis unshadowed, and less dark. Thread- 
ing the heaped-up refuse we stumble on. The black 
crows, with lancet-like blood-red beaks, which search 
the heaps by day, are gone. The black cannibal dogs 
wake and growl as we approach. 

“They are afraid of a stick and don’t generally 
attack people. But, ifseveral docome at you, crouch 
down and stay perfectly quiet,’’ the mayor counsels. 

He then tells of the Cossack who last year, pass- 
ing by a dog that did not move aside, drew his 
sabre and struck the beast. As soon as the other 
dogs smelled the fresh blood, they became mad, 
and half a dozen came at him. He put his back 
against the wall and slashed among them. Many 
he cut and wounded, but more came and more, in 
an instant. Soon he was pulled down, for hundreds 
were upon him. 

A big black-furred brute looks insolently at us 
as we pass. 

‘““They do not bury the dead here, you know,” 
the mayor says. ‘‘The corpses are taken to the 
mountain northward outside the town, and are left. 
It is cold to-night. There will be death in the 
market-place where the poor lie shelterless. And 
the dogs wait beside them.”’ 

A little way off, where the prayer-wheel stands, 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 249 


is the twinkling light of a shrine. The new moon 
and the few brilliant stars are frigidly distant. 
They cast a pale white glow now on the dimly out- 
lined walls and huts. A beggar, lying unseen, calls 
suddenly as we pass his heap of sodden hides. The 
six-foot Siberian hunter by our side cries out as 
he stumbles over and beholds a something, partly 
eaten, guarded by a great cannibal dog. 

If the thought of the rights of man has drowned 
sympathy with all that concerns the government 
of Russia, visit Urga at night, and the Cossack of 
the Russian Guard, swaggering along among the 
Chinamen, — this Cossack whom you have heard 
execrated as the ‘‘knout of the Czar,’’ — will look 
to you like a Highlander at Lucknow. The chance 
to absorb an unwholesome amount of tannin by 
way of a samovar, and to sleep on the floor be- 
side the oven in the whitewashed house of Michael 
Varlakoff, will become a privilege more prized than 
any possessed by His Holiness, the Living God. 

The section of the Russian colony in which we 
have been lodging consists of five hundred-odd 
traders. They have drifted down from Siberia, and 
on the free ground of taxless Urga have established 
their shops of gaudy European cloths, enameled 
cooking-utensils, candles, and cutlery. These Rus- 
sians, whose whitewashed many-paned houses fill 
a quarter of the town, have not the large interests 
watched by the English merchants, who dot the 
globe with their agencies. They are small Trans- 


250 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Baikal shopkeepers, transplanted bodily. They 
build their houses in the Siberian way, and their 
wives toil personally at the oven. They wear 
blouses and felt boots as the house-dress, and keep 
the ikons in the corner. Prosperity is evidenced in 
the striking-clocks, the lamps, nickeled samovars, 
and curtained double windows. But they are still 
not many removes from the peasant. 

There is, however, another section of Urga’s Rus- 
sian colony, grouped around the consulate, a large 
compound situated a verst east of the Mongol town, 
which was built in 1863, and was fortified in 1900, 
against the Boxers. Within this compound are the 
Orthodox Church, the Russian doctor, the rooms 
of the twenty Cossacks of the Guard, and the great 
empty barracks of the two sotnias that were sent 
here in Boxer times, and were, to the regret of their 
compatriots, later removed. The barracks are still 
ready for any future visits, and the breastwork, with 
its stake and fosse lined with barbed-wire, is 
equal to any force which from a five-hundred-verst 
radius can assemble against it. 

In this quarter, the Russian consul is autocrat. 
He is the official notary, without whose stamp no 
contract is legal, the chief of police, the guardian of 
orphans. Around him revolves the society of the few 
dozen mondaines of Urga, whose personnel consists 
of the officials, the garrison officers, and some half- 
dozen commercial agents, single generally, or with 
distant families. They conduct their bachelor quar- 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 251 


ters through Chinese servants, and their cuisines are 
helped out by all the canned and bottled delicacies 
that can be ordered from the frontier. The gold- 
mines, and the extensive wool-trade which produces 
a commerce of twenty to thirty millions, demand 
that first-grade men watch the interests of the great 
companies which handle the business. So men of 
the best cosmopolitan Russian type come, at salaries 
proportioned to their sacrifice. They gather in the 
consulate evenings, or sit in the fenced-off boxes at 
the theatrical performances, which periodically come 
down from Kiahta. 

A few families who have made their sixteen-day 
camel-trip from Kalgan and Peking have fore- 
gathered here with their household goods and gods. 

Buttressed by the companionship of books, this 
other class lives in splendidly-furnished rooms, with 
pictures purchased in Paris, statuettes from Rome, 
and grand pianos drawn for days over the passes 
by laboring oxen. One converses at the consulate in 
French, the mother tongue of none, but the common 
tongue of all. The few favored guests, who are in- 
vited of necessity over and over, play chess end- 
lessly in the evenings. The ladies read the latest 
French novels, or sing the songs that distant friends 
have sent from the Riviera or St. Petersburg. 

They drive in imported carriages and sleighs for 
the afternoon airing, and bemoan Nice and Monte 
Carlo in winter over the pages of Zola’s ‘‘Rome.”’ 
The men subscribe extensively to English, French, 


252 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


German, and Russian periodicals. They invite such 
relatives as can be persuaded for lengthy stays, and 
shower a guest with the hospitality of old claret, 
caviar, and the varied courtesies which the rarity 
of visitors from the world inspires. They take long 
adventurous horseback trips in the dull season, — 
explore forgotten monasteries, study the Tibetan 
inscriptions, print monographs on the folk-tales, 
and dream of promotion and Petersburg. 

The consulate has one uniquely circumstanced 
personality, whose career is a romance of Eastern 
adventure. Born in the Baltic provinces, he studied 
in the Oriental training-schools, and entered the 
Russian diplomatic service at Peking. Here he ap- 
plied himself indefatigably, until he knew the 
Chinese language as did hardly another European. 
He could write the ten thousand idecgraphs, and 
could speak flawlessly the Mandarin and the popu- 
lar dialects. He went to Mongolia and mastered its 
languages also, — its spoken idioms and its written 
grapevine letters. Then, with his diplomatic entrée, 
his knowledge of men and tongues, and the initiative 
of an adventurer, he launched his grand coup in the 
palace of Peking. 

He carried away the sole right to the gold of two 
eimucks, a territory as largeas France. Nota China- 
man may pan the metal, not a Slav may open a 
mine, save through this concessionnaire. A third of 
all gold washed, — these are his terms to those who 
would lease from him; just double what he pays the 


| 
| 
. 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 253 


Peking Yamen for his privilege. Fortune upon for- 
tune he is reported to have made, and the Chinese 
gold-washers and the Russian miners who lease from 
him have gathered their own stakes, too, despite the 
Czsar’s tribute which he exacts of all that they 
produce. 

He has spent large sums in bringing down ma- 
chinery, to do on a great scale what the shallow 
veins of ore demanded should be done on a limited 
scale. An abandoned gold-dredge lies far up the Iro 
River, transported piecemeal at exorbitant expense 
over the hills. Traction-engines are here, which 
could not cope with the Mongol roads. They con- 
sumed forty days going one hundred and twenty 
miles to the largest mine. Now they lie rusting in 
their sheds. Thousands of ox-carts were engaged for 
hauling in the various purchases. River steamers 
and great oil-drills scattered over northern Mon- 
golia are relics of his ambition. 

His brick house, finely furnished, and his brick 
smelter stand hard-by the consulate. The Russians 
tell of masons imported from Sweden to build them. 
The life-history is a bizarre record of great things 
attempted by a man whose overleaping ambition 
stopped nowhere, and whose expenditures more 
than once brought him down. But his interesting 
meteoric career continues, and twenty pud of gold 
are said still to come down yearly from the mines to 
the most picturesque character in Russian Urga. 

We drive down with one of the officials, to be 


254 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


present at another of the events in Urga’s meagre 
happenings — the arrival of the mail. 

The Russian post, one delivery a week, crosses 
Mongolia. The horses bring in three mails from the 
Russian frontier. From Urga to Kalgan, the camel- 
post guarded by Cossacks, traverses the great desert 
of Gobi. Save the Imperial Chinese telegraph, it is 
the only regular method of intercourse with the out- 
side world. The two thousand-odd roubles a year 
paid by Russia as a subsidy are a small expenditure. 
for the opportunity of accustoming the people to 
her service, and for controlling the avenues of news 
and communication. 

The post-office is at the consulate, and a new post- 
master has just been installed. Thereby hangs a 
tale which is poured into your ear before your stay 
in Urga has been much protracted. — 

A telegram came from Irkutsk to seize and bring 
to Verhneudinsk as propagandists the postmaster’s 
son and daughter— twenty-one and eighteen. 
Twenty Cossacks surrounded the house at three in 
the morning. The two were arrested, taken to the 
mayor’s house, and lodged there. The next day they 
were started on the trail to Kiahta. Once over the 
border, there would be no more hope. Quickly 
the leading men of the colony assembled and tele- 
graphed the Russian ambassador at Peking, knowing 
that if the ambassador had official cognizance, he 
could not safely authorize an arrest on Chinese soil 
by the Cossacks of the Guard. The response was 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 255 


delayed, but there was pressure enough upon the 
consul to get the prisoners held at the mining-camp 
beyond Iro until the answer was received. At 
length the ambassador replied that Chinese suzer- 
ainty must be respected. The two were free. But 
the father had been advised to resign his post and 
accept a station which was offered him at Kalgan, 
where there were only three Russians, all warranted 
proof against propaganda. 

Beyond the Russian consulate, six versts, is the 
Chinese town called, as are many of these trading- 
posts, Maimachen, or place of trade. One can get 
there by the solitary Cossack-driven droshky that 
the Russian colony supports. But more appropri- 
ately we go on pony-back, borrowing an army-saddle 
and a purple fleece-lined shuba, whose skirts reach 
around the knees, and whose long sleeves fold over 
the hands, keeping a rider reasonably warm in cold 
weather. 

The houses of Mongol Urga are soon left behind, 
the stockaded lamasery is passed on the left, and: 
we are on a big open plain. A few minutes’ gallop 
takes us past the consulate. Beyond it stands a 
compound girded by a stockade of saplings, within 
which are the low mud walls of straggling houses, 
amid which the gilded eaves of a more pretentious 
residence lift themselves above the rest. 

A troop of pig-tailed horsemen trots past: the 
white tunics of the riders are covered, back and 
breast, with red ideograph letters, which stigmatize 


256 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the bearers as of the lowest caste — soldiers of the 
Celestial service. The man in front holds aloft a 
gilded pear-shaped standard, and between the ranks 
lumbers a covered cart with closed shutters. The 
cavalcade wheels to the right and turns in, dipping 
the standard as they pass under the gargoyle-tipped — 
beams of the gateway. Servants come running out 
of the great house. From the cart is helped down 
a Manchu of pallid face and short gray mustache. 
That wooden house, girded by mud huts, is the seat 
of government for this greatest exmuck in Mongolia. 
The figure robed in cheap blue cotton is lord of life 
and death, the Zinzin, Viceroy for the Emperor of 
China. 

This Manchu Viceroy, and his Tu-T’ung, or lieu- 
tenant-governor, who represents Chinese authority 
in the city of Kalgan, are responsible for the collec- 
tion of tribute, the administration of justice in the 
cities, and the maintenance of order. Over the Chi- 
nese inhabitants in the Maimachen the rule through 
the agency of the prefect of police appointed by the 
Viceroy is direct and absolute. 

Over the Mongols, Chinese rule is exercised in 
an irregular nebulous fashion, with some force in the 
centres and almost none in the outlying districts, 
where the old nomad organization of society, with 
princes, barons, or tai-tstz, clergy, and ordinary black 
men, still persists. A code of Chinese laws exists, 
but in general justice is dealt out by the local 
princes, or guns, who receive also the cattle-tax in 








GIGIN, THE LIVING BUDDHA 


MANDARIN 


CHINESE 





, 5 ‘ z in 
. * ‘ 
ae Ts 
5 8 
J 
’ 
I 
{ 
ion 

7 

i 
| 

t 

y 
, 
hy 
’ 
. 
) ‘ 
‘ 
, ' 
7 \ 
. i 
‘ 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 257 


some districts, and who go by turns for a year to 
Peking in symbol of homage. 

These Mongol guns, ruling over each of the hu- 
shouns, or counties, which compose the ezmucks, are 
under feudal obligations to the Chinese Emperor. 
Their visible subjection to China consists of cere- 
monial visits with tribute, for which the Emperor’s 
return gifts are of far greater value. A total of 
one hundred and twenty thousand lens of silver 
($90,000) goes yearly from the Emperor to the 
nomad nobility. A khan of the first rank receives 
two thousand Jens ($1500) and twenty-five pieces of 
silk; lesser gentry in proportion. 

This primitive aristocracy lives in barbaric state, 
with splendid carpets, silver-inlaid furniture, and 
jeweled accoutrements. The women are sometimes 
very good-looking. They are laden with ornaments, 
furs and silks, and have a spot of carmine on each 
cheek, which is the prerogative of a princess. But 
the normal imagination does not go beyond the gir 
as a dwelling. Finely fitted it may be, yet it remains 
a one-room hut, with the open brazier in its centre. 
Their wealth is in ancestral ornaments, and in the 
flocks and herds of their private domains. Their one 
relic and memorial of a past sway lies in the custom 
under which the Chinese rulers call by the old Mon- 
gol names the ezmucks, which were the ancestors’ 
kingdoms. That of which Urga is capital still bears 
the name of Tu-she-tu. 

The Mongol lords are responsible for the feudal 


258 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


army, and a caste of bannermen exists, who are 
paid nominally two ounces of silver per month and 
a supply of grain, with the corresponding duty of 
keeping their bows and arrows in order. In the 
Tu-she-tu khanate of the eastern Khalka tribes, 
there are twenty banners, each under an hereditary 
yassak, or tributary prince. In 1900 some banners of 
the Barukhs turned out to fight Russians, but they 
made no showing whatever, and hurriedly returned 
after a skirmish with the Cossacks. Spears and 
arrows are the only weapons the Mongol army can 
show. 

While this feudal system applies in general to the 
whole eimuck, in Urga the Gigin has a unique posi- 
tion. The city is a great monastery, practically all 
of the permanent native population of fifteen thou- 
sand being priests. The laymen who are there are 
mostly pilgrims, or dependents upon the Church. 
Over these the Gigin is master, so that Urga is 
known as ‘The Holy Living God’s Encamp- 
ment.” 

Over the Russians and the Buriat tribesmen, the 
Chinese have no actual sway, and from them they 
collect no taxes. The Russian consul is dictator 
to this little flock; and behind his stockade, where 
the tricolor waves, rally the Orthodox in times of 
danger. . 

Across from the Zzinzin’s doorway is a spiked 
stockade. Inside, where they have been thrust 
through a hole just big enough for a man’s body, are 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 259 


the miserable criminals. In the big pit dug with 
their naked hands, the wretches cower, shelterless, 
under the terrible cold of winter. They live or die 
there, sometimes fed by the charity of Mongols, 
sometimes forgotten, sometimes purchasing miser- 
able fragments of offal with the unstolen remnants of 
the prison allowance. Few waste sympathy on the 
inmates. The low level of existence of those outside 
makes the place perhaps less terrible than it would 
be to people who had known other conditions. It is 
a grim Chinese jest, this loathsome prison for those 
who have stolen bread in the market-place, set op- 
posite the palace of the grafting governor who has 
filched the tribute of Tu-she-tu. 

From the Chinese city now, there begins to come 
the distant throb of drums and clash of cymbals. 
Three gorgeous Mongols gallop past in their splen- 
did free-reined horsemanship. A sentry stalks to 
the door of the stockaded prison, and looks toward 
the gray walls and temples of Maimachen. The pro- 
cession of the New Moon is to pass to-day. 

You leap onto your little Mongol riding-pony, and 
spurring him into a gallop, hasten along the way to 
the Chinese city. He tears down the broad road. 
The resplendent trotting horsemen take the pace as 
a challenge, and yell joyfully for a race as their whips 
come down on their own horses’ flanks. Mongol 
girls walking hand in hand along the highway scatter 
and call out as the riders clatter by. It is contagious. 
Soon a score of riders are shouting, shaking bridles, 


260 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


and lashing ponies, and it is a cavalcade of racers 
that gallops up to the gate of Maimachen. 

How different is this Chinese settlement from 
Mongol Urga! It is a magnified replica of the city 
at the frontiers. Instead of the straggly avenues a 
hundred yards broad, with cafion-like alleys flanked 
by high mud walls, all the streets are so narrow that 
two strides cross them. They are lined with minia- 
ture booths. Through the bars of their paper-paned 
windows one sees the little delicately-tinted pictures 
of pagodas and of Chinese girls, in quaint sweeping 
outlines. Red and black and gold, the New Year 
placards flame on every post and wall. Lanterns 
are hung before the gateways; green saplings stand 
sentinel by the doors; and in the unshuttered com- 
pounds innumerable lines of gaudy banners are 
seen, strung from side to side across the courtyards. 
From the houses come from time to time a thrum- 
ming and a picking of strings in minor music, 
broken by an occasional clang of cymbals or a 
drone of beaten drums. You pass a temple of mar- 
velously carved wood, wrought into curves and 
flowers and arabesques, with eaves turning out into 
open-mouthed dragons. Everything is brilliant in 
paint and gilt —a blazing kaleidoscope of color. 

In a friendly courtyard the horses are tied, and 
you walk into the teeming streets. All the Chinese 
of Maimachen and half the Mongols of Urga have 
come out to-day. Here is a little shifty-eyed Chi- 
nese Clerk, in his low shoes, with white soles several 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 261 


inches thick, his white stockings, tied at the ankle, 
showing below the baggy trousers. 

Here is a young Mongol lama, who hails you glee- 
fully with a Russian word which he has learned from 
a Buriat, and points out where the procession will 
emerge. A Mongol woman passes, gorgeously 
dressed in flowered yellow silk, with red, sable- 
cuffed sleeves so long as nearly to touch the ground, 
and her head cuirassed with the burden of silver 
ornaments. She smiles at the burly Mongol camel- 
driver who so openly admires her. 

A Chinese merchant, with red-buttoned cap, at- 
tended by a servant, is pushing through the crowd. 
His looks are surly; perhaps he is thinking of the 
whereabouts of his own establishment in this carni- 
val. 

Though the rich and wifeless Chinese may ac- 
quire Mongol companions, they cannot buy or give 
affection. Fora poor Mongol, who has the sincer- 
ity and humanness which the Chinaman withholds, 
one of these Mongol concubines will either deceive 
her master, or, if he object too vigorously, will strip 
herself of his presents and go to her lover’s gir. 

A big Celestial with a fuse comes hastily through 
the gateway from which the procession is to emerge. 
The crash of his firecrackers startles the Mongol 
ponies pushed close along the houses. Beneath the 
multi-colored gateway, next pour out a score of 
horsemen with pennanted spears. They ride two by 
two, in white coats with red letters on their breasts. 


262 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Then comes a crowd of footmen, who fill the street 
in a torrent. The curious Mongols press to each 
side, and watch the procession of their alien overlords. 
Two ranks are robed in vivid red, and carry poles 
with big gold knobs. Blue-coated Chinamen, with 
cymbals and shrilling fifes, follow; then come more 
horsemen; then the great silken umbrella, and a 
gray-mustached dignitary on horseback, — the 
chief of police; next, more fifers and wand-carriers, 
six abreast. With fireworks and clashing music, 
the vivid ranks in red and blue, and yellow and 
gold, and green and purple, and every other con- 
ceivable combination of hues, make their way around 
the stockade and back again through the gated city. 

The crowd seems to be trending now toward a 
brilliantly colored archway spanning the main 
street. With the Mongol holiday-makers we follow 
along into a cloistered courtyard flanked by peaked 
temple-like houses. A crowd of Chinese is pressing 
around some one clad in blue, who has just stepped 
out between the beater of a tom-tom and an artist 
with a big pair of cymbals. A preliminary flourish 
introduces the performer —a pasty-faced young 
Chinaman. He starts a rhythmic chant whose cad- 
ence is within a note or two of one of the old croon- 
ing Negro melodies of our South. Over and over 
again he chants it. A poet this is. He has conned 
his verses, and now comes out to sing them. He 
ends with a special swirl in what is evidently a very 
comic climax. The drum and cymbals crash out 


NAHOVWIVW VWOUN ‘AVMHOUVY ASANIHO 





ie 











f 


re 





fi 





THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 263 


once more, and another chanter comes — this one 
old and feeble, with a curiously penetrating voice. 
He drones a long hexameter-footed epic, in which 
the harsh Chinese gh and wh sounds are not so 
coarsely enunciated as in the poem of the first re- 
citer. ‘‘That is one of the old legend-singers,”’ you 
are told. It is such a ballad as Homer sang, or the 
Welsh bards chanted. It is the poetry and the his- 
tory of the long past, the immemorial past, far before 
the infancy of other nations; for China keeps alive 
her antiquity, and in her old age never forgets. 

This week there can be no buying or selling. The 
Moon must be honored, but visits are in order. 
Your friend brings you to meet a leading Chinese 
merchant. At the house, a grille of thick wooden 
bars runs down to the street level from the eaves 
just above one’s head. Looking through them, one 
can see over the little square window the most deli- 
cately-traced pictures on a white background. The 
panes are of paper, all save one, which is of glass, so 
that the owner may see if, coming down the street, 
any one turns and climbs the three steps into the 
ordinarily wide-open door of his house. 

The home of our host, which is likewise his office, 
is finely fitted up and faultlessly clean. His light- 
blue silk robes are immaculate. Two servants wait 
at table, bringing in the best of China tea and 
French “‘petit-beurre’’ biscuits for our delectation. 
Everything is appetizing and orderly. 

As we are sitting over the cups with the Chinese 


264 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


merchant, the boy comes to announce visitors, and 
two blue-robed fellow countrymen enter. One has 
a strip of light-blue silk laid over his two arms, 
which he stretches out. The host extends his own 
arms and receives it, then gives it back to the new- 
comer, who goes down on one knee and again pre- 
sents it. The merchant takes it a second time and 
bows, this time retaining it. The two guests bend 
and leave the room. ‘‘New Year’s presents,” the 
merchant explains. Again the boy comes in and an- 
nounces a guest. A Mongol messenger enters, goes 
down on one knee, and presents a red slip, black- 
lettered. ‘‘ Visiting-card,’’ the host explains. Then, 
with a smile, ‘‘ White, like yours, not polite.” He 
accepts this too. ‘‘Ch’ou Ta-izu!” (the dirty Ta- 
tar!) he says as the latter leaves. 

The calls continue, and our visit. The host is 
charming, cultured, educated; he speaks English 
well, and lacks in no attention. But you wonder if, 
when you leave, he is not going to murmur about 
you, “ Yong-kwei-tsz!’’ (foreign devil !) 

Throughout all intercourse with these Chinese, 
one has always the uneasy consciousness that one is 
doubtless, as with the card, unwittingly offending. 
There are three hundred rules of ceremony, three 
thousand formule of behavior, regulated by a classic 
tradition. The ritual is so drilled into the Chinese 
as to become instinctive. Celestial breeding would 
dictate that the little formalism which precedes a 
rubber, ‘‘May I play to hearts, if you please?” 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 265 


be stretched to cover every action of life. The left, 
not the right, is the place of honor, and to enter 
a room facing wrongly is a slight. An irregular 
method of folding a red New-Year’s card, and the 
failure in writing to raise one character above 
the level of the rest, are breaches of etiquette. 

For our race there is always felt, behind the soul- 
mask of Chinese eyes, a contempt. The kindness 
of our host to-day is unfailing. Yet we are not at 
ease or sure of the ground. Errors, condoned to 
keep face, are often inwardly resented. If you put 
your hat on the Mongol’s altar, everybody in the 
hut will yell out for you to take it off. When you 
remove it, they will nod understandingly as the in- 
terpreter explains that the ignorant foreigner trans- 
gressed inadvertently. Forthwith all is forgotten in 
an enthusiastic discussion of the last case of botts 
among the horses. But with these Chinese one 
can never tell if, by taking a chop-stick between 
the wrong fingers, one has not intimated that the 
host’s grandfather was a cross-eyed coolie soldier. 
No one will challenge or set a man right, but the 
breach will be silently resented, though the tea con- 
tinues to be smilingly offered. 

The old-time Chinese dealers at Urga grew enor- 
mously wealthy in the tea-trade to Kiahta. These 
have mostly gone back to China. But there are still 
a number of the better-class merchants whose wares 
are sold to the traders and by them to the Mongols. 
The house of Liu-Shang-Yuan claims two hundred 


266 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


years of establishment. The Urga people are still 
prosperous, for great sums in religious tribute come 
from all Mongolia to this Lourdes of Lamaism. 
There are also many Chinamen who make large 
profits from wool. 

Of a total trade in Urga estimated at twenty-five 
million roubles per year, nine tenths is in the hands 
of Celestials. The remainder is Russian, for the 
Mongols are entirely without a merchant class. Of 
the exports, wool is the main item. Some two hun- 
dred thousand puds are sent from Urga annually, 
four fifths of which go to the United States. 
While cotton cloth, cutlery, kitchen-utensils, and 
other European goods come down from Russia, the 
bulk of the imports are brought from China by car- 
avan, through Kalgan. Silks come from Shanghai, 
and tea from Hankow, passing via Peking. There is 
trade, too, with Ulasati in western Mongolia. It 
is the centre of a fur and hide country which is 
isolated from outlets toward Russia by the high 
mountains, and must send caravans to Kiahta. Its 
communication with China is either by Urga and 
Kalgan, or by the caravan-route further south. 

When the holiday-time is over we see more of the 
Chinese traders. Sitting in the shops, with one of 
these, and glancing out over the little counter of the 
sales-room, we converse as the customers come and 
gO. 

The Russian in his shop shows all he has of wares, 
the red and magenta cloths, the enameled kettles, 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 267 


the cutlery and sweetmeats. But the Chinaman 
wraps his goods in hieroglyphic-covered papers, and 
all that can be seen are rows of long-stemmed brass- 
bowled pipes, and an array of silver and bronze tea- 
pots on shelves at one side. Very rare things, too, 
our Chinese host can produce. Shanghai silks of 
finest texture, ten roubles the arsheen; jade mouth- 
pieces for the pipes at a hundred éaels; Hankow 
tea culled from the tenderest shoots. Everything is 
labeled and systematized in the Chinaman’s place, 
and he goes at once to the packet which he wishes to 
show. 

A dozen Chinese, with bright blue silk jackets 
over their black surtouts, invade now the home of 
the merchant. The red knot on their black skull- 
caps and the length of their queues and finger-nails 
show them to be men of some importance. They 
take off the bright-colored ear-tabs as they enter. 
They are down to buy wool. To-day they visit, 
next week they will trade. Then all but one will sit 
in the outer shop, while the spokesman alone will go 
into the inner room and confer with the merchant. 
From time to time the spokesman will go back to 
the party and consult, till in the end the bargain is 
made. They will all hold to the agreement, too, 
whichever way the market goes. For in this the 
Chinese are inflexibly honest. A local Chinaman 
dispatched a mounted messenger the six versts to 
Urga, to return to us twenty kopecks which he had 
overcharged by a slip of his abacus-adder. 


268 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Yet the Scotch engineers saw shells in the arsenals 
loaded with clay when the native troops went 
against the Japanese. The English miners in the 
Province of Shan-tung have had their profits cut 
to nothing by the official ‘‘squeezes,”’ and Chinese 
have bought in the depreciated stocks. 

The ethic code of the squeeze seems to be very 
nice. It is a point of honor, almost always scrupu- 
lously observed, that the first-fruits of official graft 
go to repaying the one who advanced the money 
to buy the office. A Chinaman, who could not be 
trusted to administer honestly a trust fund of a 
hundred téaels, will repay this obligation to his 
backer. Thus must he keep face. 

From the tax-appraiser who numbers the sheep 
to the civil governor who receives the lumps of 
silver tribute for transmission to Peking, every 
official gets his squeeze. They say in the evmuck of 
Ulasati, where sables are part of the tribute, that 
the officials take out the best furs and put back 
poor skins to keep the number the same; and in 
Urga, that the enormously rich administration takes 
; a Tammany third of the tribute. There has never 
' been a viceroy yet, it is reported, who has left 
Mongolia poor. Yet each official plays straight 
with his backer, his ‘belly-band.” Very curious 
is this race, and there live few Westerners who can 
at all understand it. 

We ride back in the evening from the Chinese 
city (for none may stay for the night), buried in 


THE CITY OF THE REBORN GOD 269 


recurring reveries. How brightly glitters the face, 
and how barren is the heart in Maimachen! Never 
the thousand ties of kinship and affection, never the 
thrill of citizenship, never the love of a home. How 
little generosity, too, or sympathy for the people of 
the land! The Mongols are but ‘‘ tame barbarians,”’ 
as of old were stigmatized the tributary Formosans. 
Now and then one finds a Chinaman out among the 
nomad Mongols. Perhaps he may bea watcher at a 
distant temple, perhaps a telegraph-operator on the 
two lines that go, one to Kalgan and Peking, one to 
Kiahta and Russia. Always he is something soli- 
tary —different. There is an almost sinister splendor 
in this aloofness —this self-sufficiency of walled 
cities and compounds where none but Chinese may 
dwell. What a rebuff of nationhood in the gates 
that shut out at night all save the alien outlanders! 
What contempt in the law that no woman of China 
may come among these Mongol people, as if the 
very air were contamination! How the natives are 
silently despised, whose bodies in death go to the 
dogs, while the Chinaman’s, in a casket, is sent back 
over the long leagues to his home! 
The homeless, wifeless, Chinese city, with the 
quarter of Mongol women without the walls, — it 
is in many ways typical of all Chinese rule in Mon- 
-golia. For, as the Celestial trader defaults in the 
duty of marrying the Mongol mother of his children, 
so China defaults in many of the duties that are 
inherent in suzerainty. One resents the heavy 


270 THE RUSSIAN ROAD. TO CHINA 


Chinese yoke on the necks of these simple frank- 
hearted Mongolians. They are a race of great good- 
humored children, and they are exploited while 
disdained. 

We are thinking of this unfairness as we ride back 
along the road to Urga. Behind is the distant 
Chinese city, the Manchu Viceroy’s straggling 
palace, the picketed prison-stockade. Before is the 
drooping tricolor banner of the Czar, and the white 
and green of the Greek Church, with its far-seen 
golden crucifix. A crowd of brilliantly-clad Mon- 
gols, lamas and laymen and girls and youths, are 
strolling back from Maimachen. They are laughing 
and chattering, and in uncouth playfulness are 
pushing one another about across the road. 

Half a dozen of the Zinzin’s Chinese foot-guard 
are likewise coming from Urga, stolid-faced, super- 
ior. As they reach the tumultuous band it sinks into 
silence, and the men crowd to the side of the road 
that the Chinese may pass. 

They tramp by without a glance. Then out from 
the Russian barrack-gate swings a little Cossack in 
his great black sheepskin hat, gray tunic, clattering 
curved sabre, boots and spurs. He is one of the 
Zabaikalskaia Buriats, whom Russians call Bratskie, 
the brotherly people. He speaks a tongue so similar 
to the Mongol that all these people can understand 
him. They look up to him as a rich relative, 
fortunate in overflowing measure. For on the pil- 
grimages of Buddhist Buriats to Urga, their wives 


c 
a 
» 
- 





ee 


* rg BS 
ri x 


THE GRE 











THE CITY. OF THE REBORN GOD 271 


have told the wondering Mongol women of the 
sewing-machines which they have at home to stitch 
linings, and have allowed the visitors to peep into 
their mirrors. The Mongol men have admired the 
Buriats’ breech-loading rifle, worth six horses at 
current quotations. They have enviously heard tell 
that in Russia one pays no cow-alba, but the young 
men get a uniform and free food when they ride 
out to give their Cossack service to the Czar. They 
have listened to Buriat boasts of the warm houses of 
Siberia, and stacks of hay, and stored-up harvests. 
So Mongols smile when the Buriats come to their 
girs. They say, “‘ Rich smooth Buriats! Great lords! 
Give candle, give sugar, give tobacco, give vodka.”’ 

Has not a little Zabaikalskaia Buriat reason to 
swagger when he starts from the Russian barrack- 
gate to see his lady in Urga? And should a Cossack 
of the Czar step aside for a Chinaman in the shadow 
of the Eagles? Head erect, with a look to right 
and then to left, hand on sabre, he swings straight 
down the centre of the road, and right through the 
Chinese soldiers. Without dispute they open a way. 
He chucks a not unwilling girl under the chin as he 
passes the Mongols, and he is good-naturedly hailed 
by the rest: ‘‘ Hello, Cossack! Why so fast? She 
has gone away with a lama.”’ And he goes a bit 
faster toward Urga. 

These Cossacks, terrible in war, friends and 
equals with the conquered in peace, are those who 
have held the Russian vanguard in this march to 


272 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


China, — the march which began when the two 
hatamans of Moscow, commanded by Ivan the 
Terrible, started in 1507 on their long tramp east- 
ward. The Cossacks it was whom Yermak led to 
the conquest of Sibir. Through them, in storm and 
stress, despite oppression and convict-gangs, with 
faults and failings, omissions and commissions, the 
advance of Russia has been the way of civilization 
where none could otherwise have come. 

‘Tt will mean much when a Russian railway fol- 
lows our trail from Kiahta,’’ says Alexsimevich; 
and André adds: “‘ They will all be glad when the 
Cossacks come to Kalgan.”’ 


Vil 


RUSSIA\IN EVOLUTION 

Ew times have come to Russia with the events 

that have halted her armies. The Slav, looking 
and reaching outward, has been hurled violently 
back upon himself, and he turns to look inward. 
The stream of Slavic civilization still flows eastward. 
But now held back at the frontiers, its tide is rising 
behind the impounding barriers and is lifting on its 
wave the level of national life. Its scour is under- 
mining here and there, its laden currents are de- 
positing and filling in the interstices of the social 
fabric. The struggle is intensified to achieve re- 
presentative government, to secure administrative 
reform, to relieve the distress of the peasantry. The 
people are in evolutionary throes and are sweeping 
forward in the arts of peace, in the science of gov- 
ernment, and in the myriad lines of internal develop- 
ment. 

The movements of empire-advance have been 
noted because they have been conspicuously visual- 
ized. But the economic and social growth have 
been only slightly regarded by our western world, 
intent upon great events, crises, conflicts lost and 
won. The seizure of a hamlet in Manchuria has — 
obscured the founding of twenty cities in Siberia. 


274 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The continent-cleaving Siberian Railway has now 
revealed, in the Russian occupation of northern 
Asia, not an exploiting colonial enterprise, but a 
race-movement akin to the European invasion of 
our Aryan ancestors. The upward struggle of a 
people striving to find itself is embodied in imperial 
rescripts and armed revolts, in dumas and dyna- 
mite, where rival titans grapple for the throw. 
There is now therefore in the world a more earnest 
watching of this metamorphosing Russian people. 
What are the types of civilization, the beliefs, the 
manners of thought, the institutions that are to 
hold mastery over the largest area on the globe 
occupied by a single nation? 

To comprehend a people and the course of its 
evolution one must pierce below the surface of 
ephemeral and contemporary incident, and probe 
the primitive racial elements. Russia is to-day 
iceberg-like. The crumbling, upper ice, honey- 
combed by eating waves, is exposed ; but submerged 
and unseen is the massive blue block beneath. 
Because rotten surface-structures are obvious, many 
fail to appreciate what lies in the depths. There 
comes understanding for much when one sounds the . 
ancient sources in race-history. 

From the earliest times Russia lay across the path 
of incessant invasion from Asia. In 1224 the Mon- 
gols swept down upon the old Scythian plains. 
There were no mountain fastnesses in which the 
sparse population could defend itself. The followers 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 275 


of Genghis Khan, through the years that followed, 
destroyed town after town, — Bolgari, Suzdal, 
Yaroslavl, Tver, — devastated Volkynia, and Gali- 
cia, until all Russia, save Novgorod, was brought 
under Tatar rule. Their devastations cut off the 
population of whole provinces, and changed old 
Russian cities, such as Kiev, to hybrid towns of 
Asiatics. At Sarai on the Volga, for two centuries 
Tatar sovereigns ruled; and here from being pagan 
they became adherents of Islam. Russia’s foreign 
master was confirmed in a religion as antagonistic 
as was his race. To these aliens Russia gave humil- 
iating homage and paid tribute, and from their 
khans her czar received permit to rule. Thus in 
her infancy she had a foreign race, not as servile 
members of the humble labor class, but in the wild, 
fierce scourge of conquerors. 

Throughout this period many Russian princes 
married into noble Mongol families, and Mongol 
officers formed alliances with the Russian boyars. 
The Muscovite aristocracy had already grown into 
strong Oriental proclivities from contact with its 
southern neighbor, the Byzantine, and these be- 
came confirmed under the Tatar. One czar, at 
least, Boris Godunov, was of Mongol birth. Incess- 
ant war harassed the people. Alexander Nevski, 
of Novgorod, beat back the Swedes; but, abasing 
himself, he went to the Tatar khan with the 
tribute of a country too feeble still to resist him. 
By and by Russia began to rally and to strengthen 


276 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


her centres, Novgorod, Kiev, and Vladimir. Mos- 
cow arose — that small destiny-city where Simon 
the Proud, even in vassalage, dared to dream of 
unity and nationality, and took the title of ‘‘ Prince 
of all the Russias.’’ His grandson made the first 
great stand against the Mongols and won in the 
field of Tula, which, with the fights of Alexander 
Nevski, gives to chroniclers and bards their early 
Russian ballads, or bilint. Moscow, punished 
cruelly, was razed almost to the ground. But the 
Bear was aroused and goaded into desperation. 
Russia reeled to her feet, and for nearly a hundred 
years she fought, she lost, she fell ; but she rose again 
and fought on, until at last the power of the Tatar 
terror was broken and the tyrant was driven over 
her border. Still, for a hundred years more, she was 
forcing back his inroads, and rescuing the winding 
trains of her children, toiling over the southern 
steppes to be sold as slaves at Kaffa. This was 
Russia in the last quarter of the sixteenth century. 

That Europe was spared this, she owes to the 
Russian. Through those crucial centuries when the 
Slav, weak, torn, anguished, beset with foes around 
and foes within, was standing grimly at the perilous 
portal of civilization, Europe, within the temple, 
safe by his grace, was privileged to work up into 
light, to cement her nationalities, to effect the liber- 
ation of her masses, and to develop her intellect 
into the magnificent promise of a printing-press, 
a people’s Bible, and a Shakespeare. 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 277 


But to the brave warden of that portal there was 
not the sweetness and the light. For him were the 
seams and the scars, the mutinous passions of 
the strife. Long after the clouds of the Dark Ages 
had cleared from the face of western Europe, they 
hung over Russia. The Slav was back in his Dark 
Ages yet, heir only to a barbaric experience. Here 
he must start, where Europe had started nearly a 
thousand years before, where America, in the favor 
of Providence, was never to be called upon to start. 
For him were the memories of subjection and the 
blood of contention; but also, in relief, to him were 
the stolid patience and endurance which were to 
serve him so well. He groped along in the shadow 
until the coming of the great Peter. 

But now arose a man. He, too, had dreamed 
the dream of empire, — vast, masterful. He set 
about making his dream real. He found Russia a 
small inland state, torn by faction, barbarian, and 
Oriental. Though himself the descendant of a long 
line of Byzantine kings, half monk, half emperor, he 
saw with the insight of genius, and he knew that 
that way did not lie greatness. Therefore fully and 
fiercely he broke with the past and set himself to the 
future. 

Between him and that future stood the Strelitz. 
The walls of the Kremlin, and the Red Square told 
the doom of their barring conservatism. Ke warred 
with the Turk, he fought the Cossack, he routed the 
Swedes, again and again, taking whole provinces on 


278 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


his Baltic outlet and securing the coveted Neva. 
He embroiled himself with Persia, and through 
Baku opened a way to the Caspian. Then, with a 
high hand, he swept out the customs that made for 
Orientalism. He broke the seclusion of women, the 
prostrations, banished the caftan, the beard, and 
the flowing robes. He lifted his people bodily 
and violently out of their past, and set them down 
face-front to a new order. The Russia he had 
received a province, he left an empire. The Russia 
he had received Asiatic, he left European, and 
already a force in Europe. And when arose one of 
his own blood — a reversal — who would undo the 
herculean labor of this master-builder, who would 
give back to Sweden those priceless, wave-washed 
Baltic provinces, and, restoring the capital to Mos- 
cow, return to an Oriental estate, the patriot was 
stronger than the father, and at the price of: his 
son’s life he bought the progress of Russia. Here in 
this man, who died in 1725, we can truly say that 
Modern Russia begins. 

Through this skeleton history can be traced the 
structure of the modern state, as in the struggle for 
survival may be found the root and early warrant 
of her governmental system. Every element, physi- 
cal and ethnic, was, and still is, a handicap. Russia 
is not protected by the ramparts of the sea; she is 
surrounded on all sides by nations with whom her 
history has been that of perennial conflict. In place 
of a compacted, well-peopled country, she has an 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 279 


empire extended gradually from frozen Nova 
Zembla to Afghanistan, from the Danube mouth 
to Behring’s arctic sea. She is a land of many dis- 
tinct peoples, as foreign to each other as Lithuan- 
ians and wild Kirghis; as alien in religion as 
Catholic and Mohammedan. She is divided into 
one knows not how many tribes, numbers of them 
completely barbarous. Her eastern and south- 
eastern frontiers call for defense across vast and 
vacant stretches. Her northern and western borders 
are occupied by Finns and Poles, unforgetful forever 
of their own days of sovereignty, naturally and 
rightly jealous for the memories and the prerogatives 
that are its legacy. 

With the eastern problem living from the first on 
her immediate border, with her many tribes way- 
ward, Russia early strove to fuse her empire into 
national unity. In old Poland had been seen the 
fearful price which feebleness and disunion pay to 
fate. How much greater was the menace to poly- 
glot Russia, were her master-grip to relax! That she 
should hold a strong hand over the elements that 
ever threatened her disruption was the first national 
necessity. This supreme obligation to herself in her 
entirety compelled a firm, commanding, centralized 
authority. The mould that was to shape such metal 
had need of rigidity and unyielding strength. To 
meet these race-desires, not as a purposeless tyranny 
but as the fruit of a long evolving system, arose the 
autocracy. 


280 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The system reached its climax in the most ab- 
solute administration of modern times at the period 
of the American Revolution; the “‘Government 
Statute of 1775’’ meshed all things and all men into 
the institutions of despotism ; Russia groaned under 
the iron rule of a Nicholas, yet rejoiced in the belief 
that strength was there, and sure defense from 
domestic disunion and foreign aggression; then, in 
the Crimea, came a revelation of the inefficiency of 
the bureaucratic juggernaut. Despite the stubborn 
valor of the defenders of Sevastopol, despite the 
gallant efforts of the aged autocrat, the glory of 
Russia went down in the blaze of her city and her 
fleet. | 
The old régime had failed. Even the Czar, be- 
fore he died, could read the lesson but could not 
act. How pathetic the words of the failing monarch : 
‘“My successor may do what he will, I cannot 
change.”’ 

With the accession of Alexander to the throne 
in 1855, on the sudden death of Nicholas, came the 
first effective steps toward modern institutions. 
The young czar, a self-declared friend of progress, 
raised regally the standard of reform. All Russia 
rose to the hopes of his idealism. Corruption in 
office, which had before been rampant, was crushed 
out by the sheer force of public opinion. Pamphlets 
circulated freely, uncensored. Meetings were every- 
where held to discuss the varied plans of a vivified 
government. With a whole nation become to a 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 281 


degree transcendental, the Czar began his reign and 
his reforms. 

First of all for righting, as it was first in evil, came 
serfdom. Summoning commissions of his ablest 
advisers, seeking counsel of the proprietors and 
their codperation in an act of self-abnegation, the 
Czar proceeded to the execution of his great task. 
For three years every side and every phase of the 
problem was studied. Then at length with a funda- 
mental law which forecovered every detail of the 
situation, Alexander II put his signature, February 
19, 1861, to the great Ukase of Liberation. 

In Russia’s past there is much to answer for 
before the judgment-bar, in omission and in com- 
mission. Yet, giving but justice to ruler and people, 
it must be allowed that the measure which freed 
the serfs ranks, with Magna Charta and the Ameri- 
can Constitution, among the mightiest agencies of 
advance that mankind has ever known. A depend- 
ent population of nearly forty-six million souls was 
given liberty. The great act was accomplished 
peacefully, and the measures were executed without 
any trouble worthy of the name, in a spirit equit- 
able to the old owners as well as to the serfs. Not 
alone were the latter released from bondage, they 
were provided, one and all, with land and liveli- 
hood. They were given, in everything that con- 
cerned their local administration, entire freedom 
from interference by their old masters or by the 
members of the Administration. The righteous deed 


282 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


that the American Republic achieved nearly three 
years later liberated but one ninth the number of 
the Russian bondmen. It did so at the cost of the 
deadliest fratricidal war of modern times, and the 
impoverishment of one quarter of its people. All 
the work of the Freedmen’s Bureau through the 
Reconstruction period could not insure to a tithe 
of the Negroes the opportunity for a livelihood, — 
this that Russia provided inalienably for each of her 
liberated. To this day the American Negro in many 
places is under special civic disabilities more galling 
than those imposed anywhere in the Russian 
Empire. 

The protection of the former serfs was skillfully 
arranged by grouping them in self-governing village 
communes, to which land enough was given on a 
long-term repayment basis. In each, by an assembly 
composed of all the heads of households, periodic 
allotments of the common territory were made to 
the individuals. Compact economic units, whose 
property could not be sold, were built up against 
alienation of the land or poverty-induced peonage. 
The rendering of justice in local disputes was dele- 
gated to the peasant courts, — the only tribunals 
in Russia, save the National Senate, from which 
there is no appeal. 

The Mir, complete within itself, was responsible 
to the Imperial Government for good order and the 
taxes, and was secure from molestation provided 
these duties were fulfilled. Its inhabitants, united 


MOOSON ‘NITNAUY AHL 


Ou ve 











ij 





RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 283 


and independent, were able to resist any encroach- 
ment by their former masters or by neighboring 
landlords. 

It is not unworthy of note that up to the present 
time the liberties in economic matters thus granted 
have rarely been infringed by the authorities, nor 
have the village assemblies been exploited as a play 
in politics or to attain personal ends. While agri- 
culturally and industrially the communal land pro- 
visions have become insufficient, cramping, perhaps 
baneful, and no longer necessary now that society 
is in equilibrium, nevertheless the germ of free in- 
stitutions fecundated in the Mir, when dissociated 
from its communal features, is admirable still, and 
is capable of becoming the foundation for real self- 
government. 

Plans for provincial assemblies as a further ex- 
tension of local home rule had been under consider- 
ation since 1859. On. January I, 1864, an Imperial 
Ukase was promulgated instituting Semstvos in 
thirty-three governments. To this assembly, pro- 
prietor and peasant, rich and poor, elected their 
representatives. Each Semstvo was to appoint its 
own executive to carry out the laws it decreed. 

The jurisdiction of this assembly, though con- 
fined to local and non-political matters, was wide. 
Rates, streets, convocations, posts, sanitary meas- 
ures, famine-relief, fire-insurance, schools, agri- 
cultural improvement, all land, house, and factory 
taxes (those upon imperial as well as those upon 


284 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


private domains), were given into the Semstvo con- 
trol. It was granted partial powers over various 
other minor matters. It exercised practically all 
the economic and social functions of local govern- 
mental activity save what fell to the Mirs. It was 
welcomed as an epoch-making institution. The 
liberal press of the period hailed it as a living 
guidon of the upward way, as the blessed daylight 
of a constitutional government. 

So indeed it might have become. In the new 
Emperor’s mind there germinated a whole peaceful 
revolution. He had plans for new courts of justice, 
reorganization of the army, reform of the civil 
administration, and popular representative govern- 
ment, with an elected national chamber. 

But in the midst of his reforms broke out the 
Polish insurrection. The Czar had granted to the 
Poles elective councils in each district of govern- 
ment and in the chief cities; he had appointed a 
Pole his Minister of Public Instruction, and had 
made many concessions to their old language. Iron 
and blood crushed out the insurrection, but it had 
brought to the great Czar Liberator the conviction 
that liberty spelled disunion for Russia, and this 
belief was never to be dispelled. 

Upon the Semstvo assemblies, no longer uplifted 
by the old generous enthusiasm of the sovereign, 
pressed little by little the dead weight of executive 
officialdom. One by one their functions were lopped 
away. More and more the selection of delegates was 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 285 


transferred to the administrative officials. The 
marshals of noblesse became chairmen, the govern- 
ors vetoing overlords. Before the death of Alex- 
ander II, his once-cherished creations had lapsed 
from independent state legislatures into anomalous, 
semi-advisory councils, discussing roads, land- 
taxes, agriculture, and schools, and controlled by the 
land-owning nobles and the governors. Semstvo 
and Mir and Assemblies of the Noblesse became 
ornamental trimmings to the colossal edifice of the 
bureaucracy. 

The assembling of all the functions of govern- 
ment into the hands of the executive became again 
the guiding principle of this system. ‘‘The Council 
of State,’’ whose office was that of discussing the 
budget and law-making proposals, was the simula- 
crum of a parliament. The Senate, which gave 
decision on special points appealed from the lower 
courts, and whose promulgation of all enactments 
was the hall-mark of their legality, was a form of 
supreme court. But both hung from above rather 
than rested on a substructure. They were sub- 
stantially cut off from popular influences, their 
function was secondary action following origin in 
the executive bureaus. The Imperial Autocrat, 
deriving his right from Divinity alone, exercised, in 
addition to his executive functions and his duties 
as supreme commander of the armed forces of the 
State, those powers which by a segregation of func- 
tions would have fallen to the legislative bodies and 


286 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the judiciary. In this, the ten ministries were his 
main agencies. 

Under this system, legislation was inaugurated 
through the presentation of a project to the Czar 
by one of his ministers, or by outside petition, or 
perhaps by the imperial wish. 

The proposed enactment, if the Czar ordered it 
to be further examined, was referred usually to an 
Imperial Commission of Study. Debates followed 
in the Advisory Council of State, and the completed 
bill, as framed by this body, was signed by the 
Emperor and became a ukase, to be formally pro- 
mulgated by the Senate and enrolled as part of the 
law of theland. Interpretations of law were made 
by the Ministers, which none might gainsay. Thus 
was the legislative function absolute. 

In the provinces the three functions of govern- 
ment were equally centralized. A governor (almost 
invariably a general or an admiral) through his 
subordinate executive officers duplicated in micro- 
cosm the system of the capital. The dependent 
Semstvo was his Council of State, the dependent 
judges composed his Senate, the dependent Semski 
Natschalniki, his executive ministers. Into his bu- 
reaus came the details of provincial government save 
such matters as the villagers settled in their own 
Mirs. The troops of the district were at his call, the 
gendarmerie under his orders carried out the judi- 
cial arrests and the drumhead condemnations that — 
sent so many thousands along the road to Siberia. 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 287 


In the placing of these proconsuls and their sus- 
taining soldiery was applied the Roman rule, 
“Divide et impera.”’ The head officials of the pro- 
vinces were from distant parts, — the Governor 
of Warsaw from Tiflis, the Governor of Odessa 
from Samara, the Governor of the Amur from the 
Baltic. The Orthodox Cossacks of the Don were in 
force among the troubled Poles and Jews of the 
western governments; the drafts from the peasantry 
of Little Russia garrisoned Tiflis and Turkestan, 
and Siberian regiments watched the Austrian fron- 
tier. Even the popes sent to petty village congre- 
gations were generally of far-off origin. 

Though power was thus alienated from the 
people, the bureaucracy, by other agencies rooted 
deep in human nature, had twined itself around the 
daily life of society. 

Every ambitious man in his profession, as he 
succeeded, was marked for promotion. Not only 
to office-holders and soldiers, but to everybody, 
throughout the whole social fabric, were ‘‘ chins”’ 
or graded ranks given. Here for example is a selec- 
tion from one of the lists of the Czar’s Christmas 
announcements : — 


Appointed members of the Council of State: Privy 
Councilor Kabylinski, and Von Kaufman, Senator, Min- 
ister of Public Instruction, President of the Supreme 
Court. 

Decorated with the St. Stanislaus Order, First Class: 
Major-General Hippolyt Grigerasch, Director of the 


288 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Department of Physics and Electro-technology at the 
Nicholas Engineer Academy and School. 

Decorated with the St. Vladimir Order of the Third 
Class: Major-General Michael Hahnenfeldt, on the staff 
of his Imperial Highness the Supreme Commander of 
Guards in the St. Petersburg Military District. 

Valentin Magorski, Doctor of Veterinary Medicine, 
Chief of the Veterinary Staff. 

Alexander Pomeranzev, Professor of Aréhitecuire! 

Dimitri Sassiyadke, Governor of Radom. 

Michael Mardarjev, Censor of Foreign Papers and 
Journals. 

Advanced to the ranking Chin of actual State Coun- 
cilor, hereditary ‘‘honorable citizen’’ Constantine Popov, 
founder and director of the Tea Emporiums. 

Raised into hereditary “honorable citizenship” of the 
3d gild, the Archangel merchant Emil Brautigam. 

Given personal ‘‘honorable citizenship,’ Vladimir 
Ritimoun, Proprietor of the Wollner Typographical 
Establishment; Karl Volter, Captain of the steamer 
Emperor Nicholas II, of the Riga Navigation Co. 


When a professor from his books was called up 
before the highest provincial dignitary to have 
pinned on his lapel for honorable service to the 
Empire the Order of St. Stanislaus, it was hard for 
him not to have a warm sentiment for those who 
had so signally recognized his talents. When on the 
document which recorded the promotion of a royal 
prince to a colonelcy was enrolled the name of a 
tradesman; when a neighboring doctor was raised 
his step in civil rank, each felt the touchstone. All 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 289 


who had served well in their respective positions 
might hope to be on the honor list, and this was the 
most effective tribute to the weakness, the worth, 
and the ambition of human nature. 

In Russia, as in France under Napoleon’s iron 
yoke, there was a welcome to every sort of ability, 
and its elevation to posts of the highest trust. The 
aristocracy sought for was one of power, not that 
of a small birth-caste. A fundamental democracy 
ran through society. Save for a few of the Guards 
regiments, the army was officered by poor men. The 
Cossacks’ officers were chosen from among their own 
people and were state-trained. In the knapsack of 
every soldier was Skobelov’s baton; in the desk 
of every chinovnik, Witte’s portfolio. 

So stood the bureaucratic edifice, complete in 
itself. Here and there a popular embellishment 
was added, perhaps to strengthen, often to conceal ; 
but in grim reality it formed no part of the struc- 
ture. Thus the Russian Empire finished out the 
nineteenth century. With the twentieth the system 
had come to trial for its stewardship. 

In the great reckoning are elements both of good 
and of evil. The liberation of the serfs and all that 
went with the emancipation stand as a credit. It is 
a further vast credit that Russia has made, held 
together, and civilized an empire of over eight and 
a half million square miles, with a population of 
over one hundred and forty million souls; that to 
the internal development of her splendid resources 


290 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the Government has vigorously set its hand, seek- 
ing for her rivers unhampered navigation, for her 
canals larger passage, for her deserts great irriga- 
tion works. Already the Siberian Railway links 
the Baltic and Pacific; already on the southeast the 
tracks creep to the threshold of Kashmir, where 
some four hundred miles separate the Russian lines 
from those of British India. This gap once crossed, 
Calcutta becomes but eleven days distant from 
London. It is still another credit that, despite 
Slavic limitations and financial loss, in the face of 
Western invention and competitive leveling, the 
country of the cheapest telegraph and the cheapest 
railway rate was until recently not America but 
Russia. It is a credit that the public land has been 
put so efficiently and generously at the disposal of 
the people, that any emigrant expressing a genuine 
purpose of settling will be given, wherever he may 
select it in Siberia, a liberal homestead, and he will 
be conveyed to it over the Trans-Siberian Railway 
for asum less than the cost. He is not only allotted 
his homestead, but he is supplied with seed, grain, 
tools, and advances for his first years of marketing. 

It is again a credit that the governmental attitude 
to the industrial classes has not been one of oppres- 
sion. True, work-hours are unrighteously long and 
certain strikes have been put down arbitrarily. 
Still the Russian labor laws and arrangements for 
the settlement of labor difficulties are in many fea- 
tures conspicuously statesmanlike and just. Some 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 291 


years since, a body of Belgian miners, fifty or more, 
with their families, were transferred from the col- 
lieries of the Meuse to the Donetz Basin. Recently 
these miners, at a meeting of the directors’ board, 
presented a memorial to this purport: ‘‘ How happy 
are we who are no more in Belgium, but who live 
and work in Russia! No longer must we support 
the socialistic committee. On the day of pay we 
put our hands in our pockets and have it for our 
wives and children.” 

The other side of the ledger is, however, not 
without weighty items. While no system of govern- 
ment can legislate prosperity, the public welfare 
is rightfully the first test, as it should be the first 
consideration, of an administration. Despite her 
immense territories, her vast mineral deposits, her 
fertile soils, her navigable rivers, her abundant 
timber, all the natural sources of national wealth, 
Russia is very poor. The peasants have more than 
doubled in number since the allotment of communal 
fields that followed the emancipation, and they are 
in general want. Vast stretches, whole provinces, 
are subject to periodic famine. Millions of the 
people are constantly on the brink of starvation. 
Manufacturing is, as a rule, desultory, undeveloped, 
and, in general, unprofitable. 

The per-capita wealth of Russia is estimated at 
but two hundred and seventy-five dollars, as com- 
pared to Germany’s seven hundred dollars, France’s 
eleven hundred and twenty dollars, and England’s 


292 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


twelve hundred and thirty-five dollars. Thesavings- 
bank deposits reported for all Russia average but 
$2.75 per man, while in France they average $20.82, 
in England $15.00, and in Austria $15.68. 

The degree of administrative responsibility for 
this condition is of course not to be definitely laid 
down. Muchmanifestly is due tonatural conditions, 
national character, and historic handicaps; and 
some of the resultants would be the same under any 
administrative policy. Russia in her great area has 
had a sparse population. She has not, like her sister 
nations, and preéminently America, been able to 
lay the rest of the world under teeming contribution 
to her citizenship. She has had only her natural 
increase, and no such record as that of the United 
States has been possible. The Slav is not commer- 
cial, but agricultural. He has remained poor, and 
has had relatively very small resources to devote 
to what have proved our two greatest developing 
forces — internal improvement and education. 

It is, however, a matter directly involved in gov- 
ernment that, with this low standard of national 
living, there is the correlated fact of extremely high _ 
national expenditure. An immense budget of two . 
billion roubles, ordinary expenditure, is annually 
met, which the war-loans raised to a total, for some 
years, of over three billions. 

It is the general belief that a large part of the 
public funds is frittered away in needless waste, with 
multitudes of idling clerks and sinecure officials. 


SddAL NVISSNA 
ATAVLSNOO Nooovad 





RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 293 


Granting the benefit of doubt, assuming that the 
Administration’s corruption and inefficiency are 
exaggerated, and supposing that the public money 
is in the main honestly and productively spent, it is 
still a very serious question if any public service 
rendered by the agents of Government can corre- 
spond to or justify the immense burden of taxation 
heaped upon a people whose economic distress is so 
terrible. 

The weight of the tax-levy crushing the peasants, 
whose improvident habits aggravate their want, 
is, for most, unescapable unless they follow the emi- 
grant’s road to Siberia. The rate-gatherer can take 
anything the mujik has, save his last coat, his last 
horse, his seed-grain for next year. He is, with fate- 
ful frequency, forced to hire himself out to whoever 
will use his services, and this during the brief sum- 
mer season which is so supremely essential if he is 
to attend to his own crops and fields. One land- 
owner relates that he has seen paid an average of 
five roubles ($2.50) a month for farm-laborers, in- 
cluding men, women, and children, during June, 
July, and August. 

Under the old system the method of rate-levy 
on the “souls” in a family weighed inequitably. 
Census revision was delayed in one instance, per- 
sonally related, by over twenty-three years. A fam- 
ily taxed, twenty-three years before, on a father, 
four brothers, and two adult sons, — seven souls, 
—was still assessed for seven males, whether the 


2904 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


family had increased to twenty, or been reduced 
to one. Each member of the household was re- 
sponsible for the total. 

It is related that whole families in Samara, re- 
duced by the fearful cholera epidemic of some years 
back from scores of men to a dozen or ten, had to 
leave their home-country for Siberia to escape the 
load of their dead brothers. 

Discussing the economic loss of the years of mili- 
tary service, one of the country nobles related an 
incident. He told of ordering the dead leaves and 
branches cleared out of his lake. Ordinarily, he 
said, he did not go near the work or let the peasants 
come near his chateau, for there was a good deal of 
class-hostility where he lives. But he was interested 
in the lake because the branches were killing some 
specially cherished fish, so he went down through 
the woods and was surprised to see nobody work- 
ing. All the men were crowded round a peasant 
whom he had cited as an example of those who, 
though unlettered, had great capacity. This man 
had served seven years in the navy and could neither 
read nor write,a commentary upon what the service 
training was. He was declaiming on politics, and 
the squire stepped behind a tree, for the peasant 
spoke musically and well. The man was telling 
about his naval service: ‘‘Seven years on the boats 
I have been, brothers, and every three months I got 
ninety kopecks to buy a string for the crucifix and 
to cut my hair. I had no money for tobacco, none 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 295 


to send home to my wife in all this time, and I came 
home without a kopeck. Seven years of my life I 
have given to the Czar. What has he given me? 
What has he given you?”’ The landowner stepped 
from behind the tree and faced the group of startled 
peasants. ‘‘ You have heard, your honor? Well it is 
true, it is true!”’ 

The measure which under existing land-conditions 
would most directly raise the standard of life is the 
improvement of the medieval agricultural system, 
and this depends upon the intelligence of the people 
at large. Scientific farming needs technical know- 
ledge, yet of the great sums collected, a very small 
portion goes to education. The Nation spends for 
it but forty-three million roubles, the Semstvos but 
twenty million roubles, or together one eighth of 
the military budget. 

A tedious, inefficient course in Slavonic, with the 
prayer-books as text, a smattering of modern Rus- 
sian, sometimes mathematics as far as multiplica- 
tion and division, — this is the state education of 
the privileged few of the peasants’ children. What- 
ever small amount of real knowledge is gained is 
quickly submerged in the ocean of ignorance at 
home. The percentage of illiteracy is very great. 
The record gives Switzerland five, Germany seven, 
Great Britain ten, France fifteen, Russia eighty- 
four. 

It is argued that for the bulk of the population, 
under existing material conditions, schools are of 


296 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


small use. The lack, in the general poverty, of the 
very primary materials, — paper, pencils, books; 
of proper shoes and clothes; the unsuitableness of 
the houses of the peasants as places for the children 
to prepare their lessons in, with no spot to put their 
books or to do their tasks and with no available 
light — all these things strike at the very root of 
education. The population must be raised econom- 
ically to the point where the elementals of existence 
are assured, before the incidental costs of schools 
can be met by the peasantry. However, there has 
been coming to Russia during the last generation, in 
a great wave, the kind of education that made the 
American West — the education of expansion, of 
the founding of towns, the planting of new indus- 
tries, the building of new railroads, the opening of 
better navigation-routes, the enlistment of foreign 
capital; all the intelligence and enlightenment that 
attends a real industrial, commercial, and material 
quickening. 

Beyond these social and economic factors a large 
count is set against the bureaucratic system for the 
conduct of administration. The suppression of per- 
sonal liberty, of freedom of speech, the abuse of 
power by arbitrary officials, remorseless repression, 
ruthlessly carried out, racial oppression, frightful 
cruelty in the prisons and exile stations;—it is 
a terrible indictment that has been drawn. The 
close of the Japanese War opened a new ‘‘Smutnoe 
Vremya,” or time of trouble. Industrial wars, riots 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 297 


in Baku, uprisings in the Caucasus, seizure of cities 
by Social Democrats,—so went the disturbances 
throughout Russia, the white terror above grappling 
with the red terror beneath. 

The situation which the forces of order were 
required to meet was extraordinary. The balance- 
wheel of the human mind, and all sense of propor- 
tion among classes of the people, seemed at times to 
be lost. Barbaric as the administration condemna- 
tions undoubtedly were, the individuals were not 
infrequently innocent only by curious standards. 
In a broad view one must confess that on both 
sides were rights and wrongs. The system, far more 
than individuals, was at fault. But while a system 
so linked to violenceand oppression could not longer 
be suffered, the way out could not come through 
yielding to men in insurrection. 

Salvation lay along the path that the Emperor 
opened. His rescript of October 17, 1905, pro- 
claimed a National Duma. 

The pregnant clauses in the summons to a na- 
tional legislature were these : — 


We direct the Government to carry out our inflexible 
will in the following manner: — 

1. To grant the population the immutable foundation 
of civic liberty based on real inviolability of the person 
and freedom of conscience, speech, union, and association. 

2. To call to participation in the Duma those classes 
of the population now completely deprived of electoral 
rights. 


298 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


3. To establish it as an immutable rule that no law can 
come into force without the approval of the State Duma. 


The ebullition of sentiment that followed these 
decrees was extraordinary. All the bitterness and 
discontent that had weltered through the years of 
distress were metamorphosed into a glowing hope. 
Ambition and aspiration became a fervor. The 
delirium went electrically through all classes during 
the few following weeks of uncensored press and 
unfettered meetings. The educated were fed with 
every sort of essay upon what would be the result 
of the new order, and exhortation to keep spread 
the young wings for national ascension. Among the 
unlettered peasants, pictures circulated showing 
glorified cartoons of the risen Russia. One of the 
most widely distributed of these celebrated the Im- 
perial Svoboda Manifesto. The genius of the Slav 
stood forth: one hand rested on a tablet marked 
‘“‘Zakon’’ (Law), the other unfurled a banner in- 
scribed in blazing red letters, ‘‘Svoboda”’ (Liberty), 
below which followed freedom of speech, of form- 
ing associations, of holding meetings, of religion, the 
inviolability of the home, and amnesty for political 
prisoners. Peasants and workmen were grouped 
around, and above them stood an heroic figure re- 
presenting the Duma which was to halo all national 
activity with law. The rising sun, illumining the 
Tauride Palace, cast its glow and glamour over 
the prophecy. 

The ukase had gone forth to give the widest re- 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 299 


presentation at the polls. The command was fol- 
lowed out in a system by which every class had 
its own deputies in the nominating colleges that 
elected the Duma members. Among the peasantry 
each volost had two deputies; every thousand indus- 
trials had one, the nobility, the salaried clerks, the 
bourgeois in the cities, the Cossack stanitzas, the 
boards of trade, the universities, the Holy Synod, 
the aboriginal Buriat tribesmen, — each had spe- 
cial representation. Uninterfered with for the most 
part by officialdom, all Russia crowded to the polls, 
every man believing that his ideal was now, at last, 
on the eve of realization. The peasants who called 
for land, the workmen who wished for higher wages, 
the Intellectuals with their slogan of universal edu- 
cation, the submerged races with dreams of reborn 
nationalities, the ambitious with visions of power, 
the venal with hopes of plunder, each and all thought 
their hopes were to spring at once into the actual 
and the visual. 

In such a fever-time the men to whom official 
service meant the slow toilsome improvement of 
conditions by self-sacrificing devotion to the routine 
of administration, who could offer as pre-nomination 
pledges only earnest study and conscientious action 
on the legal matters presented, were passed byin the 
hot aspiring canvass for delegates. Those who be- 
lieved all things and promised all things, whose fer- 
vency of expectation fed the universal hope, whose 
preaching held that, the way once cleared, Russia 


300 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


could at a bound reach the plane to which other 
countries had so long and toilsomely struggled, 
those of fiery faith which would consume every 
obstacle — these were the men whom the people 
ratified and whom the nation sent to St. Petersburg 
for the first Duma. 

It was a band of hot heads and eager hearts 
that assembled, echoing their constituents’ desires, 
crying for all things and at once. They were satur- 
ated with the history of the French Revolution, 
they felt confident that their coming meant the end 
of the old régime, and belief in their own power was 
the pledge of the future. Their first official act 
threw down the gauntlet to autocracy. In the reply 
to the Crown, passed during their first day’s session, 
the final paragraphs read : — 

The most numerous part of the population, the hard- 
working peasants, impatiently await the satisfaction of 
their acute want of land; and the first Russian State 
Duma would be recreant in its duty were it to fail to 
establish a law to meet this primary want by resorting 
to the use of lands belonging to the State, the Crown, the 
Royal family, all monastic and state lands, also private 
landed property, on the principles of eminent domain. 

The spiritual union of Russia’s different nationalities 
is possible only by meeting the needs of each one of them, 
and by preserving and developing their national charac- 
teristics. The Duma will try to satisfy these wants. 

Sirs, the Duma expects of you full political amnesty, 
as the first pledge of mutual understanding and mutual 
agreement between the Czar and his people. 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 301 


It was apparent that if these clauses did not con- 
template the confiscation of private property, which 
was openly advocated by the peasant deputies, and 
the substitution of a ‘‘spiritual union’’ of Russia’s 
subsidiary peoples for the real hegemony, there was 
fair prima-facie evidence for thinking that they did. 
While a general amnesty would render less than 
justice to a large number of citizens, it would cover 
as well the bomb-shell anarchists, whose imprison- 
ment was as necessary to the protection of society 
as that of any other dangerous criminals. The 
tenor of these demands, the speeches of the deputies, 
and the avowed desires of their majority, brought 
matters to a crisis. Not alone the autocracy, but 
national unity, and the jurisdiction of the courts, 
were called openly and violently into question. 
When such a challenge is offered a government, it 
must answer or abdicate. 

Unostentatiously, the Imperial Administration 
poured troops into St. Petersburg from Kronstadt 
and the northern garrisons. The governors at Mos- 
cow, Odessa, Warsaw, and the big industrial centres 
were notified to concentrate their loyal regiments. 
The whole country was mapped out like a checker- 
board. It was now only a question of when the 
authorities would act. 

On the night of July 8, the troops in St. Peters- 
burg were called to arms. They marched with 
machine-like precision to appointed stations through- 
out the city. With the dawn every strategic point 


ee rae 
al . 


302 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


was held by the soldiery, and a battalion ringed 
about the deserted Duma hall. In the silence was 
read the imperial rescript. The first Duma had 
ceased to exist. 

The dissolution of this national parliament had 
come as a stroke of lightning. The venerable repre- 
sentative Petrunkevitch told how he was awakened 
at five in the morning with the news that the city 
was under martial law and that soldiers with fixed 
bayonets were at the Duma doors. Hurried con- 
sultations were held with groups of colleagues, and 
finally the word was passed to meet at Viborg in 
Finland. At the little inn there, the pressing crowd 
of one hundred and sixty-nine fugitive deputies 
signed their manifesto. It called for the cessation 
of tax-payments, the refusal of conscription, and 
reclaimed the freedom of Russia. But the insur- 
rection, the uprising in their support! Not a regi- 
ment came to assist them, not a city rallied to their 
call, not a Mir responded. For a few weeks the 
signers were free. Then the police took them, one 
by one. 

Dully unprotesting, the public received the news 
of the dissolution of the Duma and the arrest of 
the deputies. The majority of Russians did not 
want disunion, did not want the overthrow of vested 
rights. Each wanted some specialty of his own. 
Yet here was the resultant of each constituency’s 
crystallized desires. The people had accepted the 
leadership of those who had held out great hopes, 








LOUBIANSKAIA PLACE 


STREET SCENES IN MOSCOW 


‘ 1 y 4 1 


rede? ieee eRe x Ome lil 


Jan EET 


7: 4 
rs ite aa 


Tre : 
cE whee 
. 7 — ) q 
a iq! 
<Any. 
- a es 
‘ } ao wa. - ) 
a ae .¥ 
y 
* 
Fe ‘ 
ieee 
. 
js “~™ 
. “en 
‘ 
* 
7 ' 
) 
‘ 
oo 
: = a 
‘— 
> 
. 
. 
j 
‘ + 
. 
’ 
’ 
p : 
: + 





RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 303 


impotently. The Government had crushed the men 
whose power meant social and economic, as well as 
administrative, revolution. In the blow it had per- 
force shattered the dreams as well. 

Humiliated by the contemptuous condemnation 
of their chosen representatives, bitterly disillusioned, 
the people at large stolidly acquiesced in the ex- 
tinction. 

The voting for the second Duma, which followed 
some months later, was almost perfunctory. Those 
who had chronically wished to agitate, and those 
put forward by the Administration in an effort to 
pack the membership, composed the bulk of the 
deputies. Moderates, hopeful of progress with 
order, stayed at home, disgusted with both sides. 
The result was a second violent, wrangling Duma, 
offending like the first, and in its turn ignominiously 
snuffed out. 

The year 1907 saw universal disappointment, 
cynicism, and skepticism. In the literature, the 
lassitude of the nation was shown, and morbid 
despair reflected the thwarted hopes, the agonies, 
the confusion of the people. The bitterness in the 
Lazarus of Andreyev, the decadence in the Sanin 
of Artzybashev, mirrored the people’s mood, and 
the shadow of a dark destiny brooded over all. To 
fill the cup, the reaction, coldly triumphant, was 
able to bring the members of the first national par- 
liament before the bar for high treason in signing 
the Viborg Manifesto. 


304 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


In the stifling Hall of Justice in St. Petersburg, 
like a resurrection of the first Duma, sat the hun- 
dred and sixty-nine signers, grouped as of old by 
party affiliations. Each man was called upon to 
justify his actions. Many had signed the Viborg 
document in the belief that the people would rise 
in bloody rebellion, and they issued what was, to 
their fevered view, advice of moderation. One 
deputy after another stood erect to answer for his 
deeds. If the men had been carried from liberty 
into license, at least they had been fired by in- 
tense belief in themselves and in their mission. 
Impressive were the solemn declarations of those 
who expected nothing less than long imprison- 
ment for speaking out, now, a defiance to the ruling 
power. It was currently rumored that should the 
former President of the Duma, Dolgoroukov, just- 
ify his action, his penalty was to be three years’ 
imprisonment; the others would serve one; while 
liberty was reported to be the bribe for any who 
would confess a fault. Yet almost to a man these 
old deputies rose to declare that they still stood by 
all that they had done. 

‘““T did not care, and do not care if our action was 
unconstitutional. We found that we must rely,” 
said Nabokov, ‘‘on the highest law, the will of the 
people.” 

Kakoshtin, of the Cadet Party, and a professor 
in Moscow University, declared: ‘‘ Whatever. fate 
awaits us, it will be nothing compared to the suf- 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 305 


ferings of our predecessors who have fallen in the 
fight for liberty.” 

Three members of the ‘‘Group of Toil” declared 
that the first Duma would be an encouragement to 
the people to overthrow the present system. 

Mourontzev, and Prince Dolgoroukov were there, 
leading members of the first Duma. Petrunkevitch 
ended his speech: ‘‘If you open for us the doors of 
the prison, we will quietly enter with the knowledge 
that we have fulfilled a duty to the Fatherland.” 

Burning words these, but they waked not an echo. 
The Administration was in complete control of the 
situation. Repression was the order of the day, re- 
pression as widespread and efficient as in the days 
of Nicholas I; the autocracy, buttressed by an army 
which, however lacking in discipline and supposedly 
honeycombed by disaffection, nevertheless rallied 
still to the command and service of the master. 

At this time there was issued the call for a third 
Duma. As Prime Minister sat cold Stolypin, whose 
reputation as a governor-general was the reverse 
of liberal. He had risen by virtue of rigid efficiency. 
His best friends did not know his beliefs. He had 
dissolved both the first and second assemblies, and 
had done his best to pack the third. “I want a 
Duma that will work, not talk,’”’ he declared. 

The murmurers said that the Russian Parliament 
had become a farce; that the administrative officers 
were following to the best of their ability instruc- 
tions from St. Petersburg to deliver a roster of safe 


306 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


men; that those who had agitated unwisely were 
being removed from the likelihood of candidature; 
that the Senate, with its membership of retired 
officials, had so construed each provision of the 
election law that the unquiet classes were as far 
as possible disfranchised; that every influence was 
being used to make the third a “‘dummy Duma,” 
hopelessly manipulated into the reactionary camp. 

Throughout this time of shattered ideals and 
discouragement, a very small band of real believers 
still held high the torch of faith. Most prominent 
among them was Alexander Goutchkov, he who 
among the Moscow Constitutional Democrats (the 
‘‘Cadets’’ of the earlier times) had in a critical 
Polish debate of the party spoken and voted alone 
for a united Russia. 

When at length the third Duma had assembled, 
the so-called Octobrists or Moderates, who had a 
small plurality, prepared a reply to the Speech 
from the Throne. Very respectful it was, with no 
demand for general amnesty or suggestions of con- 
fiscation or national devolution. It read in part: — 


We wish to devote all our ability, knowledge, and 
experience to strengthening the form of government 
which was given new life by the Imperial will; to pacify 
the Fatherland, to assure respect for the laws, to be a 
buttress for the greatness and power of indivisible Russia. 


Unexceptionable, this, to the higher powers, save 
that in the preamble in the original draft, the Czar’s 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 307 


historic title of ‘“‘ Autocrat”’ had not been given him. 
A debate followed, and brought about the declara- 
tions which defined the parties of the third Duma. 
Bishop Mitrophane, of the Right, or reactionary 
party, rose. He said in the name of his group that 
the Address to the Throne must contain the phrase 
“Autocrat of all the Russias.’’ Lawyer Plevako 
seconded, threatening to secede if the proper title 
were not incorporated. Paul Milyoukov spoke hotly 
for the opposing Cadets, asking whether the coun- 
try was or was not under a constitution. He de- 
clared the new election law to be contrary to the 
original ukase and an act of force. Others of the 
Left, among them orator Maklakov of the Cadets, 
declaimed against the election law by which this 
Duma was constituted. They were not politic, 
these spokesmen, but harsh and dogmatic, yielding 
none of the courtier-respect that makes up for so 
‘much absence of real yielding. For the Octobrists, 
Alexander Goutchkov led the debate. His speech 
revealed that they operated, not with the bludgeon, 
but with the Damascus blade. They were of flex- 
ible obstinacy and opportunism, stirring up no 
sleeping dogs, bending to rise again. Goutchkov 
slipped adroitly into his speech the disputed word 
constitution, thus: ‘‘We do not believe that the 
Czar’s power has been diminished. The Emperor 
has become free, for the Constitution has delivered 
him from court camarillas and the hierarchy of 
chinovniks.”’ Thanks largely to his tact, the Octo- 


308 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


brists won. The Address, without ‘‘ Autocrat,” was 
passed by a vote of two to one. But it passed at 
the cost of self-separation by the right wing of the 
reactionaries, who withdrew. 

The answer of the Administration came sharply 
from Prime Minister Stolypin : — 


The manifesto of imperial power has borne witness 
at all times to the people that the autocratic power, 
created by history and the free will of the monarch, con- 
stitutes the most precious benefit of the political state 
of Russia; for it is this power and this free will that are 
alone capable, as the tutelary source of existing constitu- 
tions, of saving Russia in times of trouble, of guaran- 
teeing the state from the dangers that threaten it, and of 
bringing back the country to the way of order and his- 
toric truth. 


He called upon the Chamber to incorporate the re- 
cognition of the ‘‘ Autocracy.” 

A hundred members protested. Many of the 
Cadets walked out. To the Octobrists, barely a 
quorum, fell the humiliating duty of recalling their 
own address and of inserting, despite the scorn, the 
fateful word. So shaken was the group itself by the ~ 
conflict that of its one hundred and sixty members , 
but ninety-five united in the caucus that elected 
officers and committee members. Alexander Goutch- 
kov was chosen chairman, Baron Meyendorf, Priest 
Bjeloussov, and Radsjauko, officers. Among the 
heads of committees were Prince Wollanski, and 
Peasant Kusovkov. In spite of the stigma of reac- 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 309 


‘tion popularly imposed upon them, these were not 
unrepresentative men. 

The distracted Duma got slowly under way, and 
the Prime Minister brought before them his pro- 
posed policy of administration. 

M. Stolypin’s address to the Duma, November 
16, 1907, stated that: — 


1. The destructive movements of the party of the 
extreme Left have resulted in brigandage and anarchy. 
Order will be the first duty of the Government. 

2. Agrarian relief is the first necessity, and this by 
a system of small proprietors. 

3. Local self-government and administrative reforms 
will be formulated and presented to the Duma. 


Business got centred on these practical subjects. 
Discussions as to whether or not there was an auto- 
cracy gave place to famine-relief measures and rail- 
way-rate studies. The absenting delegates of the 
Left and Right, who had retreated to their tents 
in the wrangle over the Czar’s titles, and had left 
the forlorn little band of constructive Octobrists 
to carry on the work of legislation, now returned. 
The proceedings began to take parliamentary 
form. 

The Budget cameon, the Ministers of the Govern- 
ment presenting their projects for discussion. In 
the heat of debate, the Minister of Finance, M. 
Kakovtsev, exclaimed, ‘‘ Thank God, we have no 
parliament yet!’ The fact that an Imperial Minis- 
ter was presenting his budget to an elected assem- 


310 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


bly showed the reality, but the war on names rose 
up afresh. The Duma officially declared the Minis- 
ter’s expression unfortunate. He threatened to 
resign unless the house apologized. The Left again 
exploded in outcries, called out that the Duma was 
a farce, threw in their votes as more fuel for the 
flame of discord, and deserted the hall when they 
were in the minority. Still the little band of 
moderates chose the self-abnegating, unspectac- 
ular part, and gave the apology that avoided a 
crisis. 

But now came up a matter wherein the dispute 
was not over a name or a title, but a reality. The 
Government, upheld by the Czar, the Court, and 
much public sympathy, proposed a programme for 
anew navy. It called for the immediate allocation 
of one hundred and eleven million roubles, and the 
expenditure in ten years, of over a billion roubles. 
In the state of the country this entailed a fearful 
burden, perhaps the loss of the gold standard. The 
outwardly supine members, in rows like grenadiers, 
voted against the project. By 194 to 78 it was lost. 

The Minister of Finance shortly afterwards un- 
dertook to issue railway bonds without the Duma’s 
consent. With a rebuke, for which this time no 
apology was asked or given, his estimate was cut 
down by one rouble, and voted. The Amur Rail- 
way was authorized, though three hundred million 
roubles are its prospective toll. The sole remain- 
ing Pacific port of Russia, Vladivostok, is thereby 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 311 


linked with the Irkutsk and Trans-Baikal districts 
of Siberia, and so doubly insured against an eastern 
enemy. 

After a lengthy session the third Duma adjourned, 
but not by violence. It could show as results two 
hundred bills passed, a budget thoroughly scrutin- 
ized and ratified, and much faithful work in com- 
mittee. More important still, the Parliament, by 
forbearance and patience, had made itself a part of 
the machinery of government, and had shown that 
a national legislature did not mean expropriation, 
and a partitioned Russia. 

At the end, fiery Maklakov of the Cadets, he who 
early in the session had cried out that all was a farce, 
admitted that ‘‘ the third Duma has lost none of its 
rights, it is systematically extending them.” All 
honor to those whose self-suppression and patience 
won. 

_ The thin edge of the wedge had been driven in 
under absolutism by the third Duma, but little 
could one foresee that a half-dozen quiet blows 
would, during the fourth Duma’s session, bring auto- 
cracy to the greatest crisis it has encountered since 
it decreed a legislature. The heart of the situation 
lies in a naval bill submitting to the Duma mat- 
ters which the Constitution reserves to the control 
of the Emperor. Strangely, too, the Czar is him- 
self the abettor, if not the originator, of the sup- 
planting. 

In May, 1906, the Czar decided to create the 


312 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


‘Naval General Staff.’””’ One hundred thousand 
roubles a year were needed, and the money must 
be sought of the Duma. The first two assemblies 
being so violent, the measure lay in abeyance, to 
the great injury of the service. Since the regenera- 
tion of the navy was one of the measures made pain- 
fully necessary by the Japanese War, M. Stolypin 
had a bill drafted, in three clauses: one ratifying 
the creation of the ‘‘ Naval General Staff,” a second 
furnishing an annual sum for its operation, a third 
supplying a fund for contingencies. No feature of 
the creation, save the financial aspect, came at all 
within the legal jurisdiction of the Duma. Yet the 
Premier had the organization itself brought before 
the Assembly. 

The deputies criticised the institution, modified 
it, sliced the estimates. Assuming the judicial func- 
tions of a court of last appeal, they voted the 
money and passed the bill, which M. Stolypin then 
submitted to the upper chamber. In view of the 
overstepping of domain, the bill was, after a lucid 
exposition of the law by the ex-Controller-General, 
thrown out. ; 

The matter was next submitted to the Czar him- 
self, who authorized its reintroduction in the Duma. 
A second time the measure was passed and sent 
to the Council. M. Durnovo, ex-Minister, ablest of 
the Conservatives, and candidate for the Premier- 
ship, made a notable speech. He proved clearly the 
trespass upon the rights reserved to the Crown, 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 313 


showed that such precedents would build up an arti- 
ficial claim which could not later be combated, while 
the allowance of participation in one instance gave 
a warrant for demanding interference in any and 
every proposal. The bill was a blow at the very 
heart of monarchical government, and a degree of 
democracy not allowed even in republican France. 
But, defiantly, M. Stolypin held his ground. The 
anomaly was presented of Conservatives decrying 
the Premier for undermining the dynasty, with the 
Emperor himself supporting the culprit. Thus has 
the former government minority been converted 
into a majority, — the measure passed by the small 
margin of twelve. 

The reactionaries have bitter feud with this Pre- 
mier. He has, it is allowed, so enlarged the functions 
of the deputies by handing over to them, one after 
another, the vital prerogatives of the autocracy, 
that no later action can ever disestablish the Duma. 
The Empire is now governed through a unified 
cabinet; the important prerogative of appointing 
the governors-general has been exercised by the 
Premier, rather than by the Czar, since June 16, 
1906. Russia has marched far on its upward 
way. 

Great, however, is the task ahead. Of all that the 
Duma can achieve the country has supreme need. 
The agrarian question calls aloud for solution, and 
the peasants’ future depends on land-relief. The 
Emperor has given instructions for the sale of most 


314 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


of the Crown domains and those of the Imperial 
Family. The nobles are being encouraged to sell to 
the tenants, on notes guaranteed by the Imperial 
land bank. Firm and able hands must guide this 
improvement, promoting the division of estates 
left to run wild, but avoiding the pitfalls of threat- 
ened property-rights. 

Individual enterprise must be awakened, which 
will in the end bring about more scientific rota- 
tion and intensive farming. The old system leaves 
fallow thirty-three per cent of the arable land —an 
area equal to the whole ploughed acreage of the 
United States. In western Europe but seven per 
cent is fallow, and the value of the harvest per acre 
in Russia is less than a third that of Germany. The 
policy adopted in the Agrarian Law of November 
9, 1906, for the gradual breaking-up of the com- 
munistic Mirs, and the division of the common lands, 
at the villagers’ option, into freehold plots, is a wise 
one. In 1907, the year following the law’s promul- 
gation, 2617 peasants, in the government of Ekate- 
rinoslav had become individual proprietors. Under 
the Land Act of 1909 one million farms had been 
taken up for private ownership in the first six 
months of the law’s operation. 

Emigration to the vast untilled fields of Siberia 
should be carried on with all the efficiency of which 
the Government is capable. That this is in pro- 
gress, the figure of four hundred and ninety-one 
thousand emigrants for the first seven months of 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 315 


1908 attests. Fifty-nine thousand homeseekers were 
sent by villages which wished to emigrate thither 
en masse. But care and providence must follow 
the movement, and insure that the settlers are 
equipped with the means for safe and permanent 
establishment. 

The race-question calls also for a righteous solu- 
tion. The future must bring the repeal of the old 
bureaucratic laws of Jewish exclusion, and end the 
vicious circle of oppression and terrorism against 
this much wronged people. The chaotic finances 
of the Empire must be regulated by years of patient 
work, such as that of the last Duma, through 
whose agency there is now, for the first time in 
twenty-two years, a budget surplus. 

The Duma members, to whom these all-import- 
ant tasks fall, must plough the fields in all their 
armor. The autocracy is not their greatest enemy. 
The history of parliamentary government demon- 
strates again and again that in an ordered commun- 
ity authority gradually reverts to the national 
representative assembly. Little by little power 
slips away from the throne. In England, in 1686, 
the reign of James II could show Jeffreys’ Bloody 
Assizes; yet five years later the Parliament was in 
full and permanent control of the government. 

The preservation of the country from the nether 
chaos is, however, a mightier problem. Before the 
ship of state rides safe in the harbor of true repre- 
sentative government there must come a critical 


316 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


period when the administrative powers are not 
firmly clasped by the hand of either autocracy or 
duma. This hiatus-time, when iron repression 
ceases and sober self-rule begins, is yet to come. 
Those who must tide the nation over it are such 
as those pathetically few Octobrists, unpopular be- 
cause of their bending, craven-seeming policy, and 
because of the unfree elections that gave them place. 
Will such a group, when the crucial hour strikes, 
be allowed peaceably to pilot the vessel? Or will 
red-handed revolution wrench from their grip the 
tiller, bereft of the guidance of autocracy? Is it to 
be evolution or revolution ? 

One cannot deny that a free election to-day would 
throw out the toiling Octobrists and put in a mem- 
bership like that of the first Duma. These con- 
structive, unvisionary men are not loved, nor is their 
progress likely to make them so. They exist as the 
ruling factor only by virtue of election manipula- 
tions and legal interpretations. With this essen- 
tially temporary support taken away, the group 
would be powerless, for every indication shows 
that the people would not support them or their 
policies. 

Even Moscow, their former stronghold, fell away 
in the 1909 elections. There is throughout the coun- 
try an undercurrent of fierce demand for an imme- 
diate millennium, with Liberty as the guiding grace 
and some particular party as its escort. A song that 
has become almost an anthem, ‘‘Spurn with us that 


S4dAL NVISSONU 
watadad 


NVWA9I10d 


3 






s 
at) 
' 
hy 
hy 

{ 
. 

‘ 





tv? 


iy 


14 





RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 317 


ancient tyrant,’’ chanted softly by the school-boys 
to the tune of the Marseillaise, — this tells the tale 
of what is in the air, and in the blood of the people. 
The most poorly-suppressed desire is insatiate to 
hack away with one blow the abuses that have, 
through the centuries, rooted themselves deep in 
Russian society. The experience of the various revo- 
lutionary and terrorist movements proves that their 
votaries are capable of daring any death for their 
creeds, and of swimming to their imaged goal in a 
sea of blood. Let the conservative Octobrist group 
once succeed in concentrating power in the Duma, 
and then let a free election substitute for them such 
men as were in the first Duma, and the Russian 
Revolution has become a fact. 

It is a commonplace to compare the situation 
with that of France in 1790. There is, however, 
one fundamental difference. France possessed a 
numerous and economically powerful bourgeoisie, 
from whom political rights had been withheld. 
This class included many strong men moved to 
a unity of political desire. They were able in the 
first place to work up into a place of dominance. 
After the interval of supplanting terrorism, they 
retook by their own efforts the power which, save 
for the periods of despotic militarism, they have 
since maintained. In Russia the conservative mid- 
dle-class is numerically very weak, and its repre- 
sentatives are unable to seize and hold control 
themselves. They possess it now only precariously, 


318 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


by the external propping of weakening absolutism. 

Will Russia’s Octobrists, after performing the func- 
tion of filching power from the autocracy, meet, 

at the hands of a new Robespierre, the fate of the 

high-idealed Gironde? 

One cannot yet answer. But whatever the har- 
vest, the work of the third and fourth Dumas, car- 
ried out in harmony with the Imperial Ministers, 
has shown that the last dread arbitrament of social 
war need not come. Revolution is the final recourse, 
to be undertaken only if a political and social situa- 
tion is so desperate that all other means must fail. 
Such is not the case in Russia. There are adminis- 
trative abuses there. But governmental restrictions 
press rather less than one might imagine upon the 
plain workaday people; and compared to those 
of other nations, they are not exceptional save in 
degree. It is the educated and so-called upper 
classes who complain. Taxes elsewhere than in Rus- 
sia are burdensome and sure as death. Emigration 
to Siberia will give any peasant the legal privilege 
of escaping taxation, which in America is the pre- 
rogative of her absentee plutocracy alone. The 
exile system, dwindling for years past, has now 
been in effect abolished by the refusal of the Duma 
to make an appropriation for its continuance. The 
press-censorship is only the open operation of in- 
fluences tacitly accepted elsewhere — such as in 
the United States left the Tweed Ring so long 
uncriticised. The much-condemned passport is 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 319 


actually of no more inconvenience than showing a 
railway ticket, and it does not come within ‘‘ forty 
sagenes”’ of the custom-house inquisition which 
faces every American citizen on his return home. 

It is not an error to say that in many matters of 
individual liberty the Slav enjoys more than the 
American. In the treatment of subject nations, reli- 
able and neutral witnesses declare that Russia does © 
not approach the rigor of the Prussian bureaucracy 
in Alsace. Many of the Empire’s restrictions are 
those which obtained throughout Europe fifty years 
ago — abuses common to a certain stage of civil- 
ization, and of public opinion. These melt away in 
newer customs, for time is curing much. Once the 
chariot of progress is started, many evils right 
themselves in the natural and inevitable upward 
pressure, and many slough off unnoted. It is not so 
many years back that in America a black man could 
be deported to malarial lowlands more deadly 
than Siberia’s steppes; not so long ago that the 
English Parliament passed an act requiring all 
railway-trains to be preceded by a man carrying 
a red flag. Like the seignorial rights of Germany’s 
feudal states, anachronisms become outgrown, and 
fall away. 

In Russia, unfortunately, the onslaught against 
iniquitous human laws is overcarried into a blind 
charge against Nature’s laws, which no revolution 
canrepeal. The protest against dire artificial abuses 
is mixed with a rebellion against the curse of Adam. 


320 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


It is the fearful fact of life that the destiny of the 
majority is anxiety, dependence for daily bread on 
other men, grinding incessant toil remunerated by 
a bare livelihood, a barring-back from the fullest 
personal capacity and possibilities through poverty, 
parentage, environment, and lack of opportunity. 
The forces of Nature and primal competition put 
so many limitations upon every one’s action that it 
is hard to say which are due to the tyranny of men, 
which are the handicaps born of the nature of things. 
The cry for deliverance is rising equally in the work- 
houses of Scotland, in France, where thirty-five 
per cent of the land is owned by great proprietors, 
in the slums of New York City, and in the rice- 
fields of Japan. A government under the present 
system can but do its best to develop men’s capac- 
ities, and to give them a fair deal. All that the 
best of modern societies has succeeded yet in 
securing to the mass of mankind is the chance to 
get their sons the education which will enable them 
to vanquish some of the limitations, security for 
the person, and protection from robbery of the 
cruder sort. 

Capacity and opportunity can come but by 
slow degrees. When one sees the numbers and the 
types in the villages, men of latent capacities un- 
doubtedly, but swamped by the spirit of nietchevo 
and with all their enterprise sapped in the stag- 
nant communism of the Mir, he realizes the futil- 

ity of a sudden change and the hopelessness of 


RUSSIA IN EVOLUTION 321 


germinating by political pellet the leaven of pro- 
gress in the hundred and forty millions. 

Rulers may be changed by revolution. But the 
real quickening of the people to their great future 
must come and is coming by the slow, sure way of 
evolution. 


VIII 
THE STORY OF THE HORDES 


MONG people so peaceful and subdued as are 
the latter-day Mongols, it is hard to realize 
that the race has had a past which in tradition at 
least goes back to the infancy of history. According 
to legend, the Chinese, the first reputed offspring 
of the Mongols, preceded by three hundred years 
Egypt’s earliest dynasty. They antedate Abraham’s 
assigned epoch by twenty-six generations. They 
claim to have continued before Marathon a longer 
time than has elapsed from the foundation of Rome 
to our own era. Yet they yield not even to the Ro- 
mans preeminence of arms, for they won and ruled 
an empire in extent and population the greatest that 
has ever existed. Mongols have led the world’s 
mightiest armies; their hosts have carried the ox- 
hide banners over every great European state but 
Spain and England, and into every Asian country © 
except Japan. 

That the march of Mongols down the long way of 
history has been so little appreciated is the sword’s 
obeisance to the pen. Save for the mendacious me- 
moirs of Tamerlane, and a few Ouighour inscriptions 
in Central Asia, chronicles there are virtually none. 
So story has found a peg for the clipped tails of 


foo lORY OF THE HORDES: 323 


Alcibiades’ dogs, but scarcely a word for the deeds 
of those who won the world from the Yellow Sea to 
the Baltic, from the Persian Gulf to the Arctic. Only 
where the annals of the race have been written in the 
blood of the peoples they conquered are the events 
to be traced; only by assembling the alien and hos- 
tile evidences of the encircling nations can one shape 
the outline of Mongolia’s mighty past. History 
takes from the Confucian Book of Records the 
story of the earliest emigration to the east; from 
Herodotus the descent upon Mesopotamia and the 
struggle with Persia on the west. It gleans from 
the Chinese archives the doings of the Hiung-nu 
—the Huns; from the documents of the Byzantine 
Empire the descent on Europe of the same Mon- 
golian “Scourge of God.’ It culls from Arab his- 
toriographs the facts of the southern conquests of 
Genghis Khan; from Russian monasteries the tale 
of the northward march of his lieutenant Batui. 

The outlines of Mongolia’s career are patched 
and gathered from her frontier lands, yet silhouet- 
ted against the far recesses of time they grow steadily 
clearer and more colossal. 

In the year given by most as 2852 B.Cc., a tribe, 
whose earliest folk-lore and traditions point to an 
origin in the cradle of the Hordes near Urga, was 
pushing seaward down the valley of the Yellow 
River. Like the children of Israel, they were in 
constant conflict with the ‘“ barbarian’’ aborigines. 
This tribe became in due time the Chinese nation. 


324 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Through fifteen hundred years the descendants 
of the invaders wrought out a dimly comprehended 
civilization on the banks of the Hoang-ho. Be- 
hind the imposing national legend, hallowed by the 
mist of centuries and focused by images of their five 
Hero Kings, one may see the fact of strong, brave 
rulers striving for their people’s advance. A real 
statesman was the original of the demigod Shin- . 
nung, ‘‘holy husbandman,”’ the introducer of agri- 
culture, in whose honor every spring a furrow is 
ploughed in the soil of his temple courtyard by the 
Emperor of China. A father in the flesh was that 
‘“‘Nest-builder” who watched the birds construct 
their homes, and on that model taught his people to 
make the wattled and plastered huts one sees to-day. 
The mystic queller of disastrous inundations, Ta-yu, 
founder of the house of Hia, was the first hydraulic 
engineer, the dykes of whose successors embank the 
treacherous Yellow River. He it was who hung at 
his door a bell which any of his subjects might ring, 
to obtain immediate attention, and who would 
leave his rice to answer a call to secure justice. Kie 
likewise wears human lineaments, he who made a 
mountain of meat and a tank of wine, and then, to 
please a frail companion, had his courtiers eat and 
drink of them on all fours like cows. There is an 
historic background to the rising against the tyrant 
under Shang, who later offered himself as a human 
sacrifice for rain in time of famine, and a kindred 
note in the story of Chou-siu, sold to misfortunes 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 325 


by a woman whom he loved and immolating himself 
in his royal robes when the rebellious vassals were 
closing in around him. 

As the years pass, the histories become clearer and 
more direct, and the legendary aspect of exploits 
falls away. The Commentaries of Confucius deal 
with events as tangible and exact as Luther’s Re- 
formation: they give the records of kings, and their 
daily doings two thousand years before our era. 

In 1122 B.c., with Wu-wang of the dynasty of 
Chu, the Chinese nation emerged asa civilized state. 
It was organized on a feudal system, not dissimilar 
to that built up by Japan’s powerful Daimios. Un- 
der this single dynasty the Celestial Kingdom began 
a period of 873 years of development, marked by the 
writings of the great sages. Lao-tse, founder of the 
Taoist religion, with its watchword of ‘‘Tao’”’ (rea- 
son), but its quick degeneracy to forms and idol- 
worship, was the first of the Chinese philosophers in 
point of time. He was at the zenith of his repute 
around 530 B.c. Hehad a young disciple struggling 
through poverty to an education, ‘‘ Master Kung,” 
known to us under the Latinized nomenclature of 
Jesuit missionaries as Confucius. 

The youth eagerly conned and meditated upon 
Lao-tse’s abstract speculations; but, unsatisfied, he 
began the studies and compilations from the an- 
cients which to this day constitute the foundations 
of Chinese literature, etiquette, religion, ceremonial, 
and policy of government. 


326 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Confucius was at once the world’s greatest college 
professor and its most influential editor. His school 
instructed three thousand pupils in ethics and 
etiquette. His writings have influenced more minds 
than those of any other human individual, and 
his supremacy is the triumph of uninspired work. 
His moral tone is lofty, —as witness his “ Do not 
unto another what you would not have done to » 
yourself,” — but his life brought no great new 
message. 

“IT am a commentator, not an originator,” he 
said of himself. 

Mang-tse, ‘Master Mang,’”’ whom we know as 
Mencius, followed ‘‘Master Kung’ by one hundred 
years, applying, as a practical reformer, to the 
society of the day, the maxims of his enlightened 
philosophy, rebuking princes and giving to the 
Chinese world the last of its classics. : 

In the glories of the Chu Dynasty, China, the 
earliest offshoot of the Mongol race, reached its 
literary and philosophic climax. 

In Turan, now called Turkestan, and in Meso- 
potamia, a western division of the Mongols appears 
about 640 B.c. It is making an incursion into the 
declining Empire of Assyria, over which Nebuchad- 
nezzar is soon to rule. Nothing of detail remains, 
only the record of the devastating inroad over the 
mountain; but it locates at this date the south- 
western frontier of Mongol dominion. 

Scythia, north of the Black Sea, reveals them 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 327 


next. The sketch is drawn by the master-pen of the 
Greek father of history in his description of 
the expedition of Darius, 506 B.c. ‘‘ Having neither 
cities nor forts, they carry their dwellings with them 
wherever they go,’ Herodotus writes, describing the 
nomad foes of the Great King. He relates that they 
are ‘‘accustomed, moreover, one and all of them, to 
shoot from horseback and to live not by husbandry, 
but on their cattle.” 

This was the enemy against whom Darius planned 
a campaign, whose object was to free from the men- 
ace of the Scythians north of the line of advance his 
prospective expedition for the conquest of Greece. 
From the bridge of boats over the Hellespont, beside 
which Miltiades watched, the great Persian marched 
to the Don River, the nomads always retreating. 
Darius finally challenged the Scythian king to stand 
and fight, or to accept him as suzerain. To this 
message Idonthyrsus replied: ‘‘This is my way, 
Persian. I never fear men or fly from them, nor do 
I now fly from thee. I only follow my common mode 
of life in peaceful years. We Scythians have neither 
towns nor cultivated lands, which might induce us, 
through fear of being taken or ravaged, to be in any 
hurry to fight with you. In return for thy calling 
thyself my lord, I say to thee, ‘Go weep!’”’ 

All the Asian steppes were open to the ever- 
retreating nomads: Darius was obliged to halt. 
Hereupon, the Scythian prince, understanding how 
matters stood, dispatched a herald to the Persian 


328 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


camp with presents for the king. They were “‘a bird, 
a mouse, a frog, and five arrows.” 

Darius was at liberty to deduce whatever ex- 
planation he chose. He retreated, the Scythians 
hounding his army on. He found his bridge over 
the Bosphorus safe, and returned to Persia to 
prepare the Athenian expedition that ended at 
Marathon. The Scythians remained : they were left © 
leading their flocks as of old over the unconquer- 
able steppes. 

By these echoes of clashings with other nations, 
the first-known streams of Mongol outflow are dimly 
followed to the Caucasus Mountains and the Black 
Sea on the south and west, bounding Scythia ; to the 
Hoang-ho Valley, in which were living the meta- 
morphosed Chinese. 

But the rolling hills south of Lake Baikal, the 
source of the race-stream, still poured out fresh 
hordes, which periodically overflowed in roving 
nomad bands, harrying the plainsmen. While the 
feudal states of China struggled and fought among 
themselves, now coalescing under the ‘‘ Wu-pa,”’ the 
five dictators, now uniting under a Prince Hwan 
of Shan-tung into a temporary Chinese Shogunate, 
there came down upon the fertile lands and popu- 
lous cities wild horsemen, sparing none, burning, 
looting, riding away. ‘‘ The Hiung-nu descended on 
us,’ appears again and again in the history. 

At length, about 246 B.c., arose the short but 
glorious dynasty of Ts’in, under China’s king, Shi- 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 329 


hwang-ti. He was a man of action. He compacted 
a centralized monarchy from the many princedoms, 
drove back the nomad Hiung-nu beyond the Yel- 
low River, built the Great Wall, and by his glori- 
ous exploits blazoned into Europe’s vocabulary, 
the word China — Ts’in. 

In Sz-ma Ts’ien’s history, a striking incident, 
revealing the Great Emperor’s limitations, is graph- 
ically told. 

“‘Li-se, the councillor, said, ‘Of old, the Empire 
was divided and troubled. There was nobody who 
could unite it. Therefore did many lords reign at 
a time. For this, the readers of books speak of old 
times to cry down these. They encourage the peo- 
ple to forge calumnies. Your subject proposes that 
all the official histories be burned. The books not 
proscribed shall be those of medicine, of divination, 
of agriculture. If any want to study laws, let them 
take the office-holders as masters.’ ”’ 

The decree was ‘“‘approved.”’ The old books of 
annals, the Confucian Commentaries, the Odes 
and the Rituals, to the suppressed execration of the 
learned, fed the flames. The literati who protested 
were warmed, themselves, over the same fires. 

But despite Shi-hwang-ti’s signal defeat of the 
five coalescing tribes, and the eighty-two thousand 
severed heads; despite the victories in 214 B.C., the 
Hiung-nu Empire grew in power, until it extended 
from Corea to Tibet. 

The Chinese ‘‘Han’’ Dynasty, even under the 


' 330 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


peasant-founder, Lin-pang, who had -proven him- 
self a thorough soldier, was constantly harried. The 
loss of the old literature continued to be mourned, 
which argues some plane of general appreciation. 
The Minister urged the recall of the Ts’in philo- 
sophers and the reproduction of the burned books. 

‘“Why have books?’’ said the Emperor. ‘‘ I won 
the Empire on horseback.”’ 

‘‘Can you keep it on horseback?” the Minister 
asked. 

The literati were eventually recalled. Their sup- 
port was secured for the throne, and the Hiung-nu 
were kept back by art as well as by arnis. 

At the Emperor’s death, his widow, the Dowager 
Empress Lu, of Borgian repute, was still harder 
pressed by the nomads. Meteh, the khan of the 
invading hordes outside the Wall, ventured to send 
to her a proposal of marriage and tariff-treaty 
couched in Rabelaisian poetry. ‘‘I wish to change 
what I have for what I have not.’”’ He followed 
the verses with gifts of camels and carts and steppe 
ponies. In return his messengers insisted on a tri- 
bute of wadded and silk clothes, precious metals 
and embroidery, grain and yeast, as well as the in- 
toxicating samshu. These royal presents and tribute 
were really a trading of goods, a barter, and citizens 
of lower rank, in the fairs beside the Wall, were 
carrying on an equivalent. 

More and more oppressive became the demands of 
the Mongols. A band of beautiful maidens, a very 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES~ 331 


toll of the Minotaur, was exacted yearly. In one 
of the ancient Chinese poems a princess laments the 
fate that condemns her to a barbarian husband, 
a desolate land where raw flesh is to be her food, 
sour milk her drink, and the felt hut her palace. 

In 200 B.c., Sin, King of Han, marched against the 
Hiung-nu, only to retreat after heavy losses, with a 
third of his soldiers fingerless from the cold. Again, 
in 177 B.c., the Hiung-nu broke a treaty and raided 
across the Wall. A speech of the Emperor, in 162 
B.C., is quoted in the Chinese chronicles: “* These later 
times for several years the Hiung-nu have come in 
a crowd to exercise their ravages on our frontiers.”’ 

In 141 B.c., Nu-ti, the fifth of the House of Han, 
assembled a great army of one hundred and forty 
thousand Chinese, and marched against the Confed- 
eracy. This army, like that of Darius, penetrated far 
up into the nomad’s territory. Scarcely a quarter 
of them returned. But the invasion was not fruit- 
less: the Hiung-nu gave allegiance to China. 
Later, in 138 B.c., largely to turn the left flank of 
the Horde, the Chinese advanced into Corea. In 
119 B.c. another march to the district north of Tibet 
turned the nomads’ right flank. At length, in 100 
A.D.,a more northerly Tatar clan, the Sien-pi, came 
down on the broken remnants of the Hiung-nu. 
After thirteen hundred years of power this tribe was 
destroyed. Of the scattered nomads some remained 
to unite with their victorious conquerors ; some went 
south to Turkestan; a third group trekked north, 


332 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


and went over the great steppe. Subsequent to 100 
A.D., they are found on the east bank of the Volga, 
where during two centuries they temporarily dis- 
appear from history. 

The great Empire of China now existed unmo- 
lested by the Hordes, and after a few hard fights 
ruled Asia as far as the borders of Persia. Its out- 
posts almost met those of the Empire of Rome. 
Both realms were, about this date, in peace and pro- 
sperity. There is even a record of trade between 
them, the Chinese annals telling of an expedition of 
King An-tun, or Antoninus, in 166 A.D., to Burmah, 
from which his factors reached the Middle King- 
dom ; and of glass, drugs, metals, and game obtained 
overland by way of Parthia from Ta-ts’in, the Great 
Empire. Pliny writes of silk, iron, furs, and skins, 
caravan-brought from China. So moved the two 
empires until 376 A.D., when Valens the Irresolute 
reigned in Byzantium. To him came messengers 
bringing word of great alarm from the Danube. 
The whole nation of Goths were on the bank, beg- 
ging a refuge in Roman territory. 

‘Wild enemies, from where we know not, are 
upon us!” they cried. 

The Goths, who were to subvert the declining 
empire, were escaping from before the western divi- 
sion of the old Hiung-nu. Valens had the Goths 
ferried over the Danube, and the Huns established 
themselves in the vacated places of what is now 
Austria. 


sg 


wy 


eon 




























































































Ta errr 













































































Vatican) 


in 


by Raphael 


. 


inting 


THE MIRACLE OF ATTILA’S REPULSE 
(From a pa 





THE STORY OF THE HORDES 333 


Amid those hordes arose a leader destined to leave 
a memory in the sagas of the Scandinavian bards, 
in the Niebelungenlied of the Teutons, and a lurid 
trail in the annals of the Czsars. He called himself 
a descendant of the great Nimrod, ‘‘nurtured in 
Engaddi, by the grace of God, King of the Huns, 
the Goths, the Danes, the Medes; the Dread of the 
World,’ — Attila. 

A profound politician, he alternately cajoled and 
threatened the peoples whose conquest he under- 
took; a true barbarian, no food save flesh and milk 
passed his lips. He and his men worshiped the mys- 
teriously discovered scimitar of Mars, and from 
Persia to Gaul, from Finland to the walls of Con- 
stantinople, his armies ranged. Ambassadors went 
from his Court to China. The great battle of Cha- 
lons, in which, aided by the Goths, the dwindling 
forces of Rome’s Western Empire won their last 
victory, alone preserved Europe from his yoke. His 
descendants, mixing with succeeding conquerors, 
have remained until this day in the land that is 
called, after their dreaded name, Hungary. 

Back to the history of Sz-ma Ts’ien one must 
return for the next harvest of Mongolia’s dragon- 
teeth. The Tung-hu, whose descendants are now 
the skin-clad Tunguses that live far to the north, 
even up to the Arctic Ocean, came down between 
309 and 439 A.D. upon Manchuria. This occupation 
separated China from Corea, which, thus isolated, 
preserved for centuries the old Han dialect. The 


336 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


the hill-slopes, waiting to be hammered into spears 
in the Altai forges; China and Europe were as ripe 
for the spoiling. All that the Mongols needed was 
a leader. 

In a quaint chronicle of the Middle Ages we read 
of how he came. When the French took Antioch 
from the Turks, one Can Can ruled over the north- 
ern region out of which the Turks had originally 
come. To the old kindred in this hour of need 
they sent for aid. Can Can was of the Cathay- 
ans, a people dwelling among the mountains. In 
one of the valley stretches lived the Tayman tribe, 
who were Nestorians. After Can Can’s death a 
shepherd, who had risen to power among the Tay- 
mans, made himself ruler as King John. King John 
had a brother named Vut. Beyond his pastures 
some ten or fifteen days’ journey was Mongol; the 
latter described as a poor and beggarly nation, with- 
out governor or law save their soothsayings so de- 
testable to the minds of the Nestorians. Adjoining 
the Mongols were other poor people called Tatars. 
When King John died without an heir, Vut became 
greatly enriched. This aroused naturally the cupid- 
ity of his needy neighbors. Among the Mongols was 
a blacksmith named Cyngis. Ingratiating himself 
with the Tatars, he pointed out that the lack of a 
governor left both peoples subject to the oppression 
of the surrounding tribes. He got himself raised to 
the double chieftainship, secretly collected an army, 
and broke suddenly upon Vut. Cyngis sent the Ta- 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES = 337 


tars ahead now to open his way, and the people 
_ everywhere cried in dismay, “‘ Lo, the Tatars come! 
the Tatars come!”’ 

While the Turks sought aid of their kinsmen for 
the defense, the French King sent to King John’s 
reputedly Christian kingdom for help to his 
crusade. But Cyngis ‘‘Temugin,” the Man, had 
come. As Genghis Khan he was to open up the 
vastest empire the world has ever seen. 

In 1200 the young Temugin, in a great battle near 
Urga, defeated Wang Khan, whom modern research, 
vindicating the basis of truth in the old Friar Wil- 
liam de Rubruquis tales, has shown to have been a 
Tatar prince of the Nestorian Christian faith, King 
of the Kitai or Cathayans, in all probability the 
ruler known to the princes of Europe, through his 
letters to the Roman Pope, as the Christian poten- 
tate of the Orient, Prester John. 

Wang Khan’s skull, encased in silver, graced the 
conqueror’s tent as a first trophy. In 1206, sum- 
moning all the Mongol chiefs, Temugin took the 
title of Genghis Khan, ‘‘ The Greatest King.” 

His armies were turned next to the reduction of 
his own people, the nomad tribes of the Central 
Asian plains. As one after another was defeated, 
its warriors were incorporated into his growing 
army. When all these myriad shepherds and soldiers 
were gathered in, he directed his march towards 
China. 

The Great Wall was as paper to his host. Ninety 


338 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


cities were taken by storm, never one surrendering. 
For while to the kindred races which he had con- 
quered, and which furnished further recruits for his 
armies, Genghis was most merciful and humane, to 
a foreign foe he was indeed the Wrath of God. Once 
he was bought off from the invasion; but again he 
returned to the prey. A way into Peking was opened 
by means of a mine dug under the walls to the centre 
of the city; through it a picked body of Mongols 
entered, marched to the gates, and opened them. 
The savage host rushed in to sack and slay. For 
sixty days Peking burned, and five desolated pro- 
vinces of North China were added to the Mongol 
Empire. 

Mohammed, Sultan of Carizme, who reigned from 
India to the Persian Gulf, was the next objective for 
the Mongols. In the field, by valor and numbers, 
the Khan’s troops defeated all the Sultan’s armies. 
The walled towns were besieged and taken, largely 
through the skill of Chinese engineers. The whole 
great Persian district was harried after the custom 
of the Mongols through four years; for hundreds of 
miles the country was so ruined that to this day the 
old populousness and prosperity have never been 
recovered. 

The army of one of the Khan’s generals marched 
north into Turkestan, and subduing many Turkish | 
peoples, entered beyond the Caucasus the territory 
of the Polovtisni, themselves Mongols of an earlier 
invasion. The conquest of Russia had begun. A 


DHE STORY OF THE HORDES. 339 


Muscovite chronicle of those days illustrates the 
utter consternation and surprise of the inhabitants 
at this formidable and sudden incursion: ‘In 
those times there came upon us, for our sins, un- 
known nations. No one could tell their origin, 
whence they came, or what religion they professed. 
God alone knew who they were.’ The people gen- 
erally believed that the time had come foretold in 
Revelation when Satan should be let loose with the 
hosts of “‘Gog and Magog to gather them together 
in battle; the number of whom is as the sand of the 
sea.’ Indeed, in the old map of Tatary, by Hon- 
dius, the territories of these two fabled worthies are 
carefully outlined in what is now Manchuria. 

Despite the Tatarean theory of the Mongols’ 
army, the Russian chivalry gathered to the aid of 
the Polovtisni, and collected an army by the lower 
Dnieper. Defiantly they killed the ambassadors 
whom the Mongols sent. The wrathful nomads ad- 
vanced into the Crimea near the Sea of Azov. The 
two hosts met in the fatal battle of Kalka. It was 
the Crécy of Russian chivalry. Hardly a tenth of 
the army escaped. Ten thousand of the men of Kiev 
fell; of the princes, six, of the boyars, seventy, died 
on the field of battle. Matislaf the Bold alone 
made front, and he was treacherously betrayed 
and slain. 

The way into southern Russia was now open; yet, 
after their victory in 1224, the Mongols disappeared 
as suddenly as they had come. The hordes had been 


340 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


diverted to complete the conquest of China. For 
thirteen years they were swallowed up by the steppe. 
The son of Genghis, ‘‘Oktai,’’ had succeeded the 
dead conqueror, and had appointed Batii General 
of the West. 

Again there was heralded an invasion, ttks time by 
one of the outlying tribes of Khirgiz on the eastern 
border. The blow was aimed at the very heart of 
Russia. The old Slav ballads, or ‘‘ bzlini,” tell how 
Oleg the Handsome fell at Riszan. The Tatars 
entered and burned Moscow in 1237. Onward into 
the north rolled their conquest, town after town 
falling. At the Cross of Ignatius, fifty miles from 
Novgorod, the torrent turned, and, sparing for the 
time being the ancient republic, swept to the south. 

Against the cradle of the Russian race, the white- 
walled many-towered city of Kiev, Mangu, the 
grandson of Genghis, now marched. By multitudes 
the Tatars carried the walls. Fighting to the end, 
the last defenders went down in a ring around the 
tomb of the great Yaroslav. 

Russia was prostrate at the feet of the nomads. 
Her princes became vassals, some to journey as faras 
the Amur to pay their homage to the Great Khan. 
Without the Tatar Emperor’s letters-patent, no 
prince could assume his inheritance. When the 
envoy presented the documents, the nobles had to 
prostrate themselves and accept them kneeling. 
Each Russian city gave its tribute, even the still 
uninvaded Novgorod. Every peasant in Muscovy 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 341 


paid his poll-tax. Indeed, the supremacy of the 
czars of Moscow, when the Tatar yoke was at 
length thrown off, was largely due to the wealth 
which the Romanov family had managed to acquire 
and to hold during their term as tax-farmers of the 
Great Khan. Russian troops, supplied as part of the 
tribute, engaged in the Tatar wars, getting in one 
instance of record their share of the booty — after 
the sack of Daghestan. They were drafted on ac- 
count of their great size and valor into a body-guard 
for the Mongol Emperor in Peking, corresponding 
to the Swiss Guard of Louis XVI. 

While the conquest of Russia was being consolid- 
ated into a permanent Mongol dominion destined 
to endure for nearly two hundred and fifty years, 
Batui led his army on into Poland and Bohemia. 
He took Buda-Pest and devastated the country far 
and wide. The most alarming accounts preceded 
him, which are still to be read in the monkish annals 
of the time. ‘‘Anno Domini, 1240, the detestable 
people of Satan, to wit, an infinite number of Tatars, 
broke forth like grasshoppers covering the face of 
the earth, spoiling the eastern confines with fire and 
sword, ruining cities, cutting up woods, rooting up 
vineyards, killing the people both of city and coun- 
try. They are rather monsters than men; clothed 
with ox-hides, armed with iron plates, in stature 
thick and short, well-set, strong in body, in war 
invincible, in labor indefatigable, drinking the 
blood of their beasts for dainties.”’ 


342 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick II, who 
undertook to gather the powers of Europe to meet 
the danger, wrote to Henry III of England: — 

‘‘ A barbarous nation hath lately come called Ta- 
tars. We know not of what place or originall. A 
public destruction hath therefore followed the com- 
mon desolation of Kingdomes and spoil of the fertile 
land which that wicked people hath passed through, 
not sparing sex, age or dignity, and hoping to ex- 
tinguish the rest of mankind. The general destruc- 
tion of the world and specially of Christendom calls 
for speedy help and succour. 

‘Themen are of short stature but squareand well- 
set, rough and courageous, have broad faces, frown- 
ing lookes, horrible cries agreeing to their hearts. 
They are incomparable archers. 

“‘Heartily we adjure your majestie in behalfe of 
the common necessitie, that with instant care and 
prudent deliberation, you diligently prepare speedy 
aide of strong knights and other armed Men-at- 
arms.” 

Throughout Europe the dread was universal. In 
1248 Pope Innocent IV sent to the Tatars an em- 
bassy with money, begging them to cease their rav- 
ages. Failing, he summoned Christendom. Louis IX 
of France prepared a crusade. The fishermen of 
England could not sell their herrings because their 
usual customers, the Swedes, had remained at home 
to defend Scandinavia. Fortunately, the tide of 
western Mongol invasion had spent itself. After 


SAINOL ONIN AHL OL GVOu AHL NO 








THE STORY OF THE HORDES 343 


wasting the Danube district, the death of the Great 
Khan recalled Batui in 1245. 

Syrian archives reveal the Mongols’ next appear- 
ance. In 1243 Hatthon, King of Armenia, sought 
Mangu Khan at Cambaluc (Peking), praying him 
to fight the Saracens and recover Jerusalem. Mangu 
sent his general, who speedily took Antioch, spoiled 
Aleppo, and sacked the city of Bagdad. 

When the latter was stormed, Haloon, the Mon- 
gol general, ordered that the Caliph be brought alive 
into his presence. There had been found in the city 
a quite surprising booty in treasure and riches. 
Haloon asked why the Caliph had not used his 
_ wealth to levy mercenaries and defend his country. 

The Caliph replied that he had deemed his own 
people sufficient to withstand the Mongols. Then 
the Khan announced that the precious things which 
had been so cherished would be alone left to the 
miserable man, who was shut into a chamber with 
his pearls and gold for sustenance and perished in 
torments. There was no Caliph of Bagdad after 
him. 

Thus, almost simultaneously, there were con- 
quered by the Mongols, northern China, Syria, 
Russia, Hungary, and Poland. The stream of 
human blood that it cost is immeasurable. 

Of the first conqueror, Genghis Khan, an Arab 
poem says :— 


On every course he spurred his steed 
He raised the blood-dyed dust. 


344 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The lives of four and a half million people are 
reckoned as his toll on humanity. He had proposed 
to raze every city and destroy every farm of the five 
northern Chinese provinces, to make pasture for his 
nomads, and was only dissuaded by a minister, who 
ventured death in opposing him. It was he who 
ordered the million souls of Herat to slaughter. 
Batui, subduer of Russia, called ‘‘Sein Khan”’ (the 
Good King), is said after the Moscow massacre to 
have received 270,000 right ears. Following his 
fight with the Teutonic knights, near the Baltic, 
nine sacks of right ears were laid at his feet. 
‘Vanquished, they ask no favor, and vanquishing, 
they show no compassion.” ‘‘The Mongols came, 
destroyed, burnt, slaughtered, plundered, and de- 
parted,’’ summarizes an Arab; and the unimagin- 
ative chronicles of the Chinese tell without comment 
of city after city taken, and their inhabitants put 
to the sword. 

Utter ineradicable barbarity would, on the face of 
things, seem to have been the inmost nature of this 
people. Yet only a few years later, when Mangu 
Khan was ruling at Caracorum, the Court had 
become civilized. Forty-one years after Genghis 
Khan’s death, when the great Venetian traveler 
Marco Polo arrived at Kublai’s Court, the palaces 
and the organized statecraft at Peking had become 
a model of efficiency. The Mongols, not asa race, 
but in the sphere of their leaders, had become 
a real nation, not unworthy of its success. 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 345 


It is interesting to reconstruct the Tatar capital 
and note its development in half a century. The 
Minorite monk, sent to beg aid from the supposedly 
Christian Mangu Khan for the delivery of Jerusa- 
lem, wrote a detailed description of the city, Car- 
acorum. It had a circuit of three miles and in dearth 
of stone was rampiered strongly with earth. It 
had two main streets: one of the Saracens, where 
the fairs were held and where many merchants 
assembled, attracted by the traffic with the Court, 
and. with the continuous procession of visitors and 
messengers; the second chief street was occupied 
by Chinese, who were artificers. The town had four 
gates. In the eastern section grain was sold, in the 
western sheep and goats, in the southern oxen and 
wagons, in the northern horses. Beyond were large 
palaces, the residences of the secretaries. The Khan 
himself had a great court beside the city rampart, 
enclosed not by an earth but a brick wall. Inside 
was a large palace, and a number of long buildings, 
in which were kept his treasures and stores of 
supplies. 

Twice a: year the Khan held high festival, with 
drinking-bouts whereat Master William, a captive 
taken in Hungary, served as chief butler, officiating 
at the tree which he had devised to pour forth in- 
toxication. The ambassador of the Caliph of Bag- 
dad came in state, carried upon a litter between two 
mules. Before the Khan, rich and poor in multi- 
tudes moved in procession, dancing, singing, clap- 


346 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


ping their hands. The guests brought gifts to the 
monarch. Those of the ambassador of the Turkish 
Soldan were especially rich, but for quaintness the 
Soldan of India scored. He sent eight leopards, and 
ten hare-hounds taught to sit upon the horses’ but- 
tocks as do cheetahs. Manifestly it was no raw 
encampment of barbarians, this Caracorum of 
Mangu Khan. 

If the Mongol’s Court could, in 1253, show this 
degree of ‘‘ pomp and pageantry,’ how much was it 
exceeded by that of Kublai the Magnificent, visited 
and told of by Marco Polo. 

Kublai had established.a second seat at Shang-tu, 
and had built not merely a court, but a city. His 
palace was of marble, its rooms aglitter with gold. 
Art had come, and the ceilings were painted with 
figures of men and beasts and birds. Trees of all 
varieties, and flowers, were executed with such ex- 
quisite skill as filled the traveler, familiar with the 
best products of Italy, with amaze and delight. Six- 
teen miles of park, enclosed by a wall, embosomed 
the palace. Rivers, brooks, and luxuriant meadows 
diversified the landscape, and white stags, fallow 
deer, gazelles, roebuck, rare squirrels, and every 
variety of attractive creature, lent gayety and 
charm. 

The Khan rode weekly with his falcons. Some- 
times a leopard sat a-croup behind him, and was 
loosened at the game that struck his fancy. 

The tale runs on of the Khan’s silk-corded pavil- 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 347 


ion in the grove, gilt all over, and having lacquered, 
dragon-pedimented columns; of cave-born rivers 
running deep below the ground; of treasured gems 
and gold. 
No wonder that Coleridge’s imagination was 

warmed to his dream poem. 

In Xanadu did Kublai Khan 

A stately pleasure dome decree, 

Where Alph the sacred river ran, 

Through caverns measureless to man, 

Down to a sunless sea. 


London’s tortuous streets were to wait two hun- 
dred years for their first pavement, when Cam- 
baluc’s were so straight and wide that one could see 
right along them from end to end, and from one gate 
to the other. In the Khan’s parks, the roads, being 
all paved and raised two cubits above the surface, 
never became muddy, nor did the rain lodge on 
them, but flowed off into the meadows. 

In addition to civilization’s wealth and magni- 
ficence, the Mongols had developed a well-organized 
government. The Khan’s twelve barons exercised 
his delegated authority, as does a modern cabinet 
in behalf of the national executive. Cambaluc was 
policed by a thousand guards. The city wards were 
laid out, for taxation and government, in squares 
like a chess-board, and all these plots were as- 
signed to different heads of families. The military 
roads were constantly kept up by a large force. The 
Emperor had ordered that all the highways should 


348 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


be planted with great trees a few yards apart. Even 
the roads through the unpeopled regions were thus 
planted, and it was the greatest possible solace to 
travelers. 

The post, too, was as thoroughly organized as 
Napoleon’s. The messengers of the Emperor, bound 
in whatsoever direction from Cambaluc, found, 
every twenty-five miles of the way, a relay-station. 
Where the route lay through uninhabited deserts, 
the relay-posts were made houses of sojourn. At all 
stations express messengers were in readiness, as 
links in the system for speeding dispatches to pro- 
vincial governors or generals: they were equipped 
with the fastest horses, which stood fresh and sad- 
dled, ready for an instant mount. The men wore 
girdles hung with bells; when within hearing of a 
station came the sound of jingling and the clatter of 
hoofs, the next man similarly provided would leap 
_to his horse, take the delivered letter, and be off 
at full speed. The post covered a full two hundred 
miles by day, and an equal distance by night. 
Marco Polo states that, in the season, fruit gathered 
one morning at the capital, in the evening of the 
next day reached the Great Khan in Shang-tu—a 
distance of ten days’ journey. 

Organized charity was instituted by the Mongol 
Khan for Cambaluc. A number of the poorest fami- 
lies became his pensioners, receiving regularly 
wheat and corn sufficient for the year. The nomad 
levied as tribute a tenth of all wool, silk, hemp, and 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 349 


cloth stuffs, and had therefrom clothing made for 
the indigent of his capital. He had a banking sys- 
tem, paper money, a wonderful military discipline, 
advanced astronomy; and he opened the Grand 
Canal to the commerce of the ages. When one 
recalls the epoch at which all this existed, and 
realizes that at that time wolves and robbers dis- 
puted mastery of the streets of Paris; that the 
Saracens were lords of half of Spain; that Wycliffe 
had not yet published his Bible, and that French 
was the language of the English law courts, — the 
advance attained is hardly short of marvelous. 

In nothing whatsoever is the Mongol civilization 
more remarkable and contrasting than in its relig- 
ious toleration — the last acquisition of a civilized 
state. 

While the Christian King of France was engaged 
in earning the title of ‘Saint Louis’”’ by extirpat- 
ing a people of whose creed he disapproved, his 
envoy, the friar, came to a country which had at- 
tained complete religious liberty and toleration. 
There were ‘twelve kinds of idolatries of divers 
nations.”’ Two churches of Mahomet preached the 
law of the Koran, and one church of the Christians 
proclaimed the gospel of the Christ. 

He found his own creed treated with especial 
courtesy, the Great Khan subscribing two thousand 
marks to rebuild a chapel on the behest of an Ar- 
menian monk. He relates that the privilege was 
accorded to the Church of trying any of their number 


350 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


accused of theft; that the Khan’s secretary and his 
favorite wife were Christians; that a chapel was 
allowed them within the court enclosure; and that 
the Nestorians inhabited fifteen cities of Cathay 
and had a bishopric there. 

Marco Polo found the same indulgent tolerance of 
his religion. In Calaci, the principal city of Tangus, 
the inhabitants were ‘‘idolaters,’’ but there were 
three churches of Nestorian Christians. In the pro- 
vince of Tenduch, formerly the seat of Presbyter 
John, King George was a Christian and a priest, 
and most of the people were Christians. They paid 
tribute to the Great Khan. 

Indeed, if the Mongolian attitude toward armed 
nations combating in Christ’s name has been im- 
placable hostility, toward those of the faith who 
worshiped peacefully in their midst it has been 
uniformly tolerant, even favoring. The Nestorians, 
who brought their creed from Khorassan in the 
fourth century, had by 500 A.D. bishoprics in Mery, 
Herat, and Samarcand. The Perait Turkomans as 
a tribe accepted Christianity, and were unpunished. 
That the Faith was liberally treated in 781, under 
the ‘Chinese, is self-acknowledged, on the ancient 
Nestorian stone of Si-an-fu. Headed by a cross, 
there is graven in Syrian and Chinese the Imperial 
decree of 638, ordering a church to be built: it gives 
an abstract of Christian doctrine, and an account of 
the ‘‘introduction and propagation of the noble law 
of Ta-t’sin in the Middle Kingdom.” In Si-an-fu 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 351 


at this time there were four thousand foreign fami- 
lies, cut off from return by a northern inroad of 
fanatical Tibetans into Turkestan. 

Another monument of 830, found near the site of 
the old Ouighour capital on the Orkhon, and carved 
in Chinese, Turkish, and Ouighour characters, men- 
tions the Western religion. A strange sect of He- 
brews of unknown origin found as well an unperse- 
cuted home at K’ai-feng-fu, where the Mosaic rites 
could be performed. To this day a remnant sur- 
vives. 

The same tolerance for alien faiths marked Tatar 
rule in Russia. The Khan of Sarai authorized a 
Greek church and a bishopric in his capital, exempt- 
ing the monks from his poll-tax. Khan Usbek in 
1313 confirmed the privileges of the Church, and 
punished with death sacrilege against it. Kublai 
Khan took part regularly in the Easter services, 
and allowed the Roman missionaries to establish 
a school in Shang-tu. 

Indeed, reviewing the whole sweep of Asia’s re- 
ligious history, one can hardly escape the deduction 
that if the greatest race of the greatest continent is 
idolatrous, it is not the fault of the Mongolians. 

The Nestorian missionaries had an unsurpassed 
opportunity in the fourth century when their faith 
was new and burning, and the world was at peace. 
But stigmatized as heretics after a doctrinal dis- 
pute which had been settled by the logic of a 
street fight, in which Cyril’s Egyptian bravos de- 


352 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


feated the Syrian henchmen of the Patriarch of 
Constantinople, their mother church was driven out 
of the Roman Empire into Persia, where, cut off 
from the support of the main trunk of fellow 
Christians, their organization withered away as 
a lopped branch. The chief congregations in Iran 
and Turan were overwhelmed by the Moham- 
medans, until at length there were left only the 
dwindling congregations in Mongolia, and such 
communities as those on the Malabar coast in 
India. 

To-day one hears of interesting discoveries. Now 
it is of the old buried Christian strata among Turko- 
mans of Samarcand, of doctrines preserved through 
the fury of Islam fanaticism by families that have 
secretly transmitted Christian worship through the 
centuries. Next it is of Nestorian monks in Asia 
Minor, startled at being able to read the characters of 
QOuighour inscriptions, relics of the writings which 
their predecessors carried to Mongolia. But for all 
practical purposes the Nestorian labors, once so 
promising, are as if they had never been. 

Another supreme opportunity for Christianity 
came when Kublai Khan, in 1268, sent west by the 
Polo brothers for Roman missionaries to teach his 
people. 

“The Great Khan, . . . calling to him the two 
brethren, desired them for his love to go to the Pope 
of the Romans, to pray him to send an hundred wise 
men and learned in the Christian religion unto him, 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 353 


who might show his wise men that the faith of the 
Christians was to be preferred before all other sects, 
and was the only way of salvation. 

‘* After this the Prince caused letters to the Pope 
to be written and gave them to the two brothers. 
Now the contents of the letters were as follows: He 
begged that the Pope would send as many as an 
hundred persons of our Christian faith; intelligent 
men acquainted with the seven arts, well qualified 
to prove by force of argument to idolaters and other 
kind of folk, that the law of Christ was best; and if 
they would prove this, he and all under him would 
be Christians.”’ 

In the advance of Christianity the steps ahead 
have been made not so much by the conversion of 
the people as by the winning of their rulers, — Con- 
stantine, giving to Rome’s legions the standard of 
the Cross; Clovis; Ethelbert; Vladimir, who drove 
the whole population of Kiev naked into conse- 
crated water of the Dnieper; Charlemagne, moving 
against the Saxons with his corps of priests. Where 
these spoke for a hundred thousand souls, Kublai 
spoke for a hundred million. He was able to deliver ; 
it was the Pope who did not rise to the occasion. In 
all Christendom Gregory could find but two priests 
to go with the Khan’s messengers, and these turned 
back in the midst of the journey, alarmed by the 
prospect of its hardships. The Khan, who wished 
some religion, sent to Tibet, and received the Buddh- 
ist missionaries whom he requested. So China, 


354 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Mongolia, Tibet, and eastern Turkestan are Buddh- 
ist to this day. 

Yet once again the Christian opportunity came. 
The way which had been opened into China by 
Matteo Ricci had been followed by Jesuit mission- 
aries, until at the beginning of the seventeenth cen- 
tury there were two churches in Peking, some three 
hundred thousand converts in the Empire, and the 
favor of the Emperor Hang was with the Western 
faith. 

When Christianity was spreading with cumulative 
rapidity, the Dominicans and Franciscans came in © 
and denounced the Jesuit workers for tolerating 
the ancestor-cult of the Chinese, and for permitting 
God to be called ‘‘Shang-ti.”’ In vain the Emperor 
Hang, appealed to by the Jesuits, declared that by 
‘“‘Shang-ti’’ the Chinese meant ‘ Ruler of the Uni- 
verse,’ and that the Confucian rites were family 
ceremonies and not idolatry. The rival friars per- 
suaded the Pope to proclaim ‘‘ Tien-chu”’ the proper 
Chinese word for God, and to condemn all ancestral 
ceremonies. Thereupon, the Chinese Emperor, re- 
buffed and disgusted with all the wrangling frater- 
nities, condemned the Christian religion and killed 
the friars, save those whom he wanted for the Im- 
perial Observatory. 

One cannot but recall an early commentary made 
by Mangu Khan upon the jarring Christian sects 
whose rival dogmas have prevented, and do to this 
day, the common progress. 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 355 


“We Mongolians believe that there is but one 
God, through whom we live and die, and we have an 
upright heart towards Him. That as God hath given 
unto the hand fingers, so He hath given many ways 
to men. God hath given the Scriptures to you, and 
ye Christians keep them not. But He hath given us 
soothsayers, and we do that which they bid us, and 
we live in peace.” 

For some years after Kublai Khan’s death, the 
Mongol Empire held its preeminence by inertia 
rather than by strength. Each of the khans had his 
kingdom. Presently the nations that had been sub- 
dued began to rise against the numerically small 
garrisons of Mongolia. In China, the young Bonze, 
Chu-Yuan-Chang, finally organized a band of Box- 
ers, and succeeded in driving out the last degenerate 
Mongol khan from Peking. He united the old eight- 
een provinces and established the Ming Dynasty, 
the tombs and palaces of whose kings are still the 
most celebrated structures of China. 

In Russia, Dimitri of the Don gathered one 
hundred and fifty thousand men and defeated the 
Mongols at Kulikovo. 

If the old supreme monarch of the north had lost 
his sway, in the south the Mongol race was being 
lifted to its second period of empire under Tamer- 
lane, the Iron Khan. His was the history of the first 
Mongol conqueror repeated. The ant that Timur 
watched during his exile, which fell back and re- 
turned sixty-nine times before it carried its grain of 


356 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


wheat to the top of the wall, was the symbol of his 
early career. Constant obscure tribal conflicts, un- 
successful at first, led finally to a gathering of the 
nomads into a terrible invading army. The Golden 
Horde was hurled against Dimitri, defeated him, and 
marched upon Moscow. It was sacked with the hor- 
rors of Genghis’ days, and all Russia was ravaged to 
the Don and the Sea of Azov. One of Tamerlane’s 
armies traversed the Pamir into India, and, by the 
capture of Delhi, opened the way for the Mogul 
Dynasty of his sons, which was to endure until the 
Indian Mutiny. His Indian army, returning, swept 
a swath of desolation through Persia, Mesopota- 
mia, Syria, Georgia, and Armenia. Every city that 
was taken was sacked, and the event commemorated 
by a pyramid of skulls embedded in mortar. One 
hundred and twenty pyramids marked Tamerlane’s 
path through India alone. The Delhi pyramid was 
made from the skulls of one hundred thousand slain 
“with the sword of holy war.” 

Bajazet, Sultan of the Ottoman Turks, — them- 
selves sprung from a nomad Mongol tribe, — was 
threatened by Tamerlane on the west. In a great 
battle Bajazet was defeated. 

Alhacen, Tamerlane’s Arabian secretary, caine 
that the conquered king was examined by his master. 

‘‘Wherefore dost thou use so great cruelty to- 
wards men? Dost thou not pardon sex or 
age? 9” ‘ 

Bajazet might logically have responded with 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES = 357 


a “‘tu quoque,” but his position did not warrant 
iG 

“Tam appointed by God to punish tyrants,” con- 
tinued Tamerlane. He had an iron cage made; and 
locked within it like a linnet, the unfortunate sultan 
was carried from place to place, because, in the Ta- 
tar’s naively quoted words, “‘It is necessary that he 
be made an exemplary punishment to all the cruel of 
the world, of the just wrath of God against them.”’ 

The invasion of China was under way, in 1405, 
when Tamerlane died, leaving a renewed Mongol 
Empire, which stretched from the Hoang-ho to the 
Don, and from Siberia to India. 

Here again the descendants of the savage con- 
querors rose to the requirements of their sovereignty 
and obeyed the peaceful and humane maxims that 
each of the two great and warlike and pitiless ty- 
rants had bequeathed to his successors. They ruled 
with a fair degree of wisdom and a large measure of 
success. A descendant of Tamerlane was to build 
at Agra, in 1630, the most splendid monument the 
world has ever seen, the Taj-Mahal. 

In the century after Tamerlane’s death the 
Hordes split up once more, Ivan the Great of Mos- 
cow, having consolidated many neighboring prince- 
doms, with the nominal consent of his Tatar over- 
lord, at length seized the opportunity to refuse the 
paymentof tribute. The Mongol Khan had no longer 
the power to compel it at the sword’s point, and 
without a battle the Tatar supremacy was covertly 


358 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


relinquished. In 1480 the long servitude of Russia 
to the alien invader was ended. From this time 
the Mongol nomads appear hardly at all in history. 
They withdrew gradually to their Asian steppes, 
leaving in Turkey, in the Crimea, and in India, the 
kingdoms of their offshoot tribes. Russia and China 
still felt the raids of the horsemen, for the khans of 
the Golden Horde were yet not to be despised. 

Fernan Hendez Pinto, the shipwrecked Portu- 
guese of the generation after Vasco da Gama, was 
in China in 1542 when Tatars came down and be- 
sieged it. He saw ‘‘an emperor called Caran whose 
seigniorie confineth within the mountains of Gen 
Halidan, a nation which the naturals call Moscoby, 
of whom we saw some in this citie [of Tuymican], 
ruddie, of big stature, with shoes and furred clothes, 
having some Latin words, but seeming rather, for 
aught we observed, idolaters than Christians. 

‘“'To the ambassador of that Prince Caran, better 
entertainment was given than to all the rest. He 
brought with him one hundred and twenty men of 
his guard, with arrows and gilded quivers, all 
clothed in chamois-skins, murrie and green. After 
whom followed twelve men of high giantlike stature, 
leading great greyhounds, in chains and collars of 
silver.”’ 

When Yermak cleared the way to Sibir, and 
opened the path that was to lead to the Pacific, the 
Mongols were pushed south. Russians still had 
Tatars all along their frontier, but these were 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES = 359 


pressed steadily back as the Slavic race advanced 
eastward. The Tatar domains were restricted soon 
to the steppe country and Mongolia. 

After Yermak’s time the Mongol power sank. It 
fell further when the Manchus established their 
dynasty in Peking in 1644. So low had its estate 
become that even the old fighting instinct was gone, 
—all the passionate desire for independence that 
has been the Mongols’ birthright since the dawn of 
history. How had it vanished? Christianity had 
not come. Buddhism had come, and it was the toll- 
ing of the knell for freedom. 

The sum of national energy and the heat of the 
new dispensation were diverted into theocracy. The 
meaning of life, its value and its duty, these basic 
ideas which determine the ultimate activities of every 
race, were revolutionized by the new faith. To the 
Pagan the world was good despite its evils; struggle 
against environment measured the worth of man- 
hood and freedom was the supreme blessing. To the 
Buddhist, life was an evil in which the soul had 
become enmeshed. The path to release lay not in 
overcoming the environment, but in retreating from 
it within the citadel of the soul. Resignation, self- 
surrender, the yielding of this world to secure the 
other world beyond, — such were the forces which 
transformed the Mongols from the foremost war- 
riors into the priest-ridden, subject, unaspiring 
people of to-day. The supreme problem in the 
autonomy of China, and in the subjugation of India, 


360 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


is involved in the point of view of Buddhism and 
its outgrowth in character. 

In 1650 a son of the leader, Tu-she-tu Khan, was 
made chief of the Mongol kutukhtus, or cardinals, 
with the title of Cheptsun Damba. This monsignor 
began the Urga hierarchy of Gigins, or god-priests, 
which has continued until the present time, when 
the eighth Gigin reigns at the Holy City. As the 
powerful Tu-she-tu clan lost its vitality, Chinese 
influence made itself felt. This was directed in gen- 
eral toward the encouragement of the priesthood, 
whose celibacy and other-worldliness dovetailed 
with Chinese control. 

The Mongol khans, becoming through the years 
more and more unwarlike, had grown tired of in- 
ternecine feuds. They were at last won over by 
China to a nominal allegiance and the payment of 
a formal tribute, reciprocating which, imperial gifts 
of tenfold value served as artful bribes. Modestly, 
diplomatically, came King Stork, leaving to the 
local Daimios, seemingly undisturbed, their feudal 
sway. With the coming of the first Manchu gov- 
ernor began the present era of Mongolia. 

As time went on, the Chinese, more astute and 
cunning, took little by little from the careless hands 
of the nomad princes the reins of real political power. 
The native chiefs were wheedled into giving up many 
ancient rights over the vassals, as well as their 
general taxing powers. Thecelibate priests, who were 
draining the manhood of their idle but powerful 





D 


ARTE 


GLORY 1S DEP 


4 
wy) 


lit 


—* 





Hf 





THE STORY OF THE HORDES 361 


hierarchy, were subsidized and directed by the in- 
terlopers. They preached to their confiding coun- 
trymen obedience and submission. In the Mongol 
Gigin of Urga, the Chinese raised up a native power 
superior to all the old feudal lords, whose armies 
melted away beneath the ecclesiastical dominion. 
When the Gigin became in turn too great a menace, 
they caused it to be decreed that each succeeding 
incarnated Buddha must come from Tibet, and that 
his main powers must be delegated to a ‘‘ Council of 
Lamas.” 

In the train of the Manchus came the Chinese 
traders, polite, supple, calling themselves friends of 
the Mongols, offering their alluring wares on unde- 
fined credit terms which tangled the unsuspicious 
natives in inextricable usury. Peking-brought gew- 
gaws were paid for a hundred times over in the food 
and clothing which the natives kept giving to the 
compounding voracity of the debt. 

Chinese coolies pressed up the river-valleys, beg- 
ging land here, intruding themselves there; more 
followed, and ever more, until the best of the past- 
ures were filched away, and the nomads, in order to 
exist, were forced to trek to the more distant and 
barren slopes. Deforesting transformed into deserts 
whole provinces. The once famed virtue of the 
Tatar women is forgotten, and every Chinaman has 
his ‘friend’? whom he leaves behind when he re- 
turns to his native land. The big prosperous Mongol 
families, that early travelers noted, are no more. 


362 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Two or three children are the most that one sees to 
a yurta, and the population, owing to lama celibacy 
and the decreased means of subsistence, is declining 
from year to year. 

This is the people and this the land which sent 
horde after horde through centuries to conquer the 
world; where in half a dozen generations a little 
band of blacksmiths like the Turks could breed a 
nation that would dominate Asia. With narrowing 
means of subsistence, and aliens draining their 
small surplus capital, the Mongol race lies prostrate 
beneath the Yellow Empire. The grim Malthusian 
tenet that the world cannot give food for all its 
children falls short here of the grim actuality. The 
silent invasion of the Chinese has been as ruthless 
as was the march of Genghis Khan. The economic 
garroting of a race is what the world has seen in 
Mongolia. 

No longer are there men to lead or men to fight. 
Obediently and submissively the once fierce, ranging 
warriors have yielded to the artfully-imposed yoke. 
The army of unmatched cavalry has become a mem- 
ory, and a nation of fighters has become a race of 
timid herders, with little heart or brain. The sons 
of the old soldiers have learned to shave their heads 
and croon Tibetan prayers, and the fires of a peo- 
ple’s ambition are quenched in the creed that makes 
abstention from effort a cardinal virtue, and anni- 
hilation life’s supreme objective. What there was 
of virtue and of valor lies buried in distant graves. 


THE STORY OF THE HORDES 363 


Ringed with the bones of slaughtered captives, 
rusted swords at their sides, they sleep well, those 
old forgotten warriors. In poverty and hardship, 
priest-ridden and debt-ridden, decimated and de- 
generated, their descendants eke out their sterile 
days. But there lingers yet among them a half-for- 
gotten memory of the heroic past. The wandering 
chanter still sings in the twilight the old ‘“‘Song of 
Tamerlane’? — Tamerlane who will come again, 
they say, and lead the hordes once more to victory. 


When the divine Timur dwelt in our tents, 

The Mongol Nation was redoubtable and warlike. 
Its least movements made the earth bend; 

Its mens’ look froze with fear 

The ten thousand people upon whom the sun shines. 
O Divine Timur, will thy great soul soon return? 
Return, return; we await thee, O Timur! . 


IX 
CHINA 


ESTINY has bequeathed to his once subject-race 

the heritage of Genghis Khan, but whether 

its Manchu possessor can or cannot hold even his 

own birthright is to-day an enigma. The last few 

years have seen the gathering of the eagles, disput- 

ing the mastery of eastern Asia, where China stands 

against the world. Slav, Saxon, and Frank press 

in, upon the supine empire. Has this yellow race the 

manhood and the capacity to rally against them 
and retrieve its national integrity ? 

The cession of Formosa after the war of 1895 
began the partition. China’s defenselessness was 
then visualized. The revelation of her easy defeat 
set every predatory nation on the alert. Watchful 
for an occasion, which two murdered missionaries 
supplied, Germany, by clumsy but successful un- 
scrupulousness, seized Kiao-chow and two hundred 
miles of hinterland. Three weeks after the blud- 
geoned ratification of Admiral Diedrich’s grab, Rus- 
sia procured the signature of the intimidated Em- 
peror to the lease of Port Arthur. France demanded 
and secured the cession of Kwang-chow-wan, on 
the mainland opposite the island of Hainan. Eng- 
land acquired the lease of Wei-hai-wei, and con- 


CHINA 365 


tinental territory opposite Hong-kong. Italy came 
to claim as its portion Sanmen Bay; but this at 
least China found courage to refuse. 

Then followed a period when, backed each by its 
government, invading cohorts of promoters scooped 
in franchises and special privileges of every descrip- 
tion. The latter part of 1899 saw foreigners pushing 
in from Manchuria on the north, where Russia with 
her so-termed railway guards held the strategic 
route, and from Yun-nan on the south, where 
France was constructing a similar road of conquest. 
It showed four European nations so established 
along the coast that only by courtesy of a foreign 
government could a Chinese vessel cast anchor in 
some of the principal ports of China. It saw a Bel- 
gian-French railway driving from Peking into the 
heart of the Empire at Hankow; an American line 
started north from Canton to the same objective; 
an English line controlling the territory between 
the main northern trade-centres, Niu-chwang and 
Tien-tsin; a French society in possession of a great 
south-country copper concession; Russians with 
the exclusive right to all the gold in two eimucks 
of Mongolia; and an English syndicate deeded the 
best of the Chinese coal-fields. 

The partition was thus far accomplished. The 
continental nations seemed to be ready for all that 
they could get. The strength of Great Britain’s 
traditional position, based upon maintaining the 
integrity of China, was shaken by her lease of Wei- 


366 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


hai-wei, although this lease was to run only so long 
as Russia should hold Port Arthur. England was on 
the point of recognizing openly ‘‘spheres of influ- 
ence,”’ as is shown by the inferential claim to special 
British rights in the Yangtse region set forth in the 
official transactions of Sir Claude McDonald, and 
brought out under parliamentary interpellation, 
when a Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the 
Balfour Ministry spoke of ‘ British rights ’”’ to the 
provinces adjoining the Yangtse River and Ho-nan 
and Che-kiang. 

There was apparently good warrant for the gen- 
eral belief that in expectation of an impending par- 
tition a provisional understanding had been reached 
by the different chancelleries, regarding the share 
of each nation, England being allotted the mighty 
domain from the Yellow Sea to Burma and Afghan- 
istan, including all Tibet, as well as six hundred and 
fifty thousand square miles in China proper. In 
general, from Shan-tung iniand the valley of the 
Hoang-ho was destined for Germany; the district 
north of her Anamese possessions for France; all 
Mongolia and Manchuria for Russia; Corea and 
the province of Fokien on the mainland opposite 
Formosa, for Japan. Peking and the surrounding 
district, whose disposition was embarrassed by 
jealousy if not by scruples, was alone left for the 
Chinese. 

At this critical juncture, when the day of dismem- 
berment seemed indeed to have arrived, the United 


CHINA 367 


States came forward in behalf of the ‘‘open-door’’ 
doctrine, as a means of preserving the nationality 
and the integrity of China. In a circular letter to 
the Powers, our Secretary of State, Mr. John Hay, 
asked that adhesion be given in writing to three 
main propositions, appertaining to each country 
“within its respective sphere, of whatever influ- 
ence.’ These points were that no treaty port rights 
or other vested interests should be interfered with; 
that the Chinese tariff should be maintained; that 
no discriminating railway charges or harbor-dues 
should be imposed. 

America’s might, thrown into the wavering bal- 
ance, turned the scale. Great Britain gave ready 
adhesion. Though the responses of some of the 
other Powers were evasive, none was at this time 
willing to bear the onus of an adverse stand: each 
nation nominally accepted, and the movement 
toward partition was checked. 

To most people Chinese matters seemed settled. 
The preservation of a nation had been combined 
with the guaranteeing of a great free market; the 
orgy of grabbing had ceased. Russia, assenting to 
the open door, had promised to evacuate Man- 
churia. The special concessions, though secured by 
stand-and-deliver methods, it was felt would bring 
economic improvements and would furnish to the 
Chinese a demonstration of the beneficent results of 
Western civilization. 

It was recognized that there would be frictions: 


368 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


misunderstandings are inevitable when old ways 
are faced with new. The extra-territorial rights of 
foreigners and their converts, absolutely necessary 
to protect their liberties if not their lives, could not 
but create occasional unharmonious situations, in 
which the consuls would have to intervene. The 
severity of the judicial punishment meted out at 
times to rioting cities for harm done to the protégés 
of the Powers was to be deplored, each nation griey- 
ing at the atrocities the others had seen fit to per- 
petrate. 

But periodic local and temporary disturbances 
had been going on from time immemorial. Did not 
the Chinese realize, we reasoned, that their old cor- 
rupt government had been given another unde- 
served chance to try and march with the rest of the 
race; that this world is not the place for graft- 
ridden relics from the fifth century B.c.? The least 
we felt was that, thanks to the bearer of the “‘ Flow- 
ery Banner,’ the Chinese had been given a last 
opportunity. A self-denying Occident had guaran- 
teed the nation’s existence and had presumably 
earned its everlasting gratitude. ‘‘ Let China get up 
and do something — let it redeem itself.” 

A very small circle of Chinese shared this Western 
view, and realized at their true value the mights 
if not the rights. There existed among the literati 
at Peking and in the coast cities the rudiments of 
a foreign liberal party. Recognizing that Western 
methods must come, they had been in favor of ac- 


IVH-14d NI SLATAVI GNV 4OdIdd AHL 


Rayo 


BS ae 


A ae 
oy Fis 
eee gt 


3 mete 
= Ode di de te a de a aie 








CHINA 369 


cepting foreign improvements even at the cost of 
railway concessions and the violated dwellings of 
wind and water spirits. When this party won over 
the young Emperor, there began the period of 
foreign concessions. Reforms, too, covering every 
subject, from queue-cutting to postage-stamps, were 
inaugurated. 

The summer of 1898 saw the important edict 
which ordered the abolition of the Wen-chang essays 
and the penmanship posts, with the Emperor’s 
personal comment that the examinations should 
test “‘a knowledge of ancient and modern history, 
and information in regard to the present state of 
affairs, with special reference to the governments 
and institutions of the countries of the five great 
continents, and their arts and sciences.’’ A Bureau 
of Mines was established, a patent-office, schools, 
a scheme of army reform. 

The climaxing decree was the one abolishing 
sinecures. For the Emperor’s unreconstructed 
entourage this last was too much. Foreign aggres- 
sion had embittered to the point of unreason man- 
darin and coolie alike. The coup d'état planned by 
the Dowager Empress, and executed by the reac- 
tionaries, virtually dethroned the Emperor, exiled 
his advisers, and ended the foreign-encouragement 
reform. 

Indeed it was not within human nature for it to 
endure. From the point of view of the party of the 
second part the aspect of the whole foreign rela- 


370 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


tionship, even after the Hay Note, looked very 
ugly indeed. The fact of guaranteed integrity was 
obscured by the Jaissez-faire of the already con- 
summated grabs. The idea that gripped them was 
the humiliation of foreign occupation and foreign 
aggression. It was asif the Russians and the Eng- 
lish had just seized rival reservations on Long 
Island and the Jersey coast, commanding New York 
City ; as if the English had wrenched away Charles- 
ton; the Germans, Philadelphia; the French, New 
Orleans; and Cossacks were garrisoned in strategic 
points throughout New England. It was as if 
the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railway 
were manned and guarded by Slavs, the New York 
Central by Belgians, the Pennsylvania by Prussians; 
as if the Pittsburg mines were handed over en bloc 
to an English corporation, and the Russians had 
exclusive mining rights to the gold of Alaska’s 
Yukon region. It was as if America’s protective- 
tariff and contract-labor laws were repealed at for- 
eign dictation, and a flood of foreign machine-made 
goods and undesired immigrants were poured into the 
unwilling country. It was as if yellow-robed Buddh- 
ist lamas were everywhere haranguing the Yankee 
farmers, telling them of the fraudulent nature of the 
Christian creed, and urging upon them an approved 
canine method for disposing of deceased ancestors, 
to replace their superstitious funeral services. It 
was as if astrologers, calling themselves engineers, 
were to dig up New York cemeteries in order to 


CHINA 371 


erect prayer-wheels; as if the apostates whom these 
yellow priests had drawn into their joss-houses were 
enabled to dodge part of the taxes, which conse- 
quently fell with added oppression on the rest of the 
people; and as if, when they did something which 
others would in the normal course of events get pun- 
ished for, a lama came before the magistrate and got 
them off. As if the President and the Senate were 
given a weekly wigging by the diplomatic corps, and 
were periodically forced to deed away sections of 
the forest reserve and tracts of particularly desirable 
territory. 

With such an aspect as this, which represents 
what in an undefined, bewildered way the Chinese 
saw and felt, it is no wonder that they considered the 
Confucian dictum obsolete: ‘Do not unto others, 
what you would not that they should do unto you” ; 
and joined the patriotic harmonious Fists, — the 
Boxers. 

Chinese sentiment was ungauged in the West 
because we had never put ourselves in their places. 
Unforeseen save by a few unheeded Cassandras, and 
unprepared for, there broke out the planless, leader- 
less Boxer Rebellion, grim fruitage of the national 
resentment. A few hastily gathered legation guards 
were alone available for defense. Spreading from 
the Shan-tung Province, where the severity of the 
Germans had goaded the usually peaceable people to 
madness, the I-Ho-Chuan besieged the legations at 
Peking. It was the infuriated and ill-directed rush 


372 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


of a patriotism real if futile, — a turning against the 
spoilers. 

The movement was crushed in a torrent of 
blood, and with a devastation that for long will 
leave its mark upon the northern provinces. The 
closing year of the nineteenth century saw the Taku 
forts stormed, Tien-tsin, the Liverpool of the 
North, taken over and administered by a foreign 
board, Manchuria and Mongolia swarming with 
Cossacks, the Dowager Empress in flight, and her 
capital looted by foreign armies. 

The coming of alien soldiery to the Forbidden 
Palace left its impress in the fiercer though more 
carefully smothered hatred of mandarins and peo- 
ple. It was still a blind resentment. They were 
injured, stung in all their pride and self-sufficiency, 
but dumb, bewildered, not knowing what to do, 
which way to turn. The liberals with their solution 
were gone; with them had passed the hopes of a pro- 
gressive policy. 

The people, perplexed, looked to their reéstab- 
lished reactionary rulers for guidance. But these 
officials, mostly of advanced age, and steeped in the 
ideas and ideals of the Confucian classics, were anx- 
ious mainly to close the ears and eyes of the masses 
to the unpleasant realities; to feather their own 
nests and finish off their lives in tranquility. 

The Chinese Minister to the United States, Wu 
Ting Fang, gives a graphic picture of these Celestial 
Bourbons : — 


CHINA 373 


‘‘It must be remembered that most of the high 
officials in Peking are born and bred Chinese of the 
old school. All the princes and nearly all the minis- 
ters of state have spent most of their days within 
the four walls of the capital. They have never 
visited even other parts of the empire, not to say 
foreign lands; nor can they speak any other lan- 
guage besides their own. They have absolutely no 
knowledge or experience of foreign ways except 
those who are ministers of the Tsung-li Yamen, and 
the experience of these men has been confined ex- 
clusively to their official intercourse with the foreign 
representatives at Peking.” 

Buttressing their hereditary intransigeance, these 
mandarins had, after the Hay Circular, possessed 
a measure of confidence that their yielding of open- 
door trade privileges to the greed of the foreigners 
had enlisted a combined support which would pre- 
serve China’s remaining national powers. 

But so powerless to fulfill their purposes had these 
paper pledges become, so far was the open-door 
doctrine from settling the situation, that in China’s 
own territory, where by solemn promises of both 
parties no special privileges could accrue, the year 
1904 saw two Powers in the throes of the greatest 
war of modern times. 

If the realization of the combatants’ purpose has 
signified much to the nations of the West, — per- 
haps rather to the United States, for the others 
nursed no illusions, — to China it has meant far 


374 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


more. It has brought for the first time a real and 
general appreciation of the necessity for modern- 
ized, efficient self-defense. 

Fifteen years of aggression have been needed to 
drive home this knowledge. While the defeats of 
1895 came as a blow to a few keen-minded Chinese, 
to most they were a matter of entire indifference. 
China was not conquered, they reasoned: only two 
provinces took part while the viceroys of the rest 
looked idly on. ‘‘ That Shan-tung man’s war’”’ was 
the general attitude; ‘Li Hung Chang’s boats 
beaten.’’ When it was over, merely Formosa, the 
little-valued island of ‘‘ tame barbarians,’’ had been 
lost. The traditional policy of playing off the jealous 
powers one against the other had apparently suc- 
ceeded ; it had cleared the Japanese from Corea and 
Port Arthur. China as a nation was hardly touched, 
and multitudes of people never knew there had been 
a war. 

The seizures of 1897-1899, coming close upon 
each other, exasperated, but taught no lesson. The 
mass of Chinese, and even those in high official 
circles, believed that a little effort would drive the 
foreign devils into the sea. The march of the Allies 
to Peking stunned them. It was their first facing of 
the fact. 

The Russo-Japanese War, and the partition of the 
province that had cradled their Emperor’s dynasty, 
dissipated their fool’s paradise. It was seen then, 
clearly, by all, that China’s only hope of maintain- 


ONIMAd ‘SALVO NOM-NANSH 


(RRR RRR : 


REE Wee ee eet ee Eh tari) 





vf 





CHINA 375 


ing her integrity lay in her defensive power. With 
the object, not of securing the blessings of civiliza- 
tion (which the overwhelming majority of China- 
men desire no more than we do the Holy Inquisi- 
tion), but of beating away the spoilsmen, the Peking 
rulers turned at length to the survey of their actual 
military condition. As this concerns intimately the 
Chinese internal situation, a summary of it may be 
pertinent. 

The Hwai-lien regulars, to the number of twenty- 
five thousand, are well-drilled, and well-armed with 
Chinese-made Mausers. They are stationed in the 
northern provinces, including the Taku and Peh- 
t’ang forts, the Tien-tsin station, and the neighbor- 
hood of Peking. These make up the only national 
force of modern troops at the disposal of the Chinese 
Government, but the private armies of various vice- 
roys bring up the total somewhat as follows: The 
camps of foreign-drilled troops, formerly Yuan Shi 
Kai’s, probably the best in China, number roundly 
twenty thousand. From the Shen-ki Ying, or artil- 
lery force, from the camps of the Manchu Banners, 
which the Government is making an effort to whip 
into some kind of shape, from the Imperial body- 
guard, and other scattered and less important 
troops, ten thousand effectives might be culled. In 
the south the Viceroy of Nanking has, all told, some 
twenty thousand more men holding the Wusung 
forts, who may be classed as efficient and well- 
armed; some of these are German- and Japanese- 


376 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


drilled. This total of seventy-five thousand repre- 
sents China’s numerical military strength in effect- 
ive modern troops. 

The old hereditary organization of twenty-four 
Banners, adds some two hundred thousand Man- 
chus, Mongols, and Chinese, — of the privileged 
soldier caste, which through two hundred and fifty 
years has drawn an annual subsidy of eight million 
taels from the Peking treasury. Billeted as the nom- 
inal wardens of the provincial cities and garrisoned 
around Peking, these Tatars have become as a rule 
so degenerated by immemorial idleness as to be use- 
less save for picturesque parades. The one positive 
element is that they are men under pay, subject to 
order, and available for initial experiments. 

The Green Banner, or militia, under the command 
of a general for each province, is theoretically com- 
posed of a large number of native Chinese. The 
army is made up mainly of officers. The higher 
officials of the Green Banner acquire the pay, com- 
missary, and weapon-allotments of their nominal 
armies, and pad the rolls with the names of coolies 
who come out for the annual review in return for the 
small portion of their nominal wage which must be 
spent to keep face. 

To expect these men to get out and fight is obvi- 
ously more than they bargained for. The Green Ban- 
ner can deliver about the same relative number of 
actual soldiers per unit of population that a Missis- 
sippi backwoods county polls for the Republican 


CHINA 377 


party. The most that can be said for the Green Ban- 
ner is that it has a list of men’s names from which 
a certain number of real recruits might be obtained. 

The military organization of even the best regu- 
lar troops is feeble. Constant word reaches the press 
of soldiers revolting for lack of pay. In one such 
instance nine hundred men near the Manchuria 
border mutinied and were put down with difficulty, 
tying up the caravans for some time. Aside from 
questions of discipline, and considering number only, 
it is doubtful if, in the whole empire of four hun- 
dred million people, one hundred thousand decently 
armed and drilled troops could be gathered, in an 
extremity, for defensive purposes. 

Drilled and armed men in whatever numbers are, 
however, but one element of a country’s defensive 
power. Organization, transportation, commissary, 
and supply are factors of hardly less importance. 
The troops that get there are the ones which count, 
and even a Chinese army marches on its belly. Rus- 
sia’s defective transport, to mention but one case, 
undoubtedly decided both the Crimean and the 
Japanese wars. The question of territorial defense 
is one of several dimensions, first of which is how 
soon could a given force, with its necessary com- 
missary and ammunition-supply, be disposed along 
the various lines of possible attack. 

Making the round of the Chinese Empire, it is 
apparent that Tibet and Mongolia, for all the re- 
sistance that could be made, might be taken by 


378 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


England and Russia respectively whenever they 
were minded to cross the border. The Chinese 
could throw out barring columns no further west- 
ward than Sze-chuan, no further northward than the 
Great Wall. 

On the frontier of Corea, the Yalu River formerly 
defined the first line of defense. But this frontier 
has been moved westward by the Japanese, so that 
it would be a political impossibility to put men there 
even were it practically possible. The present line 
would of necessity be between Shan-hai-kwan and 
Yung-ping. Perhaps withdrawals from the northern 
provinces, the viceroys permitting, might admit 
massing here fifty thousand troops. But this, as 
well as any other possible line, is entirely unfortified, 
giving hardly more advantages to the repelling than 
to the attacking forces. There would be no second 
line of defense, nothing to fall back upon but the old 
Tatar Wall of Peking. Beyond this fifty thousand 
any quota brought from the south would consume 
a very considerable time, probably a month, even 
allowing that their semi-independent viceroys did 
not discreetly hold off altogether. 

Further east, at Shan-tung, Germany’s railway 
pierces to the heart of the Confucian province; 
while from the Chinese military centre in Chi-li there 
is no corresponding railroad, Chinese-manned, 
giving them access, were it necessary to repel ag- 
gression. The Anamese railways afford the French 
means of bringing up troops, where China could 


CHINA 379 


assemble an army only after weeks of marching. The 
Burmese frontier of Britain’s dominion is similarly 
vantaged. 

The German Land-Wehr, while the first armies go 
to the front, may be called out and mobilized, until 
the whole manhood of the nation is in arms. Such 
a body is nonexistent in the Celestial Empire. Like 
her own lichee nut, once the frail shell of her resist- 
ance is broken, the meat is ready for the eating. 
Considered solely from the military standpoint, 
aside from reform as such, China is as supine as 
a huge helpless jelly-fish, with disconnected nerve- 
ganglia, and not even the rudiments of a backbone. 

For the first requirements of national defense, 
what is necessary? For the north there should be 
a thoroughly drilled and equipped regular army of 
at least one hundred and fifty thousand men, with 
capacity for rapid concentration in the neighbor- 
hood of Peking. For the south a standing army of 
at least fifty thousand men. An intermediate army 
of fifty thousand more should be available near 
Hankow, capable of being thrown either way. 
The Peking-Hankow railway line must have stra- 
tegic branches to Canton, Shanghai, Yun-nan, and 
Shan-tung. These must be controlled not by for- 
eigners but by Chinese. There must exist a reserve 
of, say, five hundred thousand men, at least par- 
tially drilled, from which to draw reinforcements. 
There must be arsenals able to make all the weap- 
ons and ammunition for these forces, since foreign 


380 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


nations will continue to command the sea. The 
sums needed to realize such a programme must be 
available, and China must possess the organization 
and fiscal system for the conduct of a war. From 
this summary it may be seen that adequate defense 
requires a measure of increase in her efficiency that 
is revolutionary. The demand which such measures 
would make upon any nation is stupendous. How 
much more would it exact of China, where for its 
accomplishment every single factor must overthrow 
the ideas, the principles, the very morals evolved 
through centuries in the most conservative race of 
the globe! 

At the outset, for the personnel of such a regular 
army, two hundred and fifty thousand adults must 
be transformed from stolid, superstitious field- 
tillers and coolies, never of combative spirit, into 
courageous, disciplined fighting men. Can this be 
done? Some, eminently qualified to judge, answer 
that it can; but Chinese history has not for several 
thousand years furnished many glorious annals. 
Where a stark fight is recorded, as at Albazin, or 
against the Mongol khans in the sixteenth century, 
the warriors have been Manchus rather than Chin- 
ese. Whenever an aggressive nation, be it Hiung-nu 
or Khitan, Mongol or Manchu, British or Japanese, 
has gone against the genuine Chinaman, the latter 
has invariably submitted. It is only when his sub- 
jugators, absorbed into the swarming mass of con- 
quered, have degenerated, that the native has been 


Qpeul SEM J[NESSL UTE SO2T[[Y 24} A194 


QNIAdd 





if 





CHINA 381 


able to rise and drive out his enfeebled oppressor. 
The Chinese have conquered by time and their 
birth-rate. 

On the other hand, the Chinaman has qualities 
which, translated into military virtues, should theo- 
retically give him a great initial advantage over any 
other race. He is comparatively without nerves; 
he can hold a gun without a tremor for what to a 
Westerner is an inconceivably long time ; he has good 
eyes and a strong sight; he can be victualed on a 
few handfuls of rice; he is entirely indifferent as to 
where or how he lodges; he is sober and reliable; he 
is a big-bodied man, stronger even, perhaps, than 
the Japanese; he is docile, obedient, and susceptible 
to discipline. Indeed, in all that concerns his phys- 
ical qualities and certain moral superiorities, one 
could not ask for better raw material. When well 
led he has at times done very creditably. A genera- 
tion of such leadership as Yuan Shi Kai’s would do 
not a little toward bringing out what there is latent 
in this people. 

If in the army organization the gap between what 
is and what should be is so great, how much wider is 
it in the government organization needed to finance 
reform. Therevenues of China are some $100,000,- 
000. About $36,000,000 are allotted to military 
purposes. When from this has been deducted the 
eighteen million-odd which go to the generals of the 
Red and Green Banners, there is left, theoretically, 
about $18,000,000 for the real army. Actually there 


382 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


is efficiently applied probably not over $10,000,000. 
The regular army of Japan — two hundred and 
twenty-five thousand — takes $40,000,000 effect- 
ively expended. China must begin from the very 
bottom, whereas Japan is simply carrying along. A 
judicious total expenditure of at least $50,000,000 is 
needed for China’s army. With the additional rail- 
way and arsenal programme, and other concomitant 
work, the demands over and above present outlays 
would reach around $110,000,000. Add this to the 
present budget, less the well-spent ten millions, and 
there is to be reckoned a total budget of at least 
$200,000,000. 

Could China raise such a defense-fund on top of 
her present hundred-million-dollar budget? Could 
she cut down on present expenses to help it out? 
The latter might be considered. Theoretically the 
wasted army money of the present budget might 
be saved and applied. Practically the vested inter- 
ests in the graft are so important as to make it 
of infinite difficulty. The mere beginning. of sine- 
cure-cutting cost the Emperor the actuality of his 
throne and nearly his head. 

The list shows other items of expenditure which 
cannot be materially economized. The large and 
growing sum which goes to repay interest, foreign 
loans, and indemnities, cannot be touched, nor can 
the $16,000,000 sent to the provinces for their lo- 
cal expenditures. The $8,000,000 for the Peking 
salaries and palace expenses is a fixture. The 


CHINA 383 


modest and well-administered $3,000,000 of the 
customs expenditures, covering about all the public 
works that China undertakes, — the lighthouse and 
coast-patrol allowances, the mails, the interpreters’ 
school, — this cannot be pared. The needed money 
must come if at all by increase of the receipts. One 
is driven irresistibly back to the Government’s tax- 
ing capacity. 

The physical possibility of such taxation un- 
doubtedly exists. The per capita revenue which the 
Government receives from its four hundred million 
subjects is but twenty-five cents. The American 
per capita revenue is eight dollars, the Japanese 
five dollars, the Russian twelve dollars, the Indian 
— perhaps in conditions the closest parallel to the 
Chinese—one dollar and a quarter. An extra twenty- 
five cents would raise the Chinese Government well 
above all financial difficulties, and still leave the 
rate far below that of the other great nations of 
the world. 

Looking at the actual mechanism for revenue 
collection, one is met by difficulties which have 
rooted themselves deeply into the system. One 
cannot squeeze any larger proportion of the needed 
sum than the present $25,000,000 from the Imperial 
Maritime Customs. Tariff-rates are fixed by treaty, 
and the collections, under English direction, are as 
efficient as they can become. The likin duties on 
freight during inland transit are such a plague to 
commerce that, far from being increased, they 


384 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


should be swept away altogether as one of the earli- 
est of reform measures. This $14,000,000 is pro- 
duced at so heavy a price of fettered and thwarted 
commerce that added tariff would but aggravate 
the strangulation without materially increasing in- 
come. The opium revenue of $5,000,000 is likewise 
an item which, for the best interests of China, should 
disappear from a reformed budget, and the “‘ foreign 
dirt’”’ from the Celestial domain. In any event 
opium cannot be made much more productive. 

After these eliminations there are left items 
which bring in $56,000,000. The sources consist 
principally of the land-tax, the grain-tribute, native 
customs, and the salt gabelle. The returns from 
these factors would require to be nearly trebled, if 
they were relied upon to make up the bulk of the 
needed total. 

The method of collection is a further check to 
greater income. The existing machinery of fiscal 
administration operates, roughly, as follows: When 
the funds begin to run short for the usual expense- 
accounts, the various executive boards apply to the 
Board of Revenue. The latter makes a glorified 
guess at the sum which, considering harvests, re- 
bellions, and other elements, each province might 
be able to pay. It is thereupon put to the provincial 
officials, consisting usually of a viceroy, a governor, 
a treasurer, and a judge, to supply something ap- 
proximating this sum. The provincial syndicate, 
through the medium of various intermediate offi- 


CHINA 385 


cials, such as the tao-taz and the fu-prefect, whose 
powers are nebulous and overlapping, call upon 
the eighty-odd county magistrates for an estimated 
share. The magistrates, shien-kwan, called collo- 
quially ‘‘father and mother officials,’’ whose varied 
functions include rendering justice, keeping the 
jail, leading the religious processions, and collecting 
the taxes, send out each his hundred henchmen to 
get the actual money or grain. Of this hierarchy of 
officials not one has a salary which would keep his 
establishment going for a month. Of necessity the 
laborer must draw his own hire first from the harvest. 

Under such a satrap system, by the grace of 
human nature, each official takes what the traffic 
will bear, letting pass to the man higher up enough 
to conciliate his claim and to keep face with 
Peking. If the penalties which follow deficient gen- 
erosity to a superior define the maximum contribu- 
tion, the minimum is fixed by the famine or the re- 
bellion point. With this method in vogue, it is not 
unreasonable to assume that the amounts gathered 
in the first instance are about as great as can be 
wrung from the people. An increase of the Govern- 
ment’s receipts would have to come through shaking 
down the office-holders for a larger share of their 
pickings. Such a revenue as a real reform would 
demand must despoil of vested rights in his liveli- 
hood every mandarin, viceroy, tao-tai, fu-prefect, 
magistrate, and petty publican in the empire. It 
might be practicable to commute the likin, or inland 


386 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


octroi dues, for fixed sums by agreement with the 
hongs, or merchant associations. This was done in 
Li Hung Chang’s province, Kwang-tung, where 
$2,750,000 was paid in order to get rid of likin dues 
which netted only $670,000. Enough might be 
raised by this means to pay the officials at just 
rates. Then honest collections might reasonably be 
demanded, and a beginning be made of fiscal reform. 
But it is apparent from these outlines how long 
a way China has to travel before her capacity for 
self-defense is a reality. 

The facts are now being comprehended by all 
classes. From the coast cities, a growing number 
of young Chinese have been sent to study abroad, 
mainly in Japan — as many as fifteen thousand in 
1907. Returning, these so-called ‘students’ have 
become the leaders in the boycotts against the 
United States and Japan. They have engaged act- 
ively in propaganda of a patriotic nature, and, 
more constructively, have translated into their 
mother tongue hundreds of books on history, eco- 
nomics, and law, including the whole Japanese code, 
Herbert Spencer, Huxley, Voltaire, Montesquieu, 
the ‘‘Contrat Social’’ of Rousseau, the works of 
Henry George and Karl Marx, and many others 
of the same general nature. 

These movements show a widespread public opin- 
ion friendly to Chinese regeneration. Various ad- 
ministrative measures have been inaugurated which 
are yet more promising. 


CHINA 387 


The old method of dividing the Peking Bureau 
into provincial departments, and letting each of 
these care for every sort of business from its special 
province, has been altered. Instead of a bureau 
having general charge over the salt-tax, the cus- 
toms, and the appointments of each province, there 
have been organized ten departments, dealing each 
with its specialty throughout the entire realm. The 
five recently-created bureaus— Agriculture, Works 
and Commerce, Police and Constabulary, Post-Office 
and Education — tell by their names the centraliz- 
ing purpose of the new régime. Formerly five hun- 
dred clerks attended a department, with office-hours 
from eleven A.M. to two P.M. including lunch, smok- 
ing-time, and due intervals for examining peddlers’ 
wares. Now a much reduced force is employed, 
with actual working-hours generally from nine A.M. 
to four P.M. The foot-binding of children has been 
prohibited ; pressure has been put upon the officials 
who smoke opium to abandon it, under penalty of 
dismissal from the service; classical essays as a civil- 
service examination subject are being given up, and 
the education of the Chinese youths abroad is being 
encouraged. A large number of Japanese officers 
have been engaged to train the khaki-clad and 
well-armed Chinese regulars, who have shown excel- 
lent aptitude. The Government has bought back 
practically all foreign railroad concessions, and all 
the valuable mining concessions except the Kai-ping 
coal-fields. 


388 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


Even representative government is well under 
way. The Dowager Empress’s edict of August 27, 
1908, by which a nine-year period was set for the 
devolution of legislative powers to provincial as- 
semblies and a national senate has been justified 
by remarkable success. The local legislatures, 
elected under carefully restricted suffrage qualifi- 
cations, have grappled earnestly with the eco- 
nomic problems of the districts. The senate, of 
thirty-two members, selected by the Prince Regent 
from an elected body, has not yet had time to 
show results, but the calibre of the men in it is 
encouraging. 

China is making a real effort to get abreast of the 
times. But never was a nation brought more di- 
rectly before the judgment-bar on the plain test of 
character. Upon the capacity of the race for private 
sacrifice and public honesty rests primarily her 
salvation. Whether China can or cannot rise to 
the task depends upon her own manhood, and no 
one can be prophet of the issue; for all estimate 
of Chinese character is perplexed by that curious 
Eastern subtlety of contradictions which baffle 
understanding. 

The inability of the Chinese to keep fingers out of 
the public till is proverbial ; yet the very high stand- 
ard of business integrity is universally conceded. 

The quality of Chinese honesty is attributed by 
some to the local idea of good form, and the obvious 
mercantile maxim that future credit depends upon 


YOUAIdWA AHL AO AOVIVd AAWWNAS 





i 


roe, ee 


"Sel 


ae a 





CHINA 389 


present performance. Bourse operators may be 
scrupulously exact as to obligations which the mere 
lifting of a finger imposes, while engaged in cam- 
paigns diverting to their private speculations the 
funds of a chain of banks, or looting the values from 
the minority owners of a street-railway. 

Chinese business integrity is said to be due to 
the fact that her merchants are of the upper class; 
cowardice in war, to the fact that her soldiers are 
of the lowest caste. In Japan the condition is ex- 
actly reversed : hence the prowess of her Samurai, 
and the peccability of her clerks — such that Japan- 
ese bankers employ Chinamen to handle their 
money. 

Since the Japanese have built up an effective 
public administration, it is fair to give the Chinese 
the benefit of faith, and to assume that in time they 
too will rally to the task, and make a modern state. 

With this should come the Trans-Mongolia Rail- 
way: opening to the plainsmen of Central Asia a 
prospect of civilization and advance. 

Equally or more important, looking at things 
broadly, it would give to the world the best of the 
great Asian trade-routes. Examine a globe and see 
_ what, in the shortening of distance, this land-route 
to Peking signifies. Note the enormous circum- 
navigations that must be made in going around 
by India and Suez, and measure then the direct 
overland route by the Urga Post-Road and the 
Trans-Siberian Railway. 


390 THE RUSSIAN ROAD TO CHINA 


The bulky freight from the Asian Coast to west- 
ern Europe will still pay tribute to thesea. To com- 
pete with vessel-transportation, which carries a ton 
from Shanghai to London for seven dollars, the rail- 
roads over the 7283 miles from Vladivostok to 
Paris would have to make a rail-rate of one tenth of 
a cent per ton-mile; this is impossible when one re- 
members the average American rate of eight tenths 
of a cent. But North China, all North Asia, and 
Europe west of Moscow, are within the railway 
radius of an Urga-Peking line. 

From interior China may be drawn the goods for 
half a continent. The tea-freight which Russia re- 
ceives over the long sea-trip to Odessa, or by the 
trans-shipped Vladivostok route, can be loaded 
then at Kalgan on the car that goes to Moscow. By 
it the silks of the Tien-tsin merchants may be rolled 
through into the freight-yards of St. Petersburg, 
and the timberless cities of interior China may build 
with the wood of the Yakutski Oblast forests. By 
it the dwellers in the valley of the Hoang-ho, 
‘‘China’s Sorrow,’’ may be nourished in their need 
with the wheat of the Angara Valley; the Manchu 
mandarins may be clad in the furs from the Yenesei ; 
the ploughshares tempered in Petrovski Zavod 
break the ancient soil of the Chi-li Province; the 
silver of the Altai Mountains make the bangles 
that deck the anklets of the purdah women. 

For America the road will open a commercial 
highway into the very heart of a new and expand- 


CHINA 391 


ing empire. American rails may carry American 
cars, — those ever moving shuttles which weave the 
woof of trade. American woolens and felts may 
protect the Siberians against their Arctic cold, 
American machinery mine and refine their gold. 
New England cottons, utilizing the Panama Canal, 
may clothe the myriad coolies of interior China. 
Here is the mail-route of ten days from Paris to 
Peking, against the thirty-five days needed by the 
fastest ships. Here is the quickest passenger-route 
from London to Yokohama. All these potential- 
ities lie as the fallow heritage of the Urga Road, if 
beyond Kalgan it is given its avenues to China and 
the sea. It is civilization that must profit when the 
equilibrium of the East is restored, and over the old 
Urga Road China is relinked to the West by the 
trains of the great Asian Railway. 


> ae 


Che Riverside press 


i 


Ui € A he 


ee 
CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS 
9 to ie aa, 





] oe 
whlg 
PY) 


ne, 








GvERAD z er. LAWRENCE 


Gun Loni Ne : 18S or 
a 


_ S——} WRANGELL 17 
~SOUFRANZ JOSEPH LAND 730 ¥ 
60 20 


03050 iho 110 
ah 
T C ety, | nO C 


ENGLISH STATUTE MILES 


\ yy ! ’ J g VWF SS SS 
ee > 5 j 2 400 600, 800.1000 


of é = 4 Sm L tS} =} KILOMETERS 


OF ot 


ANDAMAN 
G 


AOL Nas Zan NY 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 


ot Longitude 60) Umer tiem” 00 Greanviots ee 








4 
{ 
+ 1 
y 
A it 
} 
: 
I 
é 
\ 
| 


a po ee 











| BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 
iii titi 
3 9999 08815 349 7 





