UNKNOWN  MONGOLIA 


rn     1 

o  — 

^t>- 

n- 

^co 

0  = 

— c^ 

>-  ^= 

^^^f"^ 

(/I — ■- 
> 

D 

CD 

CO 

"Xi^-'T 


i|! 


•ii|<:i>l"»i 


:»•  ^v&*-- 


^*^;P!.fSkj 


f«: 


?i  \ ',  •* ' 


SNx^ 


Presented  to  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 

by  the 

ONTARIO  LEGISLATIVE 
LIBRARY 


1980 


UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 


^     in 


X 
C/D 

Q 

d  ;.  . 
>  s  = 

CO     O 

z  -B  ^ 

<  o  >. 

o 
o 
z 

o 


UNKNOWN  MONGOLIA 

A  Record  of  Travel  and  Exploration  in 
North- West    Mongolia    and    Dzungaria 


BY 

DOUGLAS    CARRUTHERS 

GOLD   MEDALLIST  OF   THE   ROYAL  GEOGRAPHICAL   SOCIETY 


^' 


C. 


WITH  THREE   CHAPTERS   ON  SPORT 

BY 

J.    H.    MILLER,    F.Z.S. 

AND  A  FOREWORD   BY 

THE  RIGHT   HON.   EARL  CURZON   OF  KEDLESTON, 

G.C.S.I.,   Etc. 


fV/TB  i68  ILLUSTRATIONS,   PANORAMAS 
AND  DIAGRAMS,   AND  6  MAPS 


VOL.   II. 


SECOND   EDITION 


LONDON 

HUTCHINSON    &    CO 

PATERNOSTER    ROW 
1914 


>BT 


■Sv 


\J.^ 


CONTENTS 

VOL.  II 

CHAPTER  XI 

PAGE 

SPORT   ON   THE   PLATEAUX   OF   MONGOLIA  .  .      319 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

CHAPTER   XII 

THE  KIREI  OF  THE  ALTAI,  THE  CHILDREN  OF  PRESTER 

JOHN 351 

CHAPTER   XIII 

DZUNGARIA — THE   LAND   OF   UNREST        .  .  .      374 

CHAPTER   XIV 

FROM   THE   ALTAI   TO   THE   ILI   VALLEY    ,  .  .      397 

CHAPTER   XV 

A  WINTER  JOURNEY  IN  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA  ; 
ALONG  THE  "IMPERIAL  HIGH-ROAD"  FROM 
KULJA  TO   KUMUL  .....      424 

CHAPTER   XVI 

HAMI,    OR   KUMUL 472 

CHAPTER    XVII 

THE   KARLIK   TAGH 494 


vi  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   XVIII 

PAOB 

BARKUL,   THE  BOGDO-OLA,   AND  ACROSS  DZUNGARIA       527 

CHAPTER   XIX 

SPORT  IN   THE  HIGHLANDS  OF  DZUNGARIA        .  .       548 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

CHAPTER   XX 

THE   GAME   OF   THE   PLAINS  .  .  .  .  ,       580 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

APPENDIX   A 

THE   DUNGANS      . 613 

APPENDIX   B 

THE   ANCIENT    STRANDS    AND    BARRIERS    OF    SAIRAM 

NOR     ........       619 

APPENDIX   C 

THE   SUMMITS   OF   KARLIK  TAGH     .  .  .  .      62I 

APPENDIX   D 

THE     LIFE-ZONES     OF     NORTH-WESTERN     MONGOLIA 

AND   DZUNGARIA   ......       624 

APPENDIX   E 

TERMS    OF   THE    RUSSO-MONGOLIAN    PROTOCOL  .       632 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 635 

INDEX 641 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS 

VOL.  II 

The  Mongolian  Wild-Sheep,  Ovis  Ammon 

By  J.  G.  Millais     Frontispiece 

FACING  PAGE 

Typical  Sheep-ground  in  North-west  Mongolia   By  J.  H.  Miller   322 

A  Mongol  Type        .... 

Camp  on  the  Mongolian  Plateau  in  August 

After  the  Stalk      .... 

A  61-IN.  Ovis  Ammon 

A  Three  Days'  Bag 

Loading  up  the  Ammon  Heads 

A   Kirei  Falconer  .... 

A  Kirei  Maiden        .... 

Kirei   in  Winter  Quarters 

Camp    beside  the  Upper  Kobdo  River 

Kirei  Women  going  to  a  Wedding 

Mistresses  of  the  Yurts 

The  Kobdo  Lake-country  and  the  Mongolian  Altai.  The  Land 
of  the  Kirei  (Panorama)   By  D.   Carruthers  6-  /.  H.  Miller 

Typical  Scenery  in  the  Border-Ranges  of  Dzungaria.     In  the 
Tian  Shan  Mountains  .  .  .  .    By  J.  H.  Miller 

Mongol  Coiffure.     A  Woman  of  the  Khalka  Tribe  . 

Nomads  of  the  Plains.     Khalka  Mongols  .    By  J.  H.  Miller 

A  Charkhar  of  Rank        ........ 

The  Barkul  Mountains,  a  Portion  of  the  Southern  Border- 
Range  of  Dzungaria  .    By  D.  Carruthers  &  J.  H.  Miller 

The  Expedition  Crossing  Dzungaria 

By  D.  Carruthers  and  J.  H.  Miller 

Makandaroff  and  his  Pets      ....    By  J.  H.  Miller 

Camp  Breakfast       .........     404 

In  Chuguchak  .  .  .  .  .  .    By  J.  H.  Miller     408 

Scenery  near  the  Entrance  to  the  Dzungarian  Gate  .  .     414 

Early  Morning  by  Sairam  Nor        ......     420 

via 


• 

>  1                                     1  > 

326 

GUST 

}1                                     >i 

330 

By  T.  P.  Miller 

334 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

338 

•                   •                   •                   • 

342 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

346 

>t             »» 

352 

. 

35& 

.    By  J.  H.  Miller 

358 

•                    •                     •                    « 

362 

•                     •                     •                     t 

366 

By  J.  H.  Miller 

366 

370 

378 

384 
388 

392 

400 
400 

404 


VI  u 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


By  J.  H.  Miller 


Ching 
and  J.  H.  Miller 


PACINO 

Chinese  Road-Guards       .  .  .  .  .    By  J.  H.  Miller 

The  Chinese  Imperial  High-road  near  Sairam  Nor 
KuM  Chaza,  a  Guard-house  on  the  Pei-lu,  or  Northern  High- 
road .  .  .  .  .  .  .    By  J.  H.  Miller 

DuNGAN  Boys  .......... 

Bactrian  Camel  in  Summer  Coat     ...... 

Bactrian  Camels  in  Winter  Coat    ...... 

DZUNGARIA    IN    MiD-WINTER.      ThE    BaSIN    OF    SaIRAM    NoR 

By  J.  H.  Miller 
The  Leader  of  the  Caravan  . 
Bactrian  Camel  ..... 
Type  of  Kirei  Kirghiz  .... 
KiREi  and  Bronco  ..... 
Tamarisk  Mound  ..... 
Dead  Poplar  Forest  in  the  Basin  of  Chi-Ku- 

By  D.  Carruthers 
The  Walls  of  Kumul      .... 
The  Khan's  Residence     .... 
A  Street  Scene  in  the  Chinese  Quarter 
A   KuMULiK  Girl       ..... 
KuMULiK  Musicians 
A  Taghlik  of  Karlik  Tagh 
The  Khan's  Falconer      .... 
A  By-lane  in  the  Chanto  Town 
The  Highest  Peaks  of  the  Karlik  Tagh 
Denuded  Slopes  on  the  Southern  Flanks  of 
Pasture-land  on  the  Northern  Side 
Rough  Climbing  in  the  Karlik  Tagh 
Gorge  in  the  Sandstone  Foothills  of  Karlik  Tagh 

By  J.  H.  Miller 
The  Village  of  Bardash.     A  Typical  Mountain  Hamlet  in  the 
Southern  Valleys  of  Karlik  Tagh 

By  D.  Carruthers  and  J.  H.  Miller 
The  Main  Ridge  of  Karlik  Tagh,  from  the  North 

By  D.  Carruthers  and  J.  H.  Miller 

The  Taghlik  Smile.     Natives  of  Bardash 

By  D.  Carruthers  and  J.  H.  Miller 

A  Taghlik  Girl By  J.  H.  Miller 

A  Taghlik  Farmstead.     On  the  South  Side 

OF  Karlik  Tagh  .....,, 

Taghlik  Yurts.     On  the  Northern  Pastures 

OF  Karlik  Tagh  .....,,  .. 


By  J.  H.  Miller 
By  J.  H.  Miller 


THE  Range 


PAGE 
428 

442 
446 
446 

450 
450 

454 
458 
458 
464 

468 
474 
474 
478 
482 
486 
486 
488 
488 
496 
496 
496 
500 

502 


506 

506 

508 
514 

522 
522 


5^2 

Valley 

562 
.     568 
By  Rowland  Ward,  Ltd.     568 

•     572 
.     576 


LIST  OF   ILLUSTRATIONS  ix 

FACING  PAGE 

River  Terraces  at  Narin         .......     526 

The  Barkul  Basin  (Panorama)    By  D.  Carruthers  &  J.  H.  Miller    532 
The  Sacred  Lake  of  Bogdo-ola       ......     538 

The  Salt-encrusted  Plains  of  Central  Dzungaria  .  .     544 

Deep-cut  Ravines  in  the  Dzungarian  Plains  .  .  .     544 

J.  H.  Miller  and  a  Day's  Bag  of  Wild-Sheep        .  .  .     550 

Sheep-ground  of  the  Upper  Borotala    .  .     By  J.  H.  Miller     556 

Flower-strewn  Meadows 
Wild-pig,  Shot  in  the  Upper  Borotala 

{Sus  scrofa  nigripes) 
Roe-deer  and  Kalmuk  Hunter 
Ovis  Ammon  Karelini,  in  Winter  Coat 
In  the  Urta  Saryk  Valley 
The  Muzart  Glacier  in  the  Tian  Shan 
Crossing  the  Karakorum  Plateau  (Altitude  17,000  ft.) 

By  J.  H.  Miller     578 
Part  of  our  Bag  at  Takianzi  ......     582 

Dzungarian  Gazelle  {Gazella  subgutttirosa)  in  Winter  Coat 

By  Rowland  Ward,  Ltd.     586 
The  Saiga  Antelope  {Saiga  taytarica)  .  .    By  J.  H.  Miller     596 

Central  Dzungaria  in  Winter         .  .  •  ,,  ,,         602 

A  Domesticated  Kulon  and  its  Chanto  Owner  ,,  ,,         602 

The  Kulon,  or  Wild-Ass  of  Dzungaria  {Equus 

hemionus  typiciis)  .....,,  ,,         606 

MAPS 

FACING  PAGE 

Sketch-map  of  the  Siberian-Mongol  Frontier,  showing  Racial 

Distribution  on  the  Russo-Chinese  Borderlands     .  .     350 

PAGE 

Alpine  Region  of  Karlik  Tagh        .  .  .  .  .  .623 

Map  showing  Life  Zones  of  North-west  Mongolia  and  Dzungaria  625 
The  Karlik  Tagh  and  Barkul  Mountains       .  {End  of  Volume) 


DIAGRAMS 


PAGE 


A  Section  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  from  North  to  South,  through 

THE  Central  Portion  of  the  Range  .  .  .  •521 

The  Ancient  Strands  and  Barriers  of  Sairam  Nor        .  .619 

Outline  of  Karlik  Tagh  from  Kumul     .....     621 
View  of  the  Highest  Peaks  of  Karlik  Tagh,  from  Ridge  South 

OF  Upper  Bardash  Valley         .  .  .  .  .  .621 


X  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

INDEX    TO    IMPORTANT    SUBJECTS    IN    THE    ILLUSTRATIONS 


Animals,  Big-Game 
Dwellings 
dzungarian  scenery 

Hunting  Scenes 

KiREI 

Lakes 
Mongols  . 

Mongolian  Scenery 
Mountains 
Native  Types  . 
Physical  Features 
Towns 
Vegetation 


FACING   PAGES 
338,   342,   346,  550,  562,   568,  582,  586,  596,  602,   606 

358,    522 

358,     37S,    400,    414,    420,    438,    450,    496.    532,    544 

556,   572,   602 

334.  338,  346,  550.  562,  568,  582.  596,  606 
•   352.  356,  358,  366,  370.  458 
.  370,  420,  432,  450,  538 
326,  384,  388,  392 
322,  330,  362.  370 
370,  378,  400,  496,  506,  532,  576,  578 
356,  366,  384,  392,  428,  442,  458,  482,  486,  508,  514 

.  414,  496,  500,  502,  526 

408,  474,  478,  488 

362,  468,  562 


UNKNOWN  MONGOLIA 

CHAPTER  XI 

SPORT   ON   THE   PLATEAUX   OF   MONGOLIA 
By  J.  H.  Miller 

The  north-west  corner  of  Mongolia  has  many  beauties 
in  summer.  Its  round-headed  bluffs  of  dark  shale, 
slashed  with  snow-drifts,  rise  from  rolling  downlands 
covered  with  a  luxurious  growth  of  short,  yellow-green 
grass,  brightened  by  brilliant  patches  of  gentians, 
crocuses,  edelweiss,  and  other  Alpine  flowers.  Its 
innocent-looking,  but  treacherous,  bogs  give  birth  to 
sparkling  streams,  which  form  the  numerous  rivers  that 
flow  through  barren  foot-hills  on  to  still  more  arid  plains, 
and  terminate  in  large  saline  lakes.  Groups  of  the 
dome-shaped  tents  of  the  nomads  are  scattered  over  the 
plateaux,  and,  wherever  grass  is  plentiful,  along  the 
edge  of  both  river  and  lake  ;  countless  flocks  and  herds, 
the  only  wealth  of  their  wandering  owners,  dot  this 
matchless  pasture-land,  and  from  a  cloudless  sky  a 
brilliant  sun  beats  down  upon  plain  and  plateau. 

In   winter  this  land   of  extremes  presents   a   very 

different   picture  ;     everything   is   then   locked   in   the 

grip  of  the  frost  fiend  ;   snow  lies  everywhere,  except  on 

the  exposed  tops  which  the  pitiless  wind  blows  clear, 

II— I  319 


320  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

causing  it  to  form  deep  drifts  on  the  leeward  side.  All 
animal  life  is  either  hibernating,  or  seeking  the  pro- 
tection of  the  lower  foot-hills.  The  camps  of  the  hardy 
herdsmen  are  now  clustered  in  sheltered  hollows  ;  their 
owners'  time  is  largely  spent  in  waging  war  against  the 
wolf-packs,  which  nightly  harry  their  sheep-folds,  and 
in  interminable  tea-drinking,  smoking,  and  chatting 
round  a  meagre  "  tezek  "  (dung-fed)  fire. 

What  appeals  most  strongly,  however,  to  the  sport 
and  nature  loving  Briton  is  that,  among  the  higher 
plateaux  of  the  Little  Altai, — the  range  which  forms  a 
part  of  the  Russo-Chinese  frontier, — roams  one  of  the 
finest  beasts  in  nature,  the  father  of  all  sheep,  the  Ovis 
ammon.  An  adult  ram  of  this  gigantic  sheep  stands 
over  50  in.  at  the  shoulder,  and  carries  horns  that  exceed 
60  in.  in  length  and  20  in.  in  girth,  and,  with  the  dry 
skull,  weigh  45  lb.  No  other  beast,  for  its  size,  carries 
such  a  weight  of  horn.  There  are  few  species  of  big 
game  that  appeal  more  to  the  heart  of  the  hunter  and 
lover  of  the  wild  regions  of  the  earth,  than  an  old  ram  in 
his  upland  solitudes.  Apart  from  the  magnificent  horns 
he  carries,  his  unrivalled  wariness  tests  the  resources  of 
the  hunter  to  the  utmost.  Luck  plays  a  very  small 
part  in  sheep-hunting ;  skill,  patience,  and  perseverance 
are  required  to  a  high  degree. 

Every  hunter  has  his  own  ideas  as  to  what  species 
of  big  game  makes  the  finest  trophy,  and  forms  the  most 
worthy  quarry.  It  may  be  the  giant  moose  of  Alaska 
in  his  primeval  forests,  or  the  shaggy  markhor  on  his 
beetling  crags,  or  the  graceful  koodoo  on  the  plains  of 
Africa.  But,  in  me,  the  elusive  wild-sheep  always 
produces  the  greatest  thrill. 

The  existence  of  the  Ovis  ammon  was    first  made 


SPORT   ON    THE    PLATEAUX  321 

known  to  Europe  by  William  Rubruck,  who,  in  his 
account  of  a  journey  to  Mongolia  in  the  middle  of  the 
thirteenth  century,  mentioned  seeing  a  "  kind  of  wild 
animal  which  is  called  '  arcoli,'  which  has  quite  the  body 
of  a  sheep,  and  horns  bent  like  a  ram's,  but  of  such  a 
size  that  I  could  hardly  lift  two  horns  with  one  hand ; 
and  they  make  of  these  horns  big  cups."  The  first 
European  hunter  to  shoot  this  great  wild-sheep  was  Major 
Cumberland,  who,  on  information  received  from  that 
remarkable  traveller,  Mr.  Ney  Elias,  journeyed  to  the 
Altai  and  procured  several  specimens.  That  was  in 
1895,  and  since  then  not  more  than  one  hunter  a  year, 
on  an  average,  has  visited  this  region ;  so  that  a  really 
large  "  ammon  "  head  still  remains  one  of  the  rarest 
and  most  prized  of  trophies. 

It  was  late  August  when  we  reached  Achit  Nor,  one 
of  the  numerous  lakes  which  dot  the  Mongolian  plateau. 
Every  few  days  a  severe  snow  or  hail  storm  swept  over 
us,  which,  together  with  the  frequent  "  honking  "  of 
wild  geese  overhead,  warned  us  that  winter  was  not 
far  distant,  and  that,  if  we  wished  to  hunt  the  ammon 
and  get  across  the  passes  of  the  Great  Altai  before  they 
were  closed,  we  must  not  delay.  Achit  Nor,  at  this 
season,  presented  a  remarkable  spectacle  with  its  teeming 
thousands  of  wild-fowl.  Undoubtedly  great  numbers 
breed  there  in  the  large  area  of  marsh  and  reeds  at  its 
northern  end.  The  greater  portion,  however,  were 
merely  using  it  as  a  resting-place  on  their  long  flight 
southwards  from  their  summer  haunts  in  Siberia. 
There  were  swans,  two  kinds  of  geese,  and  many  varieties 
of  duck,  gulls,  divers,  and  waders,  including  both  green 
and  golden  plovers. 

Every  morning  and  evening  large  numbers  of  duck 


322  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

and  geese  "  flighted  "  out  on  to  the  boggy  grass-land. 
Owing  to  the  laws  of  Buddhism,  which  prohibit  the 
unnecessary  taking  of  life,  and,  no  doubt,  partly  through 
laziness,  the  natives  on  no  account  molest  these  wild- 
fowl. The  birds  therefore  show  a  marked  indiffer- 
ence to  the  presence  of  man,  allowing  a  horseman  to 
ride  within  50  yards  of  them,  or  less,  without  doing 
more  than  raise  their  heads.  But,  as  we  soon  discovered, 
an  attempt  to  approach  them  on  foot  was  courting 
failure,  for  they  would  not  allow  us  within  200  yards. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that  a  Mongol  hardly  ever  walks. 
Even  to  go  from  one  yurt  to  another,  a  distance  of 
perhaps  not  more  than  a  few  hundred  yards,  he  will 
always  mount  a  horse,  which  is  kept  ready  saddled 
and  tied  to  his  yurt  for  the  purpose. 

We  devised  a  scheme  at  length,  by  which  we  were 
able  to  secure  several  fine  fat  geese  with  a  rook-rifle. 
One  would  ride  and  lead  the  other's  horse,  taking  a 
line  which  would  bring  us  within  50  yards  of  the  flock. 
Then  the  second,  who  had  been  walking  concealed  behind 
the  led  horse,  would  fall  to  the  ground  behind  some 
slight  cover,  and  get  a  steady  shot,  while  the  eyes  of  the 
birds  were  on  the  retreating  horses  and  man. 

In  this  district  we  came  across  an  encampment  of 
Russians  and  Tartars.  They  had  been  travelling  about 
during  the  summer,  trading  with  the  natives,  and  had 
collected  large  quantities  of  wool,  hides,  and  marmot- 
skins,  in  exchange  for  cloth,  tobacco,  cooking  utensils, 
etc.,  and  sometimes  for  money.  They  were  working 
for  one  of  the  large  merchants  at  Biisk.  The  profits 
must  have  been  very  great.  Take  the  marmot-skins, 
for  instance.  They  are  purchased  in  thousands  at  an 
absurdly  low  price  (10   to   20  kopeks  each),  and   sent 


SPORT   ON    THE    PLATEx\UX  323 

to  Europe,  where  they  are  dyed  and  sold  as  imitation 
sable.  The  wool  is  purchased  from  the  natives  for 
3  to  4  roubles  per  poud  (36  lb.)  or  the  equivalent  in 
kine,  and  sold  later  for  double  that  amount.  The 
trade  is  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  Chinese,  who  sell 
to  the  Russian  merchants,  which  minimizes  the  profits 
of  the  latter.  However,  Russia  has  already  inserted 
"  the  thin  end  of  the  wedge  "  in  Mongolia,  and  with 
the  new  state  of  affairs  the  entire  trade  of  this  vast 
country  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  Russia. 

Properly  administered,  there  is  no  reason  why  this 
ideal  grazing  country  should  not  become  one  of  the 
leading  stock-rearing  countries  of  the  world.  If  a 
branch  line  to  Kobdo,  from  the  proposed  Kiakhta- 
Kalgan  railway,  is  built,  the  whole  of  North-west  Mongolia 
will  be  brought  within  rail-communication  of  the  European 
market,  and  this  land  of  great  possibilities  will  have 
received  the  stimulus  it  requires.  There  is  every  likeli- 
hood of  this  line  some  day  being  continued  through 
to  Tomsk,  via  the  thriving  town  of  Biisk,  engineers 
having  pronounced  the  Altai  highlands  to  present  no 
serious  engineering  difficulties. 

Having  changed  our  mixed  caravan  of  oxen  and 
horses  for  eight  camels,  on  August  28th  we  started 
again  for  the  frontier  post  of  Suok,  hoping  there  to  get 
hold  of  some  hunters.  A  march  of  six  hours  took  us 
out  of  the  Achit  plain,  well  up  into  the  foot-hills  of  the 
Altai.  Marching  up  a  dry  water-course,  we  were  struck 
by  the  arid  nature  of  the  hills.  Above  the  valley 
bottom,  where  there  was  a  little  scrub  and  coarse  grass, 
the  hillsides  were  entirely  devoid  of  growth,  with  the 
exception  of  the  ubiquitous  "  burtsa  " — a  small  bush, 
which  when  dry  makes  excellent  fuel.     On  the  following 


324  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

morning  three  hours'  march  took  us  out  of  this  in- 
hospitable nullah  on  to  a  broad,  grassy  upland,  where 
the  three  small  Chagan  Nor  lakes  sparkled  in  the  sun, 
and  where  herds  of  horses  and  camels  gave  life  to  the 
scene.  On  this  upland  we  came  across  numbers  of 
derelict  ammon  horns,  showing  that  we  had  reached 
their  winter  range,  A  day's  march  due  west  on  to 
the  higher  ground,  and  we  should  no  doubt  have  seen 
them  in  the  flesh,  but  we  had  decided  to  go  farther 
along  the  hills  towards  Suok,  where  we  had  hopes  of 
obtaining  hunters  before  starting  up  towards  the  main 
divide. 

The  word  "  suok  "  is  Turkish  for  cold,  and  you  may  be 
pretty  certain  that,  if  a  nomad  of  Central  Asia  indicates 
a  place  by  such  a  name,  it  is  no  place  for  a  European 
in  winter.  Though  marked  large  on  some  maps,  it  is 
merely  a  small  Chinese  frontier  post  on  the  main  Kobdo- 
Biisk  route.  When  we  were  there  it  consisted  of  no 
more  than  half  a  dozen  yurts,  occupied  by  a  small 
official  and  a  few  disreputable  soldiers.  They  had  no 
uniform  but  a  blue  "  jumper,"  which  had  a  glaring 
red  "  disc  "  on  the  breast,  covered  with  Chinese 
characters  ;  and  their  arms  embraced  every  description 
of  antique  gas-pipe.  The  head-man  was  most  kind 
and  obliging.  We  drank  tea  with  him  in  his  stuffy 
little  yurt,  overheated  with  a  Russian  stove,  while  he 
looked  at  our  passports.  Their  size  and  colour  im- 
pressed him,  but  I  doubt  very  much  if  he  could  read 
them,  though  he  pretended  to  do  so.  Chinese  etiquette 
demands  that  a  call  should  be  returned  immediately. 
The  snow  was  being  driven  before  a  biting  north-easter 
at  the  time,  and  I  fancy  that  he  did  not  particularly 
enjoy  his  quarter  of  an  hour  in  a  flapping,  draughty  tent. 


SPORT   ON    THE    PLATEAUX  325 

On  informing  him  that  we  intended  to  spend  a  few 
days  hunting  in  the  neighbourhood,  he  advised  us  to 
visit  the  chief  of  the  Altai  Uriankhai,  Hving  in  the 
Chagan-gol  Valley,  two  marches  farther  on,  who  would 
be  able  to  provide  us  with  horses  and  hunters.  He 
said  that  there  were  none  in  the  vicinity  of  Suok. 

The  storm  raged  all  through  the  next  day,  pre- 
venting us  from  moving.  The  wind  howled  through 
the  tents,  driving  the  snow  under  the  flaps,  and  us  into 
our  blankets,  where  we  spent  the  day  reading  and 
trying  to  keep  warm. 

September  ist  broke  still  and  clear,  but  three  inches 
of  snow  covered  the  ground,  and  this  produced  a  terrible 
glare  in  the  powerful  sunlight.  A  short  march  over 
undulating  foot-hills  brought  us  to  the  broad  river-bed 
of  the  Uigur,  as  the  upper  Suok  River  is  called.  We 
were  now  close  under  the  western  end  of  the  lofty, 
rounded  Bain-Khairkhan  mass  which  fills  up  the  area 
between  the  Chagan-gol  and  Suok  Rivers.  The  evening 
was  spent  in  rifle-practice,  much  to  the  interest  of  some 
inhabitants,  who  thought  it  a  frightful  waste  of  ammuni- 
tion, but  thoroughly  appreciated  the  empty  cases. 
The  range  and  accuracy  of  our  weapons  were  a  revela- 
tion to  them. 

The  next  march  was  done  very  rapidly  ;  we  changed 
horses  half-way  at  a  small  encampment,  named  Belota. 
After  crossing  the  low,  western  end  of  the  Bain-Khairkhan 
ridge,  we  suddenly  came  upon  the  Chagan-gol  Valley. 
At  this  point  it  is  broad  and  sandy,  with  several  small 
lakes  linked  by  a  sluggish  stream.  The  sides  of  the 
valley  are  composed  of  old  moraines,  through  which 
the  stream  has  cut  its  way.  Away  to  the  south  in  the 
direction  of  Dolto  Nor,  the  head  of  the  Kobdo  River, 


326  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

the  lofty,  jagged  peaks  of  the  Great  Altai  rose  up  and 
formed  a  marked  contrast  to  the  featureless  country, 
through  which  we  had  been  marching  for  the  last  few 
days. 

We  pitched  our  camp  close  to  a  cluster  of  yurts. 
In  exchange  for  a  few  safety-pins  and  a  yard  or  two 
of  scarlet  ribbon,  we  got  as  much  milk  and  fuel  as  we 
could  want.  On  the  following  morning  we  saw  an 
imposing-looking  cavalcade  approaching  :  it  turned  out 
to  be  the  chief  of  the  Altai  Uriankhai  and  his  retainers. 
He  was  a  cheery  old  soul,  and  plied  us  with  questions 
incessantly.  How  far  was  it  to  London  ?  How  many 
horses,  cattle,  and  sheep  had  we  ?  What  did  we  pay 
for  our  wives  in  England,  and  how  many  did  we  each 
have  ?  To  all  these  and  many  more  questions  Makan- 
daroff  found  suitable  replies,  which,  if  not  truthful, 
certainly  did  not  belittle  us  in  any  way.  As  the  success 
or  failure  of  our  '  sheep  '-hunt  depended  on  getting 
on  the  right  side  of  the  old  fellow,  we  presented  him 
with  an  old  telescope  which  had  been  brought  from 
England  for  such  a  purpose.  His  pleasure  was  almost 
pathetic,  and,  when  it  was  focussed  on  to  some  horses 
a  mile  away,  he  giggled  with  childish  delight.  From 
that  moment  our  success,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned, 
was  assured.  We  were  promised  horses  and  men  for 
the  following  day. 

As  usual,  we  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  con- 
vincing the  men  that  it  was  only  the  old  rams  we  wished 
to  shoot,  on  account  of  their  horns.  This  was  more 
than  they  could  grasp.  What  use  could  we  make  of 
"  koshgor "  horns  ?  Perhaps  we  made  them  into 
medicine,  as  the  Chinese  did  with  the  maral  horns. 
But  if  it  was  the  horns  we  wanted,  why  didn't  we  pick 


A    MONGOL   TYPE. 


326] 


SPORT   ON   THE    PLATEAUX  327 

Up  those  which  were  lying  about  on  the  ground  ?  We 
could  collect  a  hundred  in  a  day,  and  an  old  koshgor 
running  wild  over  the  hills  was  so  hard  to  get  near. 
At  last,  after  much  chatter,  a  grizzled  old  veteran  pushed 
his  way  to  the  front.  He  understood  what  we  wanted. 
Some  years  before  he  had  been,  he  said,  a  caravan-man 
to  two  white  koshgor-hunters  '  like  ourselves.  He  was 
a  marmot-hunter  by  profession,  and  had  plied  his  trade 
for  some  thirty  years.  Though  he  had  never  bothered 
much  about  the  "  rams,"  it  being  much  easier  to  get 
within  shot  of  females  with  his  old  muzzle-loader,  yet 
he  knew  where  they  were,  and  guaranteed  to  take  us 
to  a  place  where  we  should  see  large  numbers  every  day. 
The  nearest  way  to  reach  the  best  place  which  he  knew 
of  was  to  retrace  our  steps  as  far  as  Belota  and  strike 
up  west  from  there. 

While  Carruthers  and  Price  spent  the  day  after 
wild-fowl,  I  took  a  man  with  me  and  climbed  on  to  the 
plateau-like  top  of  the  Bain-Khairkhan  ridge,  which 
protrudes  eastwards  from  the  main  divide  between  the 
Suok  and  Chagan-gol  Rivers,  in  a  solid  round-headed 
block  rising  8,000  or  9,000  ft. 

It  was  delightful  on  this  invigorating  autumn  day, 
with  the  sun  shining  down  from  a  clear  still  sky,  to 
move  from  one  ridge  to  another,  spying  the  ground 
ahead  from  each  vantage-point,  whilst  lying  comfort- 
ably on  the  short,  springy  turf.  Some  wild  life  was 
almost  continually  in  view.  We  saw  marmots,  snow- 
cock,  a  wolf,  a  small  herd  of  ewes  and  young,  and  five 
young  rams  that  day.  I  decided  to  try  and  shoot  one 
of  the  rams  for  meat,  but  it  was  terribly  difficult  stalking 
country,  and,  in  spite  of  the  most  snake-like  wriggUng, 

1  Probably  Prince  Demidoff  and  Mr.  St.  George  Littledale. 


328  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

300  yards  was  as  near  as  I  could  get.  The  shot  resulted 
in  a  broken  front  leg.  We  pursued  it  for  many  miles, 
but  to  try  and  catch  up  with  an  ammon,  which  has  no 
more  serious  wound  than  this,  is  pretty  hopeless  work, 
and  eventually  we  lost  the  tracks  on  a  shale  slope,  and 
reluctantly  had  to  give  it  up. 

On  the  way  back  to  camp  we  almost  rode  on  to  the 
top  of  six  gazelle  feeding  in  a  hollow  among  the  hills. 
My  man  advised  a  drive,  as  the  surest  way  of  getting  a 
shot.  From  this  and  subsequent  experiences,  I  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  gazelle  are  one  of  the  few 
beasts  that  can  be  successfully  driven.  They  are  foolish 
and  inquisitive  animals,  and  can  be  moved  in  almost 
any  direction  by  men  who  understand  their  habits. 
Making  a  wide  detour,  I  took  up  my  position  on  a  narrow 
neck  connecting  the  small  depression  with  a  much 
larger  one.  The  Mongol,  leading  the  two  horses,  then 
began  to  move  slowly  towards  my  position.  Instead  of 
at  once  clearing  out  of  the  neighbourhood,  the  gazelle 
began  to  move  slowly  towards  me.  They  would  trot 
for  a  short  distance  and  then  wheel  round  for  a  look 
at  the  man,  making  a  very  pretty  picture  as  they  bounced 
about  on  all  four  feet  at  once,  whisking  their  tails,  and 
extending  the  white  hair  of  their  rumps  as  a  danger- 
signal.  When  they  came  within  rather  less  than  100 
yards  of  me,  I  knocked  one  over,  and,  at  once  getting 
into  a  sitting  position,  doubled  up  two  more,  just  like 
shot  rabbits,  as  they  streamed  past  at  about  sixty  yards. 
For  running  shots  like  this,  a  "256  Mannlicher,  with  a 
Lyman  aperture  sight,  is,  to  my  mind,  the  ideal  weapon. 
As  trophies  they  were  of  no  account,  being  only  yearling 
bucks ;  but  their  meat  was  a  welcome  change  from  the 
everlasting   mutton.     The   gazelle,   with   the  exception 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  329 

of  the  roe-deer,  is  the  finest  of  all  the  Central   Asian 
game,  from  an  edible  point  of  view. 

Next  day  we  started  off  for  our  hunting-ground 
under  the  guidance  of  the  old  marmot-hunter.  We  had 
only  six  light  horseloads  of  baggage  with  us,  the  bulk 
of  the  heavy  stuff  being  left  with  the  old  chief  to  be 
picked  up  on  our  return.  A  severe  blizzard  came  on 
before  we  had  gone  far,  necessitating  an  early  camp  ; 
in  the  teeth  of  the  storm  the  horses  made  very  slow 
progress. 

This  is  typical  of  the  weather  we  experienced  in  the 
Altai  during  the  end  of  August  and  the  beginning  of 
September.  There  would  be  a  few  glorious  days,  then 
a  sudden  drop  in  the  temperature  and  a  blizzard  of 
Arctic  severity,  followed  by  another  fine  spell.  We 
spent  a  chilly  night  of  it  with  the  thermometer  at  18** 
Fahr.,  and  a  howling  wind  tugging  at  the  tent- ropes. 
The  morning  broke  clear,  revealing  a  land  of  whiteness, 
and  the  dark  tail  of  the  storm,  disappearing  to  the  south- 
east. Another  long  day's  march  due  west,  up  and 
down  over  the  low  outer  hills,  brought  us  to  where 
the  Uigur  stream  divides  into  several  heads.  Our  camp 
was  pitched  in  a  sheltered  position,  with  abundance  of 
tezek,  close  to  two  small  tarns  which  were  full  of 
grayling. 

We  were  now  on  our  hunting-ground,  and  what 
hunter  is  there  who  has  not  experienced  that  "  first 
night  on  a  new  ground  "  feehng  ?  As  he  lies  in  his 
blankets,  pondering  over  the  possibilities  of  the  morrow, 
hope,  doubt,  success  and  failure,  all  chase  through  his 
mind.  Old  red-letter  days  and  days  of  blank  disaster 
are  raked  up  and  gone  over  in  detail.  At  length  he 
falls   into   a   troubled   sleep,    with   visions   of   colossal 


330  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

"  heads  "  which  will  not  allow  themselves  to  be  ap- 
proached. But  in  the  morning  the  necessity  for  action 
clears  away  all  this,  and  he  starts  out  full  of  confidence. 

To  hunt  any  of  the  big  sheep  of  Central  Asia  success- 
fully, it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  make  a  really 
early  start  from  camp.  As  Makandaroff  put  it  in  his 
very  picturesque  language,  **  What  time  hunt  mouton 
nlcessaire  rise  early.     Mouton  be  very  good  general.'' 

Wild-sheep  generally  spend  several  hours  during  the 
middle  of  the  day,  especially  during  the  hot  summer 
months,  in  lying  down  in  one  of  those  unapproachable 
positions  which  the  hunter  learns  to  know  only  too 
well.  A  very  favourite  site  is  on  a  shale-slope,  which 
harmonizes  perfectly  with  their  own  colour,  near  the 
crest  of  some  commanding,  round-topped  hill,  though 
not  actually  on  the  top,  for  that  would  advertise  their 
position  to  their  enemies.  The  wind,  curling  over  the 
crest  to  them,  secures  them  on  their  only  blind  side,  for 
few  beasts  possess  a  more  highly  developed  sense  of 
smell.  In  every  other  direction  their  restless  gaze 
wanders  incessantly  over  a  vast  expanse  of  smooth 
rolling  grass  and  shale,  across  which,  as  a  rule,  it  is 
quite  useless  for  a  human  being  to  attempt  to  approach 
them.  If  sheep  have  been  driven  into  rougher  and 
more  broken  ground,  as  is  often  the  case  in  the  Tian 
Shan,  where  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  take  up  a 
position  commanding  an  extensive  view,  they  have 
the  almost  uncanny  knack  of  selecting  a  resting-place 
where,  owing  to  the  formation  of  the  ground,  the  wind 
converges  upon  them  in  all  directions.  For  this  reason 
the  horse-shoe-shaped  head  of  a  valley  is  much  favoured 
by  them.  It  is  principally  persecution,  from  time  im- 
memorial, by   their  most  dreaded  enemies,  the  wolves, 


T<  »         ."^ 


1  « 


o 

CO 


C^. 


x^--f  'iff 


SPORT   ON    THE    PLATEAUX  331 

that  has  made  them  the  wonderful  tacticians  they 
are.  But  the  hunter  has  not  always  to  contend  against 
such  insurmountable  difficulties.  In  the  early  morning, 
and  again  in  the  evening,  they  leave  their  impregnable 
position  to  graze.  The  rolling  nature  of  the  ground 
which  they  then  have  to  pass  over  gives  the  hunter 
his  opportunity.  Whilst  some  succulent  feed  holds  them 
in  a  fold  of  the  ground,  a  close  approach  is  often  possible. 
On  several  occasions  I  have  got  within  fifty  yards  or 
less  of  a  herd. 

I  do  not  intend  to  go  into  details  here  about  the 
equipment  for  a  hunting-trip  to  the  Altai.  I  shall 
confine  myself  to  suggesting  one  or  two  labour-saving 
methods.'  mV 

When  sheep-hunting  it  is,  to  my  mind,  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  be  equipped  for  a  night  out.  It  often 
happens  that,  in  following  a  wounded  beast,  one  gets 
benighted  many  miles  from  camp,  or  perhaps  one  does 
not  find  game  till  the  evening,  when  it  is  too  late,  or 
the  ground  is  unsuitable  for  a  stalk  that  day.  In  either 
case  it  is  a  waste  of  time  and  labour  to  ride,  perhaps 
ten  miles,  back  to  camp  and  return  again  in  the  morning. 
What  I  consider  the  best  equipment  for  a  night's  bivouac 
is  either  a  tente  d'abri,  or  a  light  ground-sheet,  in  case  of 
bad  weather,  a  small  cooking-pot,  in  which  one  can 
pack  one's  provisions,  such  as  bread,  tea,  sugar,  cold 
mutton,  salt,  bovril,  and  chocolate,  according  to  in- 
dividual tastes  ;  a  large  mug  and  a  spoon.  A  small 
fiarer,  or  spirit-lamp,  should  be  carried,  as  there  is 
never  any  wood  on  sheep-ground,  and  tezek  may 
not  be  handy,  or  may  be  sodden  by  a  storm.     These 

*  Major  Swayne.  in  his  book  Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia,  goes 
<ieeply  into  the  question  of  equipment. 


332  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

things  can  easily  be  carried  on  the  hunter's  horse, 
leaving  plenty  of  room  on  one's  own  for  coats,  blankets, 
etc'  By  this  means,  the  disturbing  feeling  of  having 
to  hurry  can  be  done  away  with. 

It  is  always  worth  while  to  take  two  men  out  with 
you,  so  that  the  second  man  can  be  left  in  charge  of 
the  horses  while  you  and  your  hunter  stalk  the  sheep. 
In  this  way  the  horses  can  be  brought  up  by  signal, 
and  much  time  and  unnecessary  fatigue  saved.  I  can, 
however,  only  recommend  this  provided  that  your 
"  second  horseman  "  is  used  to  the  ways  of  the  European 
hunter,  or  is  above  the  average  in  intelligence.  Other- 
wise he  may  prove  a  source  of  great  danger  and  annoy- 
ance. More  than  once  has  a  stalk  been  ruined  by  the 
second  man,  who,  having  got  tired  of  waiting,  and 
wanting  to  see  what  was  happening,  has  ridden  boldly 
on  to  a  skyline,  and  frightened  the  game.  And  the 
reverse  of  this  can  try  one's  temper  pretty  severely, 
especially  after  an  unsuccessful  stalk.  It  is  exasperating 
to  signal  for  the  horses  to  be  brought  up  and  have  no 
reply,  and  be  compelled  to  trudge  back  to  where  they 
have  been  left,  only  to  find  one's  "  second  horseman  " 
fast  asleep. 

I  seemed  to  have  been  asleep  only  an  hour  or  two, 
when  Mac  woke  me  up  by  pulling  the  tent-flaps  back 
and  saying  that  the  horses  were  being  saddled  and  it 
was  time  to  be  moving  off.  At  five  on  a  September 
morning,  8,000  ft.  up,  with  15°  of  frost  in  the  air,  one 
does  not  feel  one's  best,  and  it  is  advisable  to  get  over 
the  discomfort  of  crawling  out  of  the  warm  blankets 

^  I  strongly  recommend  a  pair  of  leather  saddle-bags,  also  a  Cossack 
saddle,  which  can  be  purchased  in  nearly  any  Russian  town,  and  is  quite 
the  best  for  hunting  or  caravan  work. 


SPORT   ON   THE    PLATEAUX  333 

and  pulling  on  frozen  boots  as  quickly  as  possible. 
Luckily,  no  other  dressing  is  necessary,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  donning  a  heavy  overcoat.  After  gulping 
down  the  usual  unsatisfactory  early  meal  and  seeing 
that  the  saddle-bags  were  stocked  with  provisions, 
cartridges,  etc.,  I  mounted  a  shaggy  little  Mongol  pony, 
and,  followed  by  the  old  hunter  and  another  "  local," 
made  for  some  high  ground  to  the  north.  At  the  same 
time  the  two  other  parties  moved  off  in  different  direc- 
tions. We  looked  like  cavalry  patrols  starting  out  to 
reconnoitre  an  enemy's  position. 

A  piercing  cold  wind  seemed  to  cut  right  through 
me,  in  spite  of  a  sheepskin  coat  and  Canadian  mits, 
as  we  crunched  our  way  up  a  half-frozen  stream-bed  in 
the  cold  grey  morning  light,  that  made  me  look  with 
longing  eyes  towards  the  small  patches  of  sun  which 
were  just  tinting  the  highest  points.  The  indifference 
with  which  the  Mongols  and  Kirghiz  treat  both  the 
heat  of  summer  (and  in  the  thin  atmosphere  of  the 
plateau  the  sun  has  terrific  power)  and  the  frightful 
cold  of  winter  is  almost  incredible.  It  is  not  an  un- 
common sight  to  see  young  children  turned  naked 
outside  the  yurts,  in  all  weathers,  to  get  hardened  ! 
This  Spartan  treatment  leads  to  the  "  survival  of  the 
fittest,"  and  has  produced  a  people  whom  it  would 
be  hard  to  beat  for  indifference  to  climatic  extremes. 

On  reaching  the  head  of  the  valley,  the  old  man 
indicated  an  outcrop  of  rock  as  being  a  suitable  place 
from  which  to  start  spying.  Leaving  the  "  second 
horseman  "  behind,  we  crept  forward  to  this  vantage- 
point.  A  large  stretch  of  country  lay  before  us.  We 
were  on  the  edge  of  a  considerable  plateau  composed  of 
undulating  grass-land,  with  outcrops  of  rock  here  and 


334  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

there,  and  patches  of  shale  on  the  tops  of  the  low  ridges. 
The  whole  land,  with  the  exception  of  the  steep  slopes 
facing  south,  was  thinly  covered  with  snow,  while  the 
numerous  small  tarns  and  boggy  hollows  were  frozen 
over. 

To  my  mind,  one  of  the  chief  joys  of  sheep-hunting 
is  the  opportunity  one  has  of  using  the  glasses  and 
telescope.  Owing  to  the  openness  of  the  country,  and 
clear  atmosphere,  vast  stretches  can  be  spied  from  any 
elevated  position,  and  game  of  some  kind  is  constantly 
in  view.  I  had  been  lying  there  for  half  an  hour  or 
so,  revelling  in  the  warmth  of  the  newly  risen  sun,  and 
carefully  quartering  the  country  ahead  with  the  glasses, 
when  suddenly  they  revealed  some  brown  smudges 
just  below  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  a  good  two  miles  away. 
Changing  the  Zeiss  glasses  for  the  telescope,  I  was  able 
to  make  them  out  to  be  eleven  "  rams,"  lying  down. 
However,  they  were  against  a  background  of  such 
protective  colouring,  and  the  distance  was  so  great, 
that  it  was  impossible  to  say  if  they  were  really  big 
ones  or  not.  The  old  man,  after  looking  through  the 
telescope,  which  I  had  wedged  between  two  rocks, 
pronounced  them  to  be  "  kara  "  (black),  and  there- 
fore "  bolshoi  koshgor  "  (big  rams).  I  did  not,  however, 
attach  much  importance  to  his  decision,  as  all  natives 
will  try  and  persuade  one  that  game  is  "  big  "  in  order 
to  encourage  one  to  shoot  some  for  meat. 

As  we  watched,  they  exhibited  one  of  those  sudden 
panics  that  I  have  often  noticed  among  "  sheep  "  and 
ibex  ;  these  frights  are  caused  by  a  sudden  change  in 
the  wind,  which  leaves  them  open  to  attack  in  some 
direction.  After  rushing  madly  downhill  for  a  short 
distance,  away  from  that  now  dangerous  skyline,  they 


:»'« •  ■*. 

'  ■'; 

■-  ^  >** 

'^^^i 

< 

-  -^ 

W 

.0:t 

Pi 

%,,!         \ 

H 

r 

X'     ■- 

< 

SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  335 

seemed  to  recover  from  their  fright,  and,  after  gazing 
up  wind  for  a  few  minutes,  one  by  one,  they  began  to 
paw  the  ground  and  lie  down  again. 

A  lengthy  discussion  now  took  place  as  to  our  next 
move  ;  it  was  carried  on  in  a  mixture  of  Russian  and 
Turki.  The  old  fellow  had  picked  up  a  few  words  of 
the  former  from  wool-merchants  and  traders,  and  of 
the  latter  most  Altai  Mongols  have  a  smattering,  from 
contact  with  their  neighbours,  the  Kirghiz.  Having 
decided  on  our  line  of  approach,  we  retreated  to  the 
horses,  and,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  folds  of  the 
ground,  were  able  to  ride  over  the  greater  portion  of 
the  intervening  distance. 

On  reaching  the  rounded  end  of  the  hill  on  which 
the  "  rams  "  were  lying,  though  still  half  a  mile  down- 
wind from  them,  we  again  left  the  horses  and  pro- 
ceeded on  foot,  our  objective  being  the  crest  of  the  ridge 
almost  above  the  herd.  Constantly  trying  the  wind, 
which  was  very  light,  with  particles  of  wool  from  the 
old  hunter's  coat,  we  reached  our  new  vantage-point. 
Choosing  a  cluster  of  rocks,  I  slowly  raised  my  head  inch 
by  inch  above  the  crest  till  I  was  able  to  get  the  glasses 
on  to  the  herd,  and  then  my  heart  gave  great  throbs 
of  excitement  as,  for  the  first  time,  I  realized  that 
before  me  were  as  fine  a  lot  of  heads  as  any  hunter 
had  ever  looked  upon.  As  the  old  Mongol  scanned 
them  his  wrinkled  face  slowly  broadened  into  a  grin. 
Turning  to  me  with  an  "I  told  you  so  !  "  look, 
he  said,  *'  Bolshoi  koshgor,"  at  the  same  time  clasping 
his  thigh  with  both  hands  to  indicate  the  girth  of  the 
horns.  They  were  now  about  400  yards  below,  and 
slightly  to  our  left,  on  a  gently  sloping  hillside.  At 
first  sight  it  looked  as  if  a  closer  approach  were  out  of 
II — 2 


336  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

the  question,  and  I  was  making  up  my  mind  for  a  long 
wait,  when  a  more  careful  scrutiny  revealed  a  narrow, 
shallow  trench  that  ran  from  the  crest  down  the  other- 
wise smooth  hillside.  Giving  the  hunter  strict  injunc- 
tions to  stay  where  he  was,  and  not  to  move  till  I  fired, 
I  slung  the  telescope  over  my  shoulder,  and,  dragging 
my  rifle  after  me,  began  to  worm  my  way  down  the 
trench.  It  was  an  anxious  and  painful  crawl,  or  rather 
wriggle,  the  cover  being  none  too  good,  and  the  stones 
unusually  sharp. 

At  last,  with  bleeding  hands  and  aching  frame,  a 
point  was  reached  which  I  judged  to  be  as  far  as  it 
was  prudent  to  go,  so,  making  a  small  screen  of  stones 
before  me,  I  peered  through  them.  What  a  sight  it  was 
that  riveted  my  gaze  !  I  was  actually  within  shot  of 
eleven  old  ammon  rams,  the  smallest  of  which  had 
horns  certainly  not  less  than  50  in.  in  length,  and  the 
largest  a  good  60  in.  Wedging  the  telescope  between 
the  stones,  I  looked  them  all  over  thoroughly,  but, 
among  so  many  beauties,  it  was  some  time  before  I 
could  decide  which  carried  "the  head  of  heads."  It  is 
probably  harder  to  judge  the  size  of  the  horns  of  sheep 
than  any  other  species  of  game  ;  in  profile  it  is  im- 
possible to  estimate  their  size  at  all  accurately.  In 
hurried  shots  this  often  leads  to  your  shooting  at  some 
small  five-year-old  beast,  whose  horns  bend  out  sharply 
from  the  head,  and  therefore  catch  your  eye  first, 
when  there  may  be  several  really  fine  heads  in  the 
herd,  whose  "  nip  in  "  escapes  you  in  the  hurry  of  the 
moment. 

However,  on  this  occasion  I  had  ample  time,  and 
eventually  decided  in  favour  of  an  old  fellow  whose 
horns  seemed  of  great  thickness,  "  nipped  in  "  close  to 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  337 

the  head,  and  terminating  in  a  sHght  downward  bend. 
I  was  still  about  250  yards  from  them,  rather  too  far 
to  make  certain  of  a  lying  shot,  so  I  decided  to  wait  till 
they  got  up  to  feed.  It  was  now  8.30,  well  past  their 
usual  feeding-time.  I  take  it,  that  the  reason  the  old 
rams  become  so  irregular  in  their  habits  at  this 
season  is  that,  having  spent  all  the  summer  grazing 
on  the  finest  grass,  they  become  so  fat  and  lazy  towards 
autumn  that  they  only  feed  for  a  very  short  time,  and 
at  irregular  intervals  during  the  day. 

For  a  good  hour  I  lay  there  with  the  snow-water 
slowly  working  its  way  through  my  clothes,  in  the 
constant  dread  that  the  wind  would  shift,  and  the  old 
man  would  get  tired  and  show  himself  (always  a  great 
danger  with  these  people),  or  that  some  other  cause 
would  rob  me  of  this  chance  of  a  life-time.  At  a  moment 
like  this  one's  feelings  are  much  too  acute  for  enjoy- 
ment, but  I  shall  always  treasure  the  recollection  of 
that  hour,  spent  in  such  close  proximity  to  those  hoary 
old  patriarchs,  as  among  the  finest  of  my  hunting  ex- 
periences. They  seemed  to  be  in  no  hurry  to  move, 
they  were  evidently  enjoying  to  the  full  the  warmth  of 
the  sun.  Every  now  and  then  one  would  get  up,  nibble 
at  a  tuft  of  grass,  and  then,  after  pawing  the  ground,  lie 
down  again.  Some  were  lying  with  their  necks  stretched 
out  along  the  ground,  as  if  resting  themselves  from 
the  terrible  weight  nature  has  imposed  upon  them. 
Others  were  sitting  up,  and  chewing  the  cud,  keenly  on 
the  look-out.  The  ram  I  had  chosen  was  lying  broad- 
side on  to  me,  so  that  I  was.  only  able  to  see  his  horns 
well  when  he  now  and  then  turned  his  head  for  a  look 
in  my  direction. 

My  patience  was  almost  exhausted,  when  one  by  one 


333  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

they  got  up  and  began  to  feed.  My  ram  was  the  third 
to  rise,  and,  as  he  stretched  himself  broad-side  on,  I 
let  drive  with  my  "318,  the  answering  thud  teUing  me 
all  I  wanted  to  know.  In  a  second  they  were  pounding 
downhill,  never  even  stopping  for  the  usual  backward 
look  ;  another  shot  as  they  disappeared  only  succeeded 
in  knocking  up  the  snow  under  the  belly  of  the  last. 
Running  down,  I  at  once  found  an  enormous  blood- 
spoor,  and  knew  that,  with  any  luck,  the  big  one  was 
mine.  The  old  hunter  looked  very  crestfallen  as  he 
came  up,  thinking  that  I  had  made  a  mess  of  the  whole 
thing,  but,  on  seeing  the  blood,  his  spirits  at  once  revived^ 
and,  by  placing  his  head  on  one  side  and  closing  his 
eyes,  he  wished  me  to  understand  that  we  should  very 
soon  find  the  ram  lying  dead. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  horses,  we  mounted  and  fol- 
lowed along  the  clearly  marked  trail  at  a  good  pace. 
We  had  covered  some  four  miles  of  undulating  country, 
and  the  blood-trail  was  getting  less  and  less,  when 
suddenly,  as  we  rode  too  carelessly  over  the  top  of  the 
rise,  up  jumped  the  ram  from  among  the  rocks  as  if 
nothing  was  the  matter,  giving  me  no  time  to  dismount 
and  shoot.  After  going  a  short  way,  he  slowed  down 
to  a  walk.  I  now  had  another  look  at  him,  and  could 
see  that  I  had  hit  him  rather  too  far  back  in  the  ribs  ; 
it  shows  the  extraordinary  vitality  of  these  beasts, 
that,  in  spite  of  a  terrible  wound  and  enormous  loss  of 
blood,  he  could  travel  about  four  miles,  and  still  keep 
on  his  legs. 

We  now  sat  and  watched  him  as  he  made  his  way 
down  a  long  slope,  across  a  stream,  and  up  the  farther 
hillside.  But  here  the  slope  was  too  much  for  him, 
and  he  soon  lay  down  again.     Dark  clouds  now  begaa 


.  0^ 


^,j 


;* 


"bir 


00 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  339 

to  roll  up  from  the  north-west,  and  I  realized  that,  if 
that  head  was  to  be  mine,  matters  must  be  brought  to 
a  speedy  conclusion.  Another  long  detour  brought 
us  above  him  again,  and,  after  another  uncomfortable 
downhill  slither,  the  tops  of  his  horns  appeared  not  fifty 
yards  off.  The  recognition  was  mutual ;  but,  before  he 
could  do  more  than  jump  to  his  feet,  a  copper-capped 
bullet  pierced  his  shoulder  and  he  went  sliding  down 
the  steep  face  of  the  hill.  He  carried  a  marvellous 
head,  even  finer  than  I  had  hoped.  The  horns  were 
61J  in.  in  length,  20J  in  girth  at  the  base,  and  had  a 
spread  of  37J  in.  He  stood  53  in.  at  the  shoulder,  and 
his  age  was  estimated  at  fifteen  years. 

In  autumn  coat  the  coloration  of  an  old  amnion 
ram  is  very  striking.  The  nose  is  white,  forehead  and 
cheeks  grey-brown,  neck  and  upper  part  of  the  body 
dark  chocolate,  freely  sprinkled  with  white  hairs,  which 
slightly  predominate  on  the  shoulders  and  along  the 
back  ;  this  gives  them  a  very  grizzled  appearance. 
The  belly  and  rump-patch  are  white,  legs  grey-mottled 
above  and  white  below  the  knees.  In  full  winter  coat 
an  ammon  ram  is  of  a  dirty-white  colour  on  the  body 
and  neck,  and  pure  white  on  the  nose,  legs,  and  rump. 
The  ammon  differs  from  nearly  all  other  large  Central 
Asian  sheep  in  that  he  does  not  grow  a  long  neck-ruff. 
In  summer  the  coat  is  exceedingly  short,  but  in  winter 
it  lengthens  all  over  the  body  and  neck  to  about  two 
inches. 

The  two  men  were  delighted  with  our  success,  and 
chatted  incessantly  as  they  phed  their  knives — not,  I 
fear,  because  I  had  got  what  I  wanted,  but  with  thoughts 
of  the  meat  orgy  that  was  to  follow.  While  keeping 
an  eye  on  them,  to  see  that  they  cut  a  good  long  head- 


340  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

skin,  I  tackled  the  cold  mutton  and  bread  in  my  saddle- 
bag. It  was  then  nine  hours  since  we  had  left  camp, 
but,  in  the  excitement  of  the  chase,  hunger  had  been 
forgotten. 

In  spite  of  a  flurry  of  snow  and  an  icy  wind,  we 
were  a  cheery  trio  as  we  returned  to  camp.  In  the 
intervals  of  much  snuff-taking,  the  old  hunter  kept  up 
a  flow  of  talk  in  his  mixture  of  Mongolian  and  Russian  ; 
the  fact  that  I  only  understood  an  occasional  word  did 
not  bother  him  in  the  least. 

Carruthers  and  Price  had  both  seen  a  good  many 
sheep,  but  nothing  of  any  size ;  so  next  day,  while  they 
started  off  early,  I  saw  to  the  cleaning  of  the  head,  and 
then  moved  our  camp  some  five  miles  farther  up  the 
valley. 

Our  men  now  began  to  give  trouble  ;  though  they 
had  been  with  us  only  three  days,  they  said  they  wanted 
to  return.  Their  excuses  were  various,  the  chief  one 
being  that  their  presence  was  needed  to  protect  their 
families  and  flocks  from  the  wolves.  This  is  one  of  the 
chief  difficulties  one  has  to  contend  with  in  Central 
Asia  ;  the  natives  are  so  independent,  and,  in  the  out- 
of-the-way  parts,  care  so  little  for  money,  that  we 
frequently  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  persuading  them 
to  accompany  us.  As  long  as  you  are  merely  travelling 
straight  through  the  country,  everything  goes  smoothly  ; 
one  chief  hands  you  on  to  the  next,  and  you  are  treated 
magnificently ;  but  directly  you  wish  to  stop  or  to  go 
off  the  main  tracks,  there  is  difficulty.  The  only  thing 
to  do,  on  entering  a  new  country  in  which  you  intend 
to  hunt,  is  to  go  straight  to  the  head-man  of  the  district, 
even  if  it  be  some  distance  out  of  your  way  ;  make  friends 
with  him  by  giving  him  a  good  present,  such  as  a  cheap 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  341 

pair  of  field-glasses,  or  an  automatic  pistol,  and  request 
him  politely  but  firmly,  to  supply  you  with  men  for  as 
long  as  you  wish  to  remain  in  his  district.  On  this 
occasion  I  had  all  the  men  up  and  pointed  out,  through 
Makandaroff,  that  if  there  was  any  more  grumbUng, 
we  would  report  the  matter  to  the  authorities  at  Suok, 
and  have  them  severely  beaten.  This  quieted  them  for 
the  time,  but  they  continued  to  work  in  a  very  half- 
hearted manner. 

Carruthers  did  not  get  back  to  camp  till  a  late  hour 
that  night.  As  it  began  to  grow  dark  we  became  a 
little  anxious,  for  to  spend  the  night  out  without  food 
or  fire,  and  with  20  degrees  of  frost,  would  be  anything 
but  a  cheerful  experience.  As  large  a  fire  as  possible 
was  kept  going  with  the  limited  supply  of  dry  horse- 
dung  at  our  disposal,  and  every  half-hour  both  barrels 
of  the  i2-bore  were  fired  off.  At  about  nine  o'clock 
horses  were  heard  approaching,  and  Carruthers  and  his 
men  rode  into  camp.  It  appeared  that  a  band  of 
'*  rams"  had  only  been  found  late  in  the  afternoon,  and 
that  by  the  time  he  had  got  within  shot  it  was  getting 
dark.  He  brought  in  one  head,  and  had  hopes  of  re- 
trieving, on  the  following  day,  two  more  beasts  that  he 
had  hit,  it  being  too  late  to  follow  them  up  at  the  time. 

It  was  one  of  those  glorious,  crisp,  still  mornings, 
which  one  associates  with  the  plateaux  of  Central  Asia 
in  their  most  pleasant  moods,  as  we  sallied  out  on  the 
following  day,  and  I  felt  thoroughly  in  tune  with  the 
inspiring  scene  around  me.  As  the  old  man  and  I 
rode  along  over  the  springy  turf,  the  shrill  whistle  of 
the  marmots  resounded  on  every  hand.  By  the  autumn 
these  jolly  animals  have  amassed  such  quantities  of 
fat,  preparatory  to  their  winter  sleep,  that  they  present 


342  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

a  most  comical  appearance.  Their  short  legs  are  almost 
invisible,  and,  as  they  make  for  their  holes,  they  look 
just  like  large  muffs  rolling  down  the  hillside.  Though 
these  animals,  along  with  the  snowcock,  add  greatly 
to  the  picturesqueness  of  the  scene,  they  are  no  friends 
of  the  hunter.  On  several  occasions,  whilst  after 
sheep  or  ibex,  my  stalk  has  been  spoilt  either  by  the 
whistle  of  a  marmot,  whose  quickness  of  eyesight  is 
almost  unequalled,  or  by  the  weird  cries  of  a  covey 
of  snowcock  as  they  sailed  out  over  the  valley. 

During  the  morning  we  came  across  a  marmot- 
hunter,  a  wild-looking  figure  clad  in  tattered  sheep-skins, 
and  armed  with  an  ancient  long-barrelled  muzzle-loader, 
with  the  usual  forked  rest.  During  the  summer  these 
hunters  wander  about  the  hills,  carrying  nothing  in 
the  way  of  food  except  a  goat-skin  sack  of  "  kummis  " 
and  a  small  bag  of  salt,  tied  to  their  saddles.  They 
rely  almost  entirely  on  marmot-flesh  for  their  meat, 
only  occasionally  killing  a  wild-sheep,  when  an  easy 
opportunity  presents  itself. 

There  are  two  methods  of  hunting  the  marmot 
adopted  by  these  people  ;  one  is  merely  to  make  a  low 
breastwork  of  sods  within  30  yards  or  so  of  a  well-used 
burrow,  and  lie  patiently  behind  it  till  a  beast  appears  ; 
the  other  requires  slightly  greater  skill  and  energy. 
On  locating  the  marmot  outside  his  hole  the  hunter 
advances  boldly  towards  it  at  a  rapid  walk,  carrying  his 
gun  in  his  right  hand,  and  incessantly  waving  a  bunch 
of  white  sheeps'-wool  attached  to  a  stick,  or  a  fox's 
brush,  in  his  left.  This  unusual  sight  so  excites  the 
curiosity  of  the  marmot  that  he  will  often  sit  bolt- 
upright  at  the  entrance  to  his  hole,  and  allow  the  hunter 
to  approach  close  enough  for  a  hurried  shot. 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  343 

We  covered  an  enormous  stretch  of  country  that 
day,  and  saw  large  numbers  of  sheep  ;  they  were  mostly 
females,  but  one  herd  of  thirteen  rams  contained  two 
or  three  beauties.  However,  the  first  day's  success 
was  not  destined  to  be  repeated.  They  had  evidently 
been  disturbed,  and  had  taken  up  such  an  unapproach- 
able position,  both  with  regard  to  wind  and  the  open- 
ness of  the  country,  that,  though  we  tried  every  artifice, 
they  eventually  got  our  wind,  and  made  tracks  for  the 
higher  ground.  We  came  across  a  great  quantity  of 
derelict  horns  that  day  ;  in  one  small  valley  below  a 
cliff  I  counted  fifty  in  about  half  a  mile  ;  it  is  in  places 
like  this  that  most  of  the  horns  are  met  with,  the  reason 
being  that  the  driven  snow  lies  deep  in  such  places 
in  winter.  At  that  season  packs  of  wolves  are  con- 
tinually harrying  the  sheep  ;  a  herd,  in  its  mad  rush 
for  safety,  gets  caught  in  a  drift  ;  the  females  and 
young  rams,  unencumbered  with  40  lb.  weight  of  horn, 
make  good  their  escape,  while  the  old  rams  get 
stuck  fast  and  are  killed.  This  accounts  for  the  pre- 
dominance of  fair-sized  horns  lying  about  in  certain 
localities. 

On  reaching  camp,  I  saw  that  Carruthers'  hunter 
had  found  and  brought  in  the  two  heads  shot  the  day 
before,  one  of  them  being  a  beauty  of  55  in.  Carruthers 
himself,  soon  afterwards,  returned  with  another  fair 
head  of  50  in. — a  pretty  good  two  days'  work.  A  council 
was  held  that  night,  at  which  we  decided  that,  as  we 
still  had  such  enormous  distances  to  travel  before 
reaching  our  winter  quarters  at  Kulja,  we  could  not 
afford  any  more  time  for  hunting  the  sheep.  It 
was  very  disappointing  to  have  to  turn  our  backs  on 
the   old   rams   just   when   we  had  got  into  the  cream 


344  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

of  the  shooting,  but,  considering  the  short  time  we 
had  been  hunting,  we  had  done  fairly  well. 

However,  we  were  destined  to  spend  one  more  day 
in  the  Uigur  Valley,  as  on  the  following  morning  Car- 
ruthers  developed  a  severe  chill,  necessitating  a  day  in 
bed.  Price  went  out  hunting,  and  I  contented  myself 
with  taking  photographs  and  measuring  derelict  heads. 
Not  far  from  camp  I  came  upon  a  remarkably  fine 
wapiti  head  with  both  horns  attached  to  the  skull ; 
though  it  was  very  much  dried  up  and  bleached,  it 
measured  50  in.  in  length,  47J  in.  in  spread,  and  10  in. 
in  girth  above  the  burr,  with  twelve  well-developed 
points.  I  was  told  by  hunters  that  the  snow  lies  to 
such  a  depth  in  winter  in  the  forests  on  the  Russian 
side,  and  the  wapiti  are  so  hard  put  to  it  for  food,  that 
they  come  right  up  on  to  the  sheep  ground,  where 
large  areas  are  blown  clear  of  snow. 

A  knowledge  of  the  present  distribution  of  Ovis 
ammon  typica,  as  far  as  it  is  known,  may  be  of  use  to 
future  travellers,  especially  to  those  who  contemplate 
pioneering  on  new  hunting-grounds.  Undoubtedly,  in 
by-gone  ages,  the  distribution  of  these  sheep  was  con- 
siderably wider  than  it  is  at  the  present  day.  At  the 
period  of  Central  Asian  history  when  the  whole  land 
was  one  great  battle-field,  and  every  able-bodied  man 
was  drafted  into  the  ranks  of  the  vast  hordes  which 
swept  backwards  and  forwards  under  the  banners  of 
Jenghis  and  other  conquerors,  people  could  have  had 
little  time  for  hunting,  and,  in  all  probability,  lived 
in  compact  communities  for  safety's  sake ;  this  allowed 
the  sheep  to  roam  undisturbed  over  large  areas  to-day 
overrun  by  the  nomads. 

In  more  recent  times  the  introduction  of  firearms 


SPORT    ON    THE    PLATEAUX  345 

into  the  country  has  undoubtedly  helped  to  thin  out 
the  game ;  but,  with  the  exception  of  the  wapiti,  this 
is  only  a  minor  cause  for  their  steady  decrease,  both  in 
number  and  distribution  ;  the  primary  cause  is  un- 
doubtedly the  rapid  increase  of  the  population  on  the 
Chinese-Russian  frontier.  Not  only  is  the  birth-rate 
among  the  Kirghiz  increasing,  but  yearly  large  numbers 
are  driven  over  to  the  Chinese  side  by  the  advancing 
Russian  settlers.  This  necessitates  the  opening  up  of 
new  grazing-grounds  year  by  year,  so  that  the  game  is 
slowly  but  surely  being  driven  into  higher  and  more 
inaccessible  regions.  The  contraction  of  their  grazing- 
grounds  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  steady  decrease  in 
the  numbers  of  the  wild-sheep  of  Central  Asia. 

The  southern  slope  of  the  Tannu-ola  Range,  at  the 
point  where  we  crossed  it,  was  the  first  place  where  we 
came  upon  signs  of  sheep,  in  the  shape  of  a  few  old 
horn-cores  and  fragments  of  horn.  But  they  were  of 
great  age,  and  I  can  safely  say  that,  at  the  present  time, 
no  sheep  reach  as  far  east  as  this.  The  western  slope  of 
the  Kundelun  group  was  the  first  place  where  we  came 
upon  fresh  horns,  it  being  the  limit  of  their  winter 
range  in  this  direction.  The  natives  say  that  there  are 
sheep  at  the  head-waters  of  the  Kemchik  ;  the  distant 
view  we  got  of  the  country  in  that  direction  certainly 
looked  most  promising,  both  the  altitude  and  formation 
being  suitable  ;  this  would  be  the  most  northerly 
limit  of  the  ammon.  To  any  one  desirous  of  exploring 
new  ground,  the  frontier  range  between  the  head-waters 
of  the  Kemchik,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Kendikti, 
and  the  Chagan-bugazi  Pass,  is  quite  one  of  the  most 
likely  regions. 

Between  the  Chagan-bugazi  and  Ulan-daba  is  the 


346  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

region  which  sportsmen  have  most  visited,  and,  without 
doubt,  it  is  the  nucleus  of  the  ammon  ground.  The 
higher  pastures  of  this  broad  mass  of  ideal  sheep-country 
lie  above  the  summer  range  of  the  Mongols,  and  rams 
are  still  undoubtedly  plentiful  there.  The  Bain-Khair- 
khan,  in  the  days  of  Demidoff  and  Littledale,  must  have 
abounded  in  rams,  but  to-day  the  natives  graze  their 
flocks  over  the  greater  part  of  it,  and  the  chances  of 
shooting  a  good  head  there  are  remote.  There  is  ample 
proof  that  the  range  of  Ovis  amnion  typica  extends 
along  the  whole  length  of  the  Great  or  Mongolian 
Altai,  to  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  range. 

Though  more  than  one  Russian  explorer  mentions 
having  met  with  sheep  in  the  Eastern  Altai,  it  is 
to  Sir  Francis  Younghusband  that  we  are  indebted 
for  by  far  the  most  interesting  information  on  this 
subject.  In  his  remarkable  journey  of  1887  across  the 
Gobi,  from  Pekin  to  Hami,  he  struck  the  Great  Altai 
at  its  most  easterly  extremity  in  longitude  100°  East. 
He  estimated  the  height  of  the  range,  even  at  its  terminal 
portion,  as  9,000  ft.  above  sea-level,  and  the  natives 
reported  grassy  plateaux  in  the  centre.  These  two 
combinations  sound  suitable  for  ammon.  Though  Sir 
Francis  did  not  visit  these  high  plateaux,  where  the 
sheep  would  have  been  at  that  season  (July),  yet  on 
the  outlying  southern  foot-hills  horns  were  found  lying 
on  the  ground  which,  from  their  great  girth  of  19  in. 
and  general  shape,  undoubtedly  belonged  to  Ovis  ammon 
typica. 

When  we  were  in  the  desert  north-east  of  Guchen, 
the  Baitik  Bogdo  Range,  a  southern  and  somewhat 
isolated  appendage  of  the  Altai,  was  visible  to  the 
north.     The  Kirei  Kirghiz,  when  asked  what  game  was 


SPORT  ON   THE  PLATEAUX  347 

to  be  found  there,  informed  us  that  there  were  plenty 
of  "  arkar."  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  if  sheep 
inhabit  such  outlying  hills  as  the  Baitik  Bogdo,  and 
those  that  Sir  Francis  Younghusband  visited  farther 
east,  in  all  probability  there  are  some  magnificent 
hunting-grounds  among  the  high  plateaux  of  the  Eastern 
Altai. 

The  eastern  extremities  of  the  Altai  and  Tian  Shan 
ranges  are  only  divided  by  a  narrow  strip  of  desert 
a  hundred  miles  in  breadth  ;  yet  it  is  of  such  an  abso- 
lutely barren  nature  as  to  completely  prevent  the  range 
of  the  Ovis  ammon  typica  of  the  Altai  overlapping 
that  of  the  Ovis  ammon  karelini  of  the  Tian  Shan. 
Sir  Francis  Younghusband  describes  this  gap  as  being 
"  the  most  desolate  country  I  have  ever  seen."  Directly 
the  lower  slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan  were  reached,  this 
traveller  came  upon  horns  decidedly  different  to  those 
on  the  Altai  side  ;  they  were  thinner  at  the  base  and 
more  angular  than  those  found  farther  north.  A  mag- 
nificent pair  which  he  picked  up  there,  and  which  are 
still  in  his  possession,  measure  62  in.  in  length  and 
16  in.  in  girth.  Our  own  experiences  of  the  Karlik 
Tagh  sheep  bear  out  his  observations  ;  we  saw  con- 
siderable numbers  of  horns  in  these  mountains,  either 
lying  on  the  ground  or  in  possession  of  their  owners, 
all  of  which  were  similar  in  thickness  and  twist  to  those 
we  saw  later  on  the  Borotala.  In  their  winter  dress 
these  sheep  {Ovis  ammon  karelini)  grow  a  pure  white 
throat-ruff,  3  in.  in  length,  a  characteristic  which  the 
Ovis  ammon  typica  of  the  Altai  does  not  possess. 

The  following  night  we  encamped  at  Belota,  and  the 
next  day,  while  Carruthers  took  the  caravan  over  to 
the  Chagan-gol,  Price  and  I,  with  one  man,  hunted  our 


348  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

way  thence  over  the  Bain-Khairkhan,  this  being  our 
last  chance  of  seeing  sheep. 

Right  on  the  top,  at  an  altitude  of  about  9,000  ft., 
we  saw  an  enormous  herd  of  gazelle  ;  there  must  have 
been  nearly  two  hundred  of  them.  They  were  principally 
females  and  young,  with  a  few  small  bucks.  These 
gazelle  {G.  gutturosa)  are  found  all  over  North-western 
Mongolia,  north  of  the  Great  Altai,  and  south  of  the 
Tannu-ola  ranges  ;  the  most  north-westerly  limit  of  their 
ranges  is  the  steppe  round  the  Russian  frontier  post  of 
Kosh-Agatch  ;  from  there  they  extend  right  across 
Northern  Mongolia  as  far  as  the  eastern  extremity  of 
the  plateau.  In  winter  they  are  to  be  found  in  the 
sheltered  valleys  among  the  foot-hills  or  out  on  the 
open  plains  round  the  lakes  ;  but  in  summer  they 
ascend  right  up  into  the  mountains.  In  this  respect 
they  differ  from  G.  suhgutturosa,  of  which  we  saw  a 
great  deal  later,  in  Dzungaria.  This  latter  species, 
though  occasionally  found  in  the  summer,  when  the 
grass  of  the  plains  is  burnt  up,  in  low  hills  at  an  altitude 
of  6,000  ft.,  never,  like  the  former,  reaches  the  elevated 
boggy  plateaux  that  one  associates  with  wild-sheep. 

The  general  colour  of  G.  gutturosa  is  light  fawn  ;  the 
limbs,  cheeks,  under-parts,  sides,  and  rump  are  white  ; 
there  are  no  dark  face-markings,  as  in  most  gazelle, 
though  the  top  of  the  muzzle  is  slightly  darker  than 
the  fawn  of  the  back.  The  tail  is  short,  with  a  brown 
tip  ;  it  is  in  the  shortness  and  colour  of  the  tail  that  it 
differs  most  markedly  from  G.  suhgutturosa  ;  for  in  the 
latter  it  is  considerably  longer  and  black.  Its  horns 
also  differ  from  those  of  the  G.  suhgutturosa  in  being 
rather  thinner  and  shorter,  and  more  closely  and  boldly 
ringed  ;    instead  of  diverging  directly  from  the  skull 


SPORT  ON  THE  PLATEAUX  349 

they  are  parallel  at  the  bases,  diverging  sharply  above, 
with  the  tips  gently  bending  inwards  again. 

The  almost  complete  absence  of  dark  face-markings 
and  the  shortness  and  light  colour  of  the  tail  are  the 
marked  characteristics  of  the  three  species  of  gazelle 
that  are  peculiar  to  the  Chinese  Empire.  These  are 
G.  picticaudata  of  Tibet,  G.  prjevalskii  of  the  Ordos, 
Ala  Shan  and  Kansu,  and  G.  gutturosa  of  North  Mon- 
golia. I  do  not  include  G.  subgutturosa,  with  its  com- 
paratively long  black  tail,  as,  although  it  inhabits  Dzun- 
garia  and  Chinese  Turkestan,  it  is  not  peculiar  to  China, 
Russian  Turkestan  and  Western  Asia  being  the  centres 
of  its  distribution.  In  comparing  the  horns  of  the 
three  Chinese  gazelle,  I  find  that  they  have  common 
characteristics  which  differ  from  those  of  other  Asiatic 
species.  The  above  description  of  the  horns  of  G. 
gutturosa  stands  also  for  the  other  two  varieties,  with 
the  exception  of  the  backward  bend,  which  is  decidedly 
more  pronounced  in  picticaudata,  and  slightly  more  in 
prjevalskii.  There  is  also  a  slight  difference  in  the 
formation  of  the  rings.  For  the  first  two-thirds  of 
their  length  they  diverge  very  slightly,  the  terminal 
portion  bending  out,  and  then  in,  sharply.  Those  of 
the  Dzungarian  gazelle  diverge  considerably  from  their 
base  upwards  with  a  decided  backward  bend,  the  terminal 
portion  forming  a  less  pronounced  hook. 

Later  on,  we  observed  a  few  female  ibex  and  arkar. 
This  range  is  evidently  a  favourite  breeding-ground, 
but  I  doubt  if  there  are  any  big  rams  there  at  the  present 
day  ;   at  any  rate,  we  saw  none. 

After  a  long  day  in  the  saddle,  just  at  dusk,  we 
dropped  down  into  the  Chagan-gol  Valley,  and  found  our 
camp  pitched   some   five  miles  below  the  camp  of  the 


350  UNKNOWN    MONGOLIA 

Mongol  chieftain,  which  we  had  left  seven  days  before. 
A  long  march  over  an  uninhabited  country,  with  no 
living  thing  to  break  the  monotony  except  a  few  gazelle 
and  an  occasional  wheeling  vulture,  took  us  out  of  the 
Chagan-gol  Valley  and  onwards  towards  the  Great 
Altai  Mountains,  whose  snow-capped  ridges  now  ap- 
peared to  rise  no  great  distance  ahead  of  us.  We  here 
left  the  Mongols  and  entered  the  land  of  the  Turk,  for 
at  this  point  begins  the  territory  of  the  Kirei,  or  Keraites, 
a  Turki  race,  the  descendants  of  the  people  whose  name 
once  resounded  far  and  wide  across  the  whole  of  Asia — 
as  the  followers  of  that  romantic,  yet  elusive  person, 
"  Prester  John." 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  KIREI  OF  THE  ALTAI,  THE  CHILDREN  OF  PRESTER  JOHN 

**  The  name  of  *  Pr ester  John '  has  an  attractive  interest 
both  for  those  who  love  the  romances  of  the  nursery,  and  for 
those  who  study  the  more  sober  facts  of  medieval  history. 
To  both  it  is  a  puzzle  and  a  paradox,  and  has  given  rise  to 
much  discussion.  That  a  Christian  king  and  priest  reigned 
in  an  isolated  far-off  land  over  a  Christian  people,  en- 
vironed by  pagans  and  barbarians,  was  a  belief  of  most 
medieval  writers.  Some  of  them  fixed  his  residence  in 
Abyssinia,  others  in  India,  others  again  on  the  borders 
of  China.  The  legend  gradually  grew  more  definite  as 
the  various  envoys  to  the  Mongol  Khans  returned  and 
brought  news  of  their  having  been  in  contact  with  the  Chris- 
tian people,  and  opinion  became  settled  that  the  Prester 
John  of  history  was  the  King  of  the  nation  of  the  Keraits, 
a  disciple  of  the  Nestorians." — Sir  H.  H.  Ho  worth. 

The  Kirei  ^  represent  a  section  of  the  Kirghiz  family, 
and  one  of  the  purest  branches  of  the  great  Turkish 
race.  In  fact,  if  we  endeavour  to  trace  back  the  history 
of  the  Kirghiz,  we  find  that  they  came  into  existence, 
— from  an  unknown  origin,  as  it  were, — in  the  Kemchik 
valleys  of  the  Yenisei  basin,  at  a  period  when  it  would 
be  almost  impossible  to  draw  distinctions  between  the 

1  There   are  various  forms  of   spelling,  such  as  Kirai,  Kerrit,  Kerait, 
and  in  the  earliest  writings  it  takes  the  form  of  Crit. 

11— 3  351 


352  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

Mongol  and  the  Turkish  races ;  we  can  look  on  the 
Altai  ranges  and  the  Kemchik  pastures  as  being  the 
birthplace  of  a  section  of  the  Turkish  race,  and  on  the 
Kirei  as  being  the  truest  examples  of  the  original 
Turks. 

The  migrations  of  the  Kirghiz  before  the  sixth  cen- 
tury A.D.  are  as  little  known  to  us  as  are  the  move- 
ments of  other  nomad  peoples  of  those  days.  Their 
history  is  mysteriously  wrapped  up  in  that  of  the  Uigurs, 
and  we  know  little  of  them  definitely  until  they  rose 
to  some  power  in  the  sixth  century,  contemporaneously 
with  that  of  the  Uigur  Empire.  Previous  to  that  the 
Kirei  are  supposed  to  have  occupied  the  country  to  the 
east  of  Lake  Baikal,  at  the  sources  of  the  Amur  ;  out 
of  this  region  they  were  pushed, — by  invading  hordes  of 
Khitans, — southwards  towards  the  Hoang  Ho,  to  which 
region  they  are  assigned  by  most  writers.  I  imagine, 
however,  that  a  large  section  of  the  tribe  always  remained 
north  of  the  Gobi,  probably  in  the  Altai,  or  at  the  sources 
of  the  Kemchik  and  Abakan,  where  to  this  day  Kirghiz 
people  are  living,  and  amongst  whom  there  is  a  tribe 
called  Kirei.  Subsequently  the  Kirei  formed  a  part  of 
the  Naiman  kingdom,  which  included  a  powerful  con- 
federation of  Turkish  tribes  who  overcame  the  Uigurs, 
and  ruled  over  the  region  between  the  Kerulun  and  the 
Altai,  making  Karakorum  their  capital.  On  the 
break-up  of  the  Naiman  confederacy,  the  Kirei  took 
their  place  as  the  ruling  power,  their  chief  centre  being 
on  the  banks  of  the  Black  Irtish  and  on  the  ranges 
of  the  Great  Altai.  This  period  of  their  greatness 
extended  over  both  the  eleventh  and  the  twelfth 
centuries.  Eventually  they  were  incorporated  in  the 
Empire  of  Jenghis  Khan,  and,  no  doubt,  owing  to  their 


H«^ 


■5* 


A    KIRKl    FALCONER. 


352] 


*V»^^^« 


•^ 


THE    KIREI   OF   THE   ALTAI  353 

fighting    qualities,  formed  valuable  contingents  to  the 
Mongol  armies  as  they  moved  westwards. 

After  this  the  nomadic  Turkish  tribes,  as  represented 
by  the  Kirghiz  and  Kasaks,  became  more  or  less  in- 
dependent, until  recently  when  Russia  and  China  com- 
pelled them  to  accept  the  jurisdiction  of  their  respective 
Governments,— the  Kirghiz,  with  their  kinsmen  the 
Kasaks,^  being  now  scattered  over  wide  areas  of  Central 
Asia  from  the  Altai  Mountains  to  the  Sea  of  Aral.  Of 
all  the  different  tribes  of  Kirghiz,  however,  the  Kirei 
hold  first  place  in  point  of  historical  interest.  Long  ago 
they  claimed  attention  as  being  an  isolated  Christian 
tribe  in  the  middle  of  pagan  Asia,  the  subjects  of  the 
mysterious  Prester  John, — a  Christian  monarch  who  was 
not  only  credited  with  vast  wealth  and  power,  but  was 
ruler  of  a  kingdom  of  great  size.  No  other  tribe  has 
created  such  excitement  in  the  West  nor  has  been  en- 
dowed with  such  a  wonderful  reputation  as  that  of  the 
Kirei  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century.  It  is  this  par- 
ticular period  of  their  history  that  excites  our  interest, 
and  makes  this  account  of  them,  at  the  present  day, 
of  unusual  value.  We  saw  them  in  the  very  heart  of 
their  own  territory,  we  crossed  and  re-crossed  their 
country,  and  met  with  them  both  in  their  mountain- 
pastures  and  on  the  sand-dunes  of  the  low-lying  plains  ; 
we  kept  constantly  before  us  the  records  of  their  past, 
and  this  intensified  and  doubled  the  curiosity  which 
their  encampments  would  in  any  case  have  elicited. 

I  will  briefly  recount  the  romance  of  the  Kirei — as 
subjects  of  Prester  John — and  then  state  what  appear 

^  The  true  Kirghiz,  also  called  Buruts,  Kara-Kirghiz  or  mountain- 
Kirghiz,  inhabit  as  a  rule  the  highland  region,  such  as  the  Pamirs,  parts 
of  the  Tian  Shan,  and  the  Altai.  The  Kasaks,  who  are  an  offshoot  from 
the  original  stem,  hold  the  lowlands  and  plains. 


354  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

to  be  the  facts,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  of  the  history 
of  these  people.  The  story  of  the  Kirei,  their  con- 
nexion with  Nestorian  Christianity,  and  their  supposed 
but  wholly  mythical  power  and  wealth,  is  typical  of 
the  days  when  Asia  was  so  little  known  to  Europe  that 
any  stories  originating  from  thence  quickly  grew  into 
fabulous  tales  of  amazement  and  wonder.  A  report, 
for  instance,  filtered  through  to  Europe  in  the  early 
part  of  the  eleventh  century — that  is  to  say,  at  the  time 
when  Asia  first  began  to  occupy  a  place  in  the  minds 
of  Western  people — of  the  conversion  to  Christianity  of 
a  powerful  Eastern  potentate  and  his  subjects.  The 
accounts,  however,  were  so  extravagant  in  their  em- 
bellishment of  the  might  of  this  great  Khan,  yet,  at  the 
same  time,  so  poor  in  detail,  that  it  was  difficult  to 
decide  who  he  was  and  where  his  kingdom  was  situated. 
During  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  cen- 
turies, the  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  elusive 
Prester  John  occupied  the  close  attention  of  all  writers 
and  travellers ;  endless  traditions  and  fables  collected 
around  the  name  of  this  semi-mythical,  kingly  pontiff, 
until  it  became  quite  impossible  to  separate  truth  from 
fiction,  though  men  continued  their  attempts  to  discover 
the  whereabouts  of  his  fabulous  kingdom,  as  if  it  were 
an  El  Dorado.  Many  letters,  supposed  to  have  been 
written  by  the  Khan,  passed  between  him  and  the 
Pope,  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople,  and  the  King  of 
France ;  all  of  these  proclaimed  not  only  his  greatness, 
power,  and  wealth,  but  also  the  extent  of  his  dominions, 
exaggerating  his  importance  to  such  an  extent  that, 
although  these  fables  were  believed  at  the  time,  they, 
in  the  end,  defeated  their  own  object,  and  received  no- 
credence. 


THE   KIREI   OF  THE  ALTAI  355 

The  following  are  extracts  from  one  of  the  letters 
accredited  to  Prester  John  which  so  greatly  stimulated 
the  imagination  of  the  Western  mind  in  the  twelfth 
century  : 

**  Know  and  believe  that  I  am  the  Priest  John,  the 
servant  of  God,  and  that  I  surpass  in  riches,  in  power, 
and  in  virtue  all  the  kings  of  the  earth.  Sixty-two 
kings  are  tributary  to  me.  .  .  .  We  believe  that  we  have 
no  equal,  either  for  the  quantity  of  our  riches  or  the 
number  of  our  subjects.  When  we  issue  forth  to  make 
war  on  our  enemies  we  have  borne  before  us,  upon  thir- 
teen cars,  thirteen  large  and  precious  crosses,  ornamented 
with  gold  and  jewels.  Each  cross  is  followed  by  ten 
thousand  horsemen  and  a  hundred  thousand  foot-soldiers, 
without  counting  the  men  of  war  charged  to  conduct  the 
baggage  and  the  provisions  of  the  army.  ...  If  you 
can  count  the  sands  of  the  sea,  and  the  stars  of 
heaven,  you  may  number  my  domains,  and  reckon  my 
power." 

The  writer  of  this  document  adds  that  the  variety 
of  fauna  found  within  the  dominion  of  the  Kirei 
includes  the  elephant,  dromedary,  camel,  and  sala- 
mander ;  that  there  are  immense  forests  filled  with 
serpents,  and  an  arid  sea  of  sand,  and  their  land  is  the 
home  of  Cyclopes,  centaurs,  pigmies,  giants,  and  canni- 
bals !  Every  conceivable  exaggeration  grew  up  around 
this  Eastern  potentate  and  his  dominion  ;  in  fact, 
Prester  John  and  his  country  became  a  byword  for 
fantasy,  magnificence,  and  prosperity. 

Foolish  as  these  accounts  seem  to  us  now,  yet  they 
contain  much  truth.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Prester 
John  was  a  real  person,  and  whether  there  existed 
more  than  one  Eastern  monarch  or  African  potentate 


356  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

who  could  claim  to  be  the  original  Prester  John  is  of  little 
consequence,  as  the  question  can  never  be  decided ;  but, 
taking  the  accumulated  evidence  into  careful  considera- 
tion, the  Khans  of  the  Kirei  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth 
centuries  seem  to  accord  very  closely  with  the  accounts 
of  this  priestly  king. 

It  appears  certain  that  early  in  the  eleventh  century 
a  great  wave  of  Nestorian  Christianity  spread  itself 
across  Asia,  and,  amongst  other  conversions  which  are 
known  to  have  taken  place,  was  that  of  the  Khan  of 
the  Kirei  and  of  many  of  his  subjects.  On  this  point 
all  medieval  writers  agree.  No  doubt  the  missionaries, 
eager  to  show  the  magnitude  of  their  conversions  and 
the  importance  of  their  converts,  wrote  these  very 
exaggerated  accounts  in  the  name  of  the  Khan  ;  they 
were  doubtless  products  of  their  own  imagination,  and, 
although  attributed  to  the  Khan,  it  is  probable  that 
he  was  unaware  of  their  contents.  The  Nestorians  were 
a  great  political  power  throughout  Inner  Asia  in  those 
days,  and  the  conversion  of  so  powerful  a  tribe  as  the 
Kirei  would  carry  great  weight  ;  it  is  noteworthy  that 
the  date  of  their  conversion  marked  an  increase  in  their 
power  and  prestige,  this  being  the  starting-point  of 
those  conquests  and  invasions  which  brought  their 
name  into  prominence,  and  which  spread  their  reputation 
far  and  wide. 

The  Kirei  supremacy  continued  until  the  Tartar 
tribe,  of  which  Jenghis  Khan  was  chief,  became  their 
rivals,  and  finally  their  conquerors.  Thus  the  Kirei 
disappeared  off  the  field  of  Central  Asian  politics,  and 
the  Mongols  became  the  leading  race.  The  subsequent 
history  of  the  two  races  shows  clearly  the  manner  in 
which  the  Mongols  rose  to  power,   became  Buddhists, 


A    KIREI    MAIDEN. 


356] 


THE    KIREI   OF  THE   ALTAI  357 

and  finally  fell  into  the  condition  in  which  they  remain 
at  the  present  day.  The  Christian  Kirei  also  lost  their 
power,  but  they  became  Mohammedans,  and  have  now 
reached  a  state  of  superiority  and  a  degree  of  prosperity 
far  in  advance  of  that  of  the  Mongols. 

At  the  present  day  the  range  of  the  Kirei  includes 
their  old  home  on  the  banks  of  the  Upper  or  Black 
Irtish,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  western  Altai  pastures, 
but  the  territory  on  the  east  of  the  Altai,  which  must 
once  have  been  theirs,  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Mongol 
Khans.  The  territorial  boundaries  of  the  Mongol  chiefs 
are  inviolable,  and  the  Kirei  are  hampered  in  their 
desire  to  advance  in  this  direction  by  the  Chinese  au- 
thorities who  uphold  the  Mongols'  rights. 

The  main  resort  of  the  tribe  is  along  the  western 
flanks  of  the  Altai,  being  the  area  drained  by  the  tribu- 
taries of  the  Black  Irtish.  Only  in  one  part, — in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  lakes  Dolto  Nor  and  Dain  Kul, 
at  the  sources  of  the  Kobdo  River, — do  the  Kirei  possess 
pasturages  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  watershed  of  the 
Altai  Range.  Here  they  own  a  fine  country,  consisting 
not  only  of  summer  pastures,  forests  and  lakes,  but 
also  numerous  sheltered  valleys.  This  portion  of  their 
territory  is  monopolized  by  the  chief  and  his  section 
of  the  tribe.  Towards  the  west  the  range  of  the  Kirei 
extends  into  the  Dzungarian  plains,  as  far  as  the  lakes 
Ulungur  and  Zaisan — on  the  Russian  frontier.  Farther 
westwards  still,  along  the  marches  of  Russian  and 
Chinese  territory,  there  exists  a  Western  branch  of  Kirei, 
separated  from  the  Altai  Kirei,  and  serving  under  a 
different  chief.  To  the  southwards  their  boundaries  are 
less  clearly  defined.  They  occupy  the  well-protected 
and  low-lying  valley  of  the  Upper  Irtish  as  their  winter 


358  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

quarters,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  Urungu  Valley 
falls  within  their  territory  ;  beyond  this,  uninhabited 
steppes  and  areas  of  sand-dunes  allow  them  free  progress 
as  far  as  the  Bogdo-ola  Mountains,  the  southern  border- 
range  of  Dzungaria. 

We  visited  the   Kirei  in  many  of  these  localities. 
Our   experiences   in  connexion  with  the  section  of  the 
tribe  owning  the  pastures  of  the  Upper  Kobdo  Valley 
proved  to  us  that  they  spent  the  summer  in  the  high- 
lands around  Dain   Kul   and  Dolto  Nor,  and  wintered 
in  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Kobdo,  at  the  rather  high 
altitude  of  6,000  ft.     The  inhabitants  of  the  Dzungarian 
flanks  of  the  Altai  descended  to  the  valley  of  the  Upper 
or  Black  Irtish  for  the  winter.     In  this  latter  locality 
we  found  them  in  the  course  of  our  journey  across 
Dzungaria.     The   Kirei   were   indeed   fortunate   in   the 
possession  of  such  a  well-favoured  winter  resort.     Great 
belts  of  tall  reeds  sheltered  them  from  the  winds,  groves 
of    poplar    and   willow   supplied   ample   firewood,    and 
plenty  of  grass  was  to  be  found  for  their  animals.     There 
should  also  be  good  pasture  for  sheep,  judging  by  the 
immense  flocks  we  came  across  in  that  country.     The 
encampments  were  pitched  in  snug  quarters  amongst 
the  reeds  and  the  poplars,  so  well  protected  as  to  be 
almost  hidden  from  view;  their  existence  was  quickly 
discovered,  however,  by  the  presence  of  many  golden- 
eagles  tethered  to  the  higher   branches  of   the   poplar 
trees.       Inner   Asia    is    the    home     of    falconry,    and 
the    natives    not    only    use    hawks    and    falcons,    but 
even  train  the  great  golden-eagles   for   the  purpose   of 
hunting   such  large  quarry  as  gazelle,  foxes,    and  even 
wolves.     All  these  Kirei  seemed  prosperous  in  themselves 
and  rich  in  flocks. 


THE   KIREI   OF   THE   ALTAI  359 

The  Western  branch  of  the  Kirei  are  distributed 
along  the  Russo-Chinese  frontier  of  Dzungaria,  and 
range  into  the  territory  belonging  to  both  nations  ; 
the  Tarbagatai,  Sair,  BarUk,  and  Maili  ranges  forming 
their  headquarters.  Some  are  Russian  subjects,  others 
are  Chinese,  but  all  move  freely,  regardless  of  the  de- 
limitations of  the  political  frontiers.  The  chief  of  the 
Western  branch,  Mahmot  Beg  by  name,  is  a  cousin  of 
Jenghis  Khan,  chief  of  the  Altai  Kirei,  and  resides  in 
the  Maili  Mountains. 

The  southern  section  of  the  Kirei  spend  their  time 
between  the  valley  of  the  Urungu  River  and  the  small 
group  of  mountains,  called  Baitik  Bogdo,  which  lie  in 
the  plains  to  the  south.  These  hills,  we  were  told,  are 
favourable  for  summer  grazing,  and  well  watered,  but  in 
winter  migration  is  necessary,  the  nomads  then  trekking 
either  northwards  to  the  Urungu  Valley,  or  southwards 
to  the  sand-dune  area  lying  near  the  foot-hills  of  the 
Bogdo-ola  Range.  During  our  journeys  in  the  month 
of  February  in  Southern  Dzungaria,  we  visited  encamp- 
ments of  the  Kirei  in  the  belt  of  sand-dunes  which 
extends  to  within  ten  miles  of  the  town  of  Guchen. 
There  we  found  they  had  made  a  remarkable  use  of  a 
region  which,  being  waterless,  was  an  impossible  dwelling- 
place  for  nomads,  except  at  this  particular  season  when 
snow  covered  the  ground  and  served  as  a  water-supply. 
Their  movements  being  dependent  upon  the  snowfall, 
they  begin  to  migrate  southwards  in  November  and  to 
go  north  again  during  the  month  of  March.  By  these 
means  the  Kirei  are  enabled  to  pasture  their  flocks  over 
the  sand-belt  covered  with  dwarf  scrub  and  grass,  and 
bordered,  along  its  northern  edge,  with  forests  of  saxaul. 
Their    encampments    presented    a    curious    appearance. 


u 


60  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 


hidden  away  in  a  hollow  of  the  dunes,  or  sheltered 
amongst  the  giant  saxaul  bushes.  The  yurts  were 
closely  grouped  and  the  flocks,  which  consisted  chiefly 
of  sheep  and  goats,  were  well  guarded  from  the  attacks 
of  wolves  ;  they  had  a  few  camels,  but  their  horses  they 
had  left  behind  them  in  the  Baitik  Mountains. 

This  particular  section  of  the  Kirei,  who  really 
belong  to  the  Altai  district,  are  exhibiting  a  tendency 
to  extend  their  boundaries  farther  to  the  southwards. 
Whether  they  had  been  pushed  out  by  increase  in  the 
population,  or  for  what  special  reason  they  had  come  to 
this  country,  we  were  unable  to  ascertain.  From  all 
appearances,  they  were  discontented  with  their  lot, 
wishing  either  to  return  to  the  main  Altai  or  to  make  a 
permanent  home  on  the  Bogdo-ola.  The  desire  to  move 
elsewhere  was,  no  doubt,  caused  by  the  relative  poverty 
of  their  territory,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  rest 
of  the  tribe.  The  Baitik  Mountains  cover,  at  the  best, 
only  a  small  area ;  they  support,  besides  the  Kirei,  a 
small  sedentary  population  of  Torgut  Mongols,  and, 
being  of  no  great  altitude,  any  appearance  of  desiccation 
would  quickly  make  itself  felt  by  these  people.  More- 
over, the  existence,  within  view,  of  the  untenanted 
range  of  the  Bogdo-ola  must  be  very  tantalizing  to 
them  ;  for  this  reason  the  Kirei  yearly  renew  their 
endeavours  to  establish  themselves  on  those  inviting 
pastures.  Every  winter  a  certain  number  succeed  in 
reaching  the  foot-hills,  where  they  spend  a  few  months 
peacefully,  without  let  or  hindrance  ;  but  in  the  spring 
they  must  pack  up  and  trek  northwards,  otherwise  the 
Chinese  soldiery  is  sent  out  to  harry  them. 

The  Kirei  of  the  Altai  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Amban  of  Sharasume,  to  whom  they  pay  a  nominal 


THE   KIREI   OF   THE  ALTAI  361 

tax,  as  well  as  the  tribute  paid  to  their  own  chief.  Those 
of  the  tribe  who  migrate  in  winter  to  the  Bogdo-ola 
Mountains  in  Southern  Dzungaria,  are  taxed  by  the  offi- 
cials of  Guchen  for  the  use  of  their  winter  pasturage. 
We  came  across  a  few  of  the  latter,  who  complained  to 
us  of  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  Chinese ;  but  they 
themselves  were  in  fault,  having  considerably  overstayed 
the  time  allotted  to  them.  We  found  others  who  had 
avoided  interference  by  claiming  that  they  were  Russian 
subjects. 

This  digression,  in  relation  to  the  early  history 
and  to  the  present-day  distribution  of  the  Kirei,  is 
necessary  on  account  of  our  having,  at  this  juncture, 
arrived  at  the  frontiers  of  their  country. 

We  will  now  resume  the  thread  of  the  narrative  and 
return  to  the  spot  where  we  first  came  in  contact  with 
these  people.  On  leaving  the  hunting-grounds  of  the 
Uigur  plateau  a  break  occurred  in  the  usual  routine  of  our 
j  ourney .  Survey  work  was  stopped  by  the  speed  at  which 
we  were  forced  to  travel,  and  excused  by  the  compara- 
tively well-known  nature  of  the  country  through  which 
we  were  now  passing.  Winter  was  fast  approaching,  as 
shown  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  month  of  September, 
our  camps  were  repeatedly  under  snow  ;  we  therefore 
hastened  to  cross  the  Great  Altai  Range,  which  lay 
between  us  and  the  warm  lowlands  of  Dzungaria. 
Pressing  forward  across  the  plateaux  that  lie  in  the 
extreme  north-western  corner  of  Mongolia,  we  found 
ourselves,  in  mid-September,  approaching  the  lower 
foot-hills  of  the  Altai  Mountains.  This  country  was  a 
fine  one,  good  for  the  shepherd,  and  pleasant  to  traverse. 
Rivers  of  clearest  water  ran  across  the  downlands,  and 
frequent  larch  groves  gave  the  region  a  less  bleak  aspect 


362  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

than  was  the  case  with  much  of  the  country  over 
which  we  had  been  travelhng. 

On  September  14th  we  camped  close  to  an  upper 
tributary  of  the  Kobdo  River,  amongst  Mongols,  un- 
mistakable by  their  untidiness  and  dirt  ;  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  without  any  change  of  scenery,  climate,  or 
political  division,  we  found  ourselves  amongst  a  new 
people — the  Kirei.  This  may  not  seem  of  importance  to 
the  general  reader,  but  in  reality  it  represented  an  ethno- 
graphical change  of  great  and  unusual  interest.  We  had 
in  a  day  passed  out  of  the  Buddhist-Shammanist  world 
into  the  Mohammedan  world — from  the  Mongol  to  the 
Turk.  In  fact,  w^e  now  entered,  at  a  distance  of  3,000 
miles  from  Mecca,  the  farthest  outpost  of  Islam  in 
Asia. 

I  well  remember,  while  riding  along  with  our  Mongol 
horsemen,  accosting  the  first  follower  of  the  Prophet 
whom  we  met  in  the  course  of  our  journey,  and  re- 
marking on  the  natural  politeness  with  which  he 
invited  us  to  his  yurt.  Within,  a  fine  old  gentleman 
— a  perfect  Turkish  type — rose  to  greet  us.  With  a 
word  of  welcome,  which  in  other  Mussulman  countries 
could  only  have  been  extended  to  co-religionists, 
he  bade  us  be  seated.  His  dwelling  was  a  yurt  of  the 
ordinary  construction,  yet  very  different  in  appearance 
to  that  of  the  Mongol  yurts.  Here  we  not  only  felt  at 
home,  but  greatly  appreciated  the  cleanliness  of  our 
surroundings  and  the  true  hospitality  and  exquisite 
manners  of  our  host. 

These  well-made  yurts,  covered  with  white  felt,  were 
in  direct  contrast  to  the  black,  torn,  and  ragged  tents 
of  the  Mongols.  The  interior  spoke  of  prosperity,  and 
showed  a  distinct  appreciation  of  comfort.     Clean  carpets 


THE    KIREI   OF   THE   ALTAI  363 

of  felt  covered  the  floor,  and  many  household  belongings 
stood  around  the  sides — gaudily-coloured  boxes,  a  bed, 
quilts  and  cushions,  saddlery  and  a  falcon  ;  while  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  tent  displayed  a  profusion  of 
cooking-pots,  kettles,  kummis-bags,  and  other  signs  of 
a  commissariat,  such  as  would  arouse  the  envy  of  any 
Mongol  housewife.  No  little  Buddhist  altar  adorned 
the  head  of  the  yurt,  no  lazy  priest  lounged  on  the  seat 
of  honour,  while,  in  place  of  poorly  clad  and  disreputable- 
looking  inhabitants,  we  were  delighted  to  see  rosy- 
cheeked  children,  and  plump,  healthy-looking  women, 
clad  in  becoming  costumes  of  black  and  white.  The 
men,  too,  were  of  remarkably  fine  build  as  compared 
with  the  Mongols.  There  was  almost  an  appearance 
of  opulence  in  these  Kirghiz  encampments  ;  in  com- 
parison with  the  Mongols  and  Uriankhai,  these  Kirei 
tribesmen  might  be  described  as  "gentlemen-rovers," 
rich  in  flocks  and  herds,  well-housed,  owning  a  fine 
country,  and  with  sufficient  leisure  at  their  disposal  to 
indulge  in  horse-racing  and  in  falconry. 

The  comparison  between  the  low  Mongol  soldiery 
who  accompanied  us  and  these  lordly  Kirei  was  in- 
structive. All  spoke  of  a  higher  standard  of  life,  and  a 
superior  moral  code  ;  we  realized  at  once  the  immense 
social  gap  which  lay  between  these  two  people.  The 
special  type  of  our  Mohammedan  host  was  well  preserved ; 
he  was  obviously  Mussulman,  and  through  him  we  realized 
the  far-reaching  influence  of  rehgion  and  the  power  it 
possesses  of  engraving  itself  upon  the  character  of  a 
people.  Here  is  no  decadent  form  of  Islam,  it  is 
one  and  the  same  faith  as  followed  by  the  nomads 
of  Arabia  or  North  Africa.  The  world-wide  uniformity 
of  this  belief  has  created  an  absolute  unity  of  type. 


364  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

All  pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  Mohammedan  faith 
formed  the  basis  on  which  stood  the  superiority  of  the 
Kirghiz  over  the  Mongols,  and  convinced  us  that  their 
well-being  and  progressiveness  emanated  from  the  same 
cause.  Independence,  cleanliness,  and  abstinence  were 
the  traits  which  stood  out  most  strongly,  and  were 
those  in  the  most  direct  contrast  to  the  character  of 
the  Mongols.  A  greater  contrast  still  is  shown  in  the 
wide  difference  which  exists  in  the  social  conditions  of 
these  two  nomad  peoples.  Whereas  the  Mongols  are 
serfs  living  under  the  control  of  their  rulers  and  of 
their  priests,  the  Kirghiz  are  a  free,  self-governing 
people,  forming  a  powerful  democracy  where  all  men 
are  more  or  less  equal. 

The  power  of  Islam  is  chiefly  noticeable  here,  in 
that  these  two  people  were  originally  of  the  same  Sham- 
manistic  faith.  Yet  Islam  alone  possessed  the  power 
of  up-rooting  the  "  Black  Art."  The  influence  both  of 
Christianity  and  Buddhism  on  the  Shamman  tribes  has 
been  mentioned  in  Chapter  VII.  Neither  of  these  re- 
ligions has  proved  a  success ;  Islam,  on  the  other  hand, 
has  had  such  an  effect  on  the  Turki  tribes  that  their 
ancient  belief  in  Shammanism  is  now  only  discernible 
in  certain  rites  and  customs.  The  "  Baksa,"  or  "  wonder- 
doctor  "  of  the  Kirghiz,  for  instance,  represents  the 
Shamman  priest  under  a  new  cloak ;  but  he  is  now  sup- 
pressed by  the  Mullahs,  and  has  no  longer  any  religious 
power. 

We  came  across,  even  in  this  extremely  remote 
corner  of  the  Mohammedan  world,  several  men  who 
had  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and  later  on,  in  the 
course  of  our  travels,  we  made  the  acquaintance  of 
Mahmot   Beg,   chief   of    the  Western   Kirei,    who   had 


THE    KIREI   OF   THE   ALTAI  365 

made  the  pilgrimage  in  person,  together  with  his 
wife.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  the  route  taken  by 
pilgrims  from  the  Altai  to  Mecca.  A  road- and- water 
journey  of  800  miles  leads  them  northwards  to  the 
Siberian  railway,  the  railway  carries  them  to  Odessa 
on  the  Black  Sea— the  meeting-place  of  all  pilgrims 
from  Central  Asia — and  from  there  they  take  ship  to 
Jedda.  The  return  journey  is  generally  made  by  the 
new  railway  from  Medina  to  Damascus,  whence  they 
reach  the  coast  at  Beirut. 

So  great  is  the  force  of  religion  amongst  the  followers 
of  the  Prophet  that,  although  they  owe  allegiance  either 
to  the  Emperor  of  China  or  to  the  Tsar  of  Russia, 
they  look  neither  to  Pekin  nor  to  St.  Petersburg, 
for  they  consider  Stamboul  to  be  their  rehgious 
and  political  capital.  On  many  occasions  we  met 
Moslem  missionaries  from  Constantinople  "  on  tour  " 
amongst  the  outlying  encampments  of  nomads  in 
Central  Asia.  Railways  and  telegraphs  have  brought 
even  these  far-removed  colonies  into  closer  communi- 
cation with  the  Protector  of  their  faith,  and  with  the 
centre  of  their  belief;  greater  ease  of  transport  is 
likely  to  advance  still  further  the  cause  of  Islam  in 
Asia. 

Our  sudden  introduction  into  the  Moslem  world 
made  us  realize  the  fact  of  the  remarkable  force  and 
progress  of  Islam  in  Central  Asia.  Along  the  frontier 
between  Islam  and  Buddhism,  there  is  to  be  noticed  a 
steady  pressing  forward  of  the  Mohammedan,  a  deter- 
mination to  gain  possession  of  the  best  pasturages, 
and  a  strong  desire  to  move  eastwards  and  to  move 
higher  up.  In  many  places  the  movement  merely 
results  in  the  colonization  of  vacant  lands,   in  other 


366  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

places  it  means  competition  with  the  resident  popula- 
tion, while  in  others  it  results  in  the  actual  pushing 
back  of  the  rightful  owners.  If  it  were  not  for  the  zeal 
shown  by  the  Chinese  in  protecting  the  Mongol  rights  of 
ownership,  many  localities  would  be  rapidly  overrun 
by  the  Mohammedan-Turki  tribes.  All  the  regions  not 
exclusively  reserved  for  Mongols  are  becoming,  year  by 
year,  more  thickly  populated  by  newcomers  of  Moslem 
faith. 

As  a  rule,  this  movement  appears  to  be  from  Russian 
into  Chinese  territory,  the  Chinese  being  quite  unable 
to  check  the  immigration.  The  Chinese  do  not  want 
these  immigrants  flooding  their  country,  because  they 
get  nothing  out  of  them,  for  the  newcomers  still 
remain  Russian  subjects,  and  are  a  constant  source 
of  trouble  to  the  authorities  on  this  account.  It  is 
equally  certain  that  the  movement  into  Chinese  terri- 
tory is  caused  by  no  love  of  Chinese  rule.  Whatever 
M.  Vambery  says  about  "  an  approach  between  Moslems 
and  Buddhists,"  and  a  growing  tendency  for  Moham- 
medans to  side  with  Celestials  against  a  common  foe 
in  the  person  of  the  European,  his  theories  find  no  proof 
in  these  localities.  The  Turki  Moslems  prefer  to  be 
under  Russian  rather  than  Chinese  rule,  and,  I  believe, 
would  side  with  the  West  against  the  East,  in  the  same 
way  as  the  Buddhist  Mongols  have  recently  thrown  in 
their  lot  with  Russia  against  China. 

Whether,  or  not,  the  immigration  is  being  directly 
caused  by  the  continual  influx  of  Russian  colonists  into 
Russian  Central  Asia,  it  is  hard  to  say  ;  so  far  as  one 
can  judge,  this  element  probably  plays  a  definite  part 
in  producing  a  movement  of  the  nomadic  tribes  from 
the  plains   into    the  mountains, — which  latter  happen 


KIREI    WOMEN    GOING   TO    A    WEDDING. 


366J 


MISTRESSES    OF   THE    YURTS. 


THE   KIREI   OF  THE  ALTAI  367 

to  lie  along  the  Russo-Chinese  frontier,  and  chiefly  on 
the  Chinese  side  of  it.  In  such  localities  as  the  Tian 
Shan  this  is  undoubtedly  the  case,  for  the  Kasaks  of 
the  Russian  territory, — finding  their  lands  too  cramped 
and  too  crowded,  through  rapid  increase  in  their  popu- 
lation and  by  reason  of  the  influx  of  Russian  colonists, 
— are  now  moving  into  Chinese  territory,  where  there 
is  more  space  in  which  to  settle. 

There  are  other  localities  where  this  Russian  influence 
is  entirely  absent,  and  yet  we  find  the  same  movement 
of  the  Mohammedan  nomad  tribes  ;  this  fact  is  there- 
fore undoubtedly  due  to  an  increase  in  the  population, 
or  to  a  demand  for  better  pastures,  owing  to  desiccation. 
This  latter  reason  would  account  for  the  universal  desire 
to  move  into  higher  country. 

With  the  Kirei,  for  instance,  in  spite  of  the  ample 
lands  and  the  best  pasture  in  the  Altai  ranges,  an  attempt 
is  being  made  by  those  members  of  the  tribe  who  inhabit 
the  most  southern  portion  of  their  territory — namely, 
the  Baitik  Mountains  and  the  Dzungarian  plains — to 
acquire  the  rights  to  pasture  their  flocks  still  farther 
south,  in  the  Bogdo-ola  ranges.  As  a  fact,  the  Kirei 
are  endeavouring  to  extend  their  borders  towards  the 
well-pastured  and  unoccupied  ranges  of  the  Eastern 
Tian  Shan,  but  are  hindered  in  their  project  by  the 
determination  of  the  Chinese  authorities  to  keep  those 
regions  for  themselves. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  nomadic  Moslem  tribes  of  this 
part  of  Inner  Asia  exhibit  signs  of  progress  and  increase 
which  the  Buddhist  tribes  do  not  show. 

At  this  season — mid-September — the  Kirei  were  on 
their  autumn  migrations,  and  as  we  rode  along  the  banks 
of  the  Upper  Kobdo  River  we  accosted  small  bands  of 
II— 4 


368  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

nomads  moving  down  to  their  winter  quarters.  They 
had  come  from  the  high  pastures  on  the  flanks  of  the 
Great  Altai,  and  from  the  lands  surrounding  the  lakes, 
which  lie  embosomed  in  the  grassy  uplands  at  an  alti- 
tude of  about  7,000  ft.  At  this  season  they  sought  the 
sheltered  valleys  of  a  lower  altitude,  where  protection 
from  cold  and  a  lesser  snowfall  made  the  severity  of 
winter  more  endurable.  The  valley  presented  a  lively 
scene,  with  the  continual  movement  of  family  parties 
with  their  household  belongings,  flocks  and  herds  ;  as 
well  as  small  caravans  of  camels  carrying  wool,  hides, 
and  felt — the  products  of  the  by-gone  season — slouching 
past  on  their  way  to  Kobdo,  the  trade  centre  of  the 
Mongolian  Altai. 

The  Kobdo  River  was  here  a  fast-flowing  stream, 
fifty  yards  in  breadth,  with  banks  pleasantly  dotted 
with  groups  of  giant  larch-trees  and  willow- scrub.  We 
discovered  here  the  temporary  camp  of  the  chief  of  the 
tribe,  with  a  considerable  following  of  retainers ;  so  we 
pitched  our  tents  near  by  in  order  to  interview  him,  and 
to  ask  for  means  of  transport  through  his  country.  The 
chief,  we  discovered,  was  on  a  visit  to  Chuguchak,  a 
town  lying  on  the  Russo-Chinese  frontier  in  the  Dzun- 
garian  plain,  at  a  distance  of  about  400  miles  from  his 
home.  His  eldest  son,  however,  did  the  honours  in  his 
stead,  and  the  factotum  of  the  princely  family  looked 
after  our  needs. 

Jenghis  Khan-Kam,  paramount  chief  of  the  Kirei, 
claims  descent  from  the  great  Mongol  emperor  of  that 
name.  This  claim  is  curious,  for,  although  Jenghis 
overthrew  the  Kirei  confederacy,  it  is  extremely  doubt- 
ful that  he  set  up  a  Mongol  ruler  over  a  Turki  tribe. 
The  present  chief  is  certainly  of  pure  Turkish  descent. 


THE   KIREI   OF  THE  ALTAI  369 

To  claim  Jenghis  Khan  as  his  ancestor  suits  his 
vanity,  as  in  a  similar  way  many  Bokharan  nobles  claim 
descent  from  Alexander  the  Great  ;  the  truth  being 
that  they  probably  gave  their  women-folk  in  marriage 
to  the  great  Emperor  or  to  his  generals.  The  suffix 
'*  Kam,"  the  title  given  to  us  by  his  own  people,  is  of 
immense  interest.  The  earliest  mention  of  the  King  of 
the  Kirei,  by  Rubruck,  describes  him  as  Coir-Cham  : 
"  Cham  being  his  title,  the  word  having  the  meaning  of 
Soothsayer,  which  is  applied  to  their  princes  because 
they  govern  the  people  by  means  of  divination."  ^  The 
same  term  is  employed  at  the  present  day  to  denote 
the  Shamman  priests. 

The  personal  get-up  of  these  nomads  was  extravagant 
and  showy.  The  men  were  generally  dressed  in  gay 
colours,  not  in  the  dingy  black  of  the  Kara-Kirghiz 
of  the  Pamirs  or  the  Western  Tian  Shan ;  but  the  women 
always  "sported," — if  they  could  afford  it, — ^the  "  Kara- 
chapan,"  or  black  quilted-coat,  as  well  as  the  high-piled 
head-gear  of  white  material.  In  some  details  their 
dress  differed  from  that  of  all  other  Kirghiz  tribes,  the 
chief  difference  being  the  boots  of  tanned  leather,  with 
high  heels  of  a  rich  dark  green  colour  ;  it  was  the  fashion 
also  for  all  Kirei  of  rank  to  wear  the  soft  plumes  of  the 
Eagle  Owl  as  a  crest  to  their  fur-lined  caps. 

The  yurts  of  the  chief  were  exceptionally  large,  and 
the  white  felt  covering  was  gaily  embroidered  with  red 
and  blue  designs.  Hospitality  was  shown  us  by  means 
of  a  liberal  supply  of  kummis  and  sheep,  and  promises  of 
everything  we  wanted ;  but,  when  it  came  to  the  actual 
supply  of  transport,  we  were  faced  by  very  different 
methods  to  those  to  which  we  had  been  accustomed. 

^  The  Journey  of  Friar  Rubruck,  p.   100  (Hakluyt  Society  edition). 


370  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

With  this  difficulty  of  procuring  transport  we  gained 
our  first  experience  of  the  independence  of  the  Kirghiz. 
We  were  bluffed  at  each  renewed  demand  for  transport, 
by  such  absurd  statements  as,  "the  passes  are  closed," 
"we  have  no  horses,"  "the  Mongols  had  better  take 
you  on  farther."  Two  whole  days  were  thus  spent  in 
haggling  with  the  wealthy  owners  of  innumerable  herds 
of  horses,  all  of  whom  did  their  best  to  evade  their 
duty  to  us  as  strangers  travelling  through  their  country, 
before  we  enforced  our  demands.  I  allude  to  this  in 
order  to  draw  attention  to  the  different  points  of  view 
that  existed  between  the  Mongol  and  the  Kirghiz :  the 
former  considered  himself  our  vassal,  the  latter  con- 
sidered himself  our  equal. 

We  were  now  forced  to  provision  both  ourselves  and 
our  caravan  for  the  crossing  of  an  uninhabited  area, 
which  included  also  the  passage  of  the  Great  Altai. 
Since  the  Kirei  had  now  deserted  the  highlands,  this 
meant  a  journey  of  five  days'  duration  before  reaching 
the  settlements  on  the  lower  foot-hills  of  the  Dzungarian 
side  of  the  range.  We  therefore  purchased  sheep,  for 
food,  and,  with  the  Kirei  men  and  horses  in  place  of  the 
Mongols,  we  recommenced  our  travels. 

On  September  17th  we  visited  Dolto  Nor,  the  lowest 
of  the  group  of  lakes  which  form  the  sources  of  the 
Kobdo  River,  the  main  caravan  being  led  up  to  Dain 
Kul,  by  the  direct  route  to  the  Urkhogaitu  Pass  over  the 
Altai  Range.  The  country  surrounding  these  lakes 
forms  the  main  summer  resort  of  the  Khan  of  the  Kirei 
and  his  section  of  the  tribe.  Situated  at  an  altitude  of 
7,000  ft.  immediately  below  the  forest-belt  on  the  moun- 
tains which  rise  directly  to  the  south-west,  this  plateau 
supplies    excellent    summer   pastures    for    innumerable 


THE   KIREI   OF   THE  ALTAI  371 

flocks  and  herds.  The  country  is  pecuUar,  for  it  is 
formed  entirely  of  miniature  hills  and  dales — remnants  of 
old  moraines.  At  this  season  it  presented  a  somewhat 
melancholy  appearance;  there  was  no  pasture,  and  the 
lakes  were  lifeless,  showing  barren  shores  of  black  stones 
with  neither  reeds  nor  rushes  to  enliven  the  dead  brown 
of  the  landscape.  But  the  islands  dotting  the  lakes 
were  partially  covered  with  forest,  and  in  spring  or 
early  summer  the  view  would  be  entrancing. 

Beyond  the  lakes,  rose  suddenly  in  a  long  even  ridge, 
the  walls  of  the  main  chain  of  the  Altai.  We  noticed  a 
considerable  belt  of  larch  forest,  with  the  snow  extending 
as  far  down  as  the  top  of  the  tree-limit,  which  must  here 
have  been  about  8,000  ft.  No  peaks  of  any  special 
beauty  or  height  rose  above  the  even  and  slightly  indented 
ridge;  on  the  whole,  this  panorama  of  the  Altai  was 
disappointing,  and  we  considered  the  range  misnamed 
"  Great."  The  actual  height  of  this  range, — which 
we  will  rename  the  "  Mongolian  Altai,"  in  distinction 
from  the  Russian  Altai, — seems  to  average,  according 
to  Prof.  Sapoznikoff,  about  10,000  ft.  There  is  only 
one  summit  which  reaches  an  altitude  of  13,120  ft. 
in  the  entire  length  of  700  miles, — between  the  Russian 
frontier  and  where  the  ranges  sink  away  into  desert. 
At  the  point,  however,  where  the  Mongolian  Altai  breaks 
away  from  the  Russian  Altai  there  is  a  group  of  live  high 
peaks,  one  of  which  reaches  an  altitude  of  14,760  ft. 
With  the  exception  of  these  summits  the  "Great"  Altai 
is  in  reality  a  rather  inconspicuous  and  narrow  range. 

Altitude,  however,  is  not  everything ;  the  Altai 
in  September  under  fresh  snow  presented  a  feature  of 
remarkable  beauty,  its  unbroken  wall — for  there  is 
only   one  feasible  pass  over  many  hundreds  of  miles — 


372  UNKNOWN   MONGOLIA 

giving  us  a  deep  impression  of  its  importance  as  a 
boundary  between  Mongolia  and  the  region  lying 
beyond  ;  between  the  cold,  bleak  plateaux  and  the  hot 
lowlands  ;  between  a  land  which  is  exclusively  Mongol 
and  a  land  where  many  races  strive  together  for  mastery, 
and,  most  significant  of  all,  between  the  spheres  of  the 
great  faiths — Buddhism  and  Islam. 

On  leaving  the  Dolto  Nor  we  rode  over  undulating 
moraines,  and  finally  across  a  small  plain,  as  hard  and  as 
smooth  as  a  billiard-table,  which  had  been  utilized  by 
our  sporting  friends,  the  Kirei,  as  a  race-course.  The 
annual  race-meeting  is  held  in  July,  when  severe  tests 
of  the  capacity  and  staying  powers  of  horses  and  riders 
take  place,  as  instanced  by  races  run  over  a  course  of 
20  miles  !  A  line  of  posts  and  rails  to  which  the  nomads 
tied  their  horses  was  the  only  sign  of  it  being  used  as  a  race- 
course. Towards  the  edge  of  the  plain  the  lake  of  Dain 
Kul  was  to  be  seen,  tucked  away  under  hills  covered 
with  golden-tinted  larch  forest ;  and  here  it  was  that 
we  made  our  last  camp  in  Mongolia.  On  the  morrow 
a  long  day's  journey  took  us  over  the  watershed  of  the 
Altai.  The  route  was  in  every  way  an  easy  one ;  in  fact, 
the  crossing  of  the  range  can  be  accomplished  without 
much  difficulty  by  laden  camels,  and  we  ourselves  rode 
on  horseback  over  the  pass,  without  even  dismounting. 
There  was  not  much  snow,  and  what  little  there  was  lay 
both  on  the  south  side  and  on  the  north,  shale  and 
rock  being  the  feature  of  the  pass.  Later  we  realized 
that  the  southern  flanks  of  the  Altai  receive  the  greater 
precipitation,  the  forest  and  pasture  being  larger  and 
finer  on  the  south,  and  the  outlying  spurs  being  more 
covered  with  snow  than  the  northern  side  of  the  ridge. 
It  was  at  an  altitude  of  9,711  ft.  that  we  crossed  the 


THE   KIREI   OF  THE  ALTAI  373 

watershed  and  camped  on  a  snow-patch  below,   near 
which  juniper  and  birch-scrub  gave  us  fuel/ 

The  crossing  of  the  Urkhogaitu  Pass  led  us  down  to 
the  head-waters  of  the  Kran  River,  which  finds  its  way 
eventually  into  the  Irtish,  and  so  on  to  the  Ob  River 
and  the  Arctic  Ocean.  In  the  course  of  two  days'  j  ourney 
our  caravan  descended  from  the  cold,  rocky  crest  of  the 
Altai,  over  grassy  hills  and  through  pleasantly  forested 
valleys,  to  the  lowest  altitude  we  had  experienced  for 
many  months.  From  the  nomads'-land  of  breezy  pla- 
teaux and  wind-swept  pastures  we  descended  to  forests, 
steep-sided  valleys,  and  rushing  rivers,  and,  still  lower 
down,  to  irrigated  lands,  fields  of  ripe  corn — already 
half  harvested — and  to  settled  conditions  of  life. 

The  scenery  in  the  Kran  Valley  was  gorgeous  during 
the  pageant  of  autumn :  the  larch  trees  were  golden,  and 
the  birches  and  poplars  had  turned  cinnamon-yellow  and 
wine-red.  We  now  had  before  us  a  new  phase  in 
our  journey,  namely,  across  a  country  apart  from,  and 
possessing  little  in  common  with,  the  rest  of  Central 
Asia.  On  reaching  the  mouth  of  the  mountain-locked, 
portion  of  the  Kran  Valley,  our  eyes  suddenly  gained  a 
view  of  endless  plains  which  lay  spread  out  before  us. 
Dropping,  by  an  easy  descent,  to  the  foot  of  the  range, 
we  passed  on  towards  this  new  land  which  stretched  in 
featureless  expanse  to  a  far  horizon,  and,  arriving  at 
Sharasume,  halted  there  in  order  to  arrange  our  future 
movements. 

1  The  Urkhogaitu,  or  Urmogaitu,  is  the  only  pass  used  as  a  trade- 
route  between  Northern  Mongoha  and  Dzungaria.  It  is  only  open,  how- 
ever, for  a  short  season.  At  the  beginning  of  June,  Major  George  Pereira 
had  considerable  difficulty  in  crossing  it,  but  reported  several  caravans 
as  having  accomphshed  the  passage  at  the  end  of  that  month.  By  the 
middle  of  October  the  pass  is  again  closed. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

DZUNGARIA — THE   LAND   OF   UNREST 

Before  embarking  upon  our  voyage  over  the  ocean-like 
steppes  of  Dzungaria,  it  may  be  well  to  give  a  brief 
survey  of  the  country  ahead  of  us,  to  record  its  history 
and  to  describe  its  physical  features.  An  apology  ought 
to  be  made  for  using  the  name  Dzungaria/  as  it  sug- 
gests that  the  local  inhabitants  are  Dzungars,  whereas 
Dzungars  no  longer  exist ;  the  name  remains,  for  no 
other  title  can  be  found  for  this  odd  corner  of  Inner  Asia. 
Dzungaria  does  not  belong  to  Chinese  Turkestan — from 
which  it  is  separated  by  a  giant  wall  of  mountains ;  it  is 
not  Mongolian — for  the  Altai  Mountains  form  a  boundary 
between  the  two  countries  ;  and,  although  it  merges  into 
the  Gobi  Desert  on  the  east  and  into  Southern  Siberia 
on  the  west,  it  has  nothing  in  common  with  either  of 
those  regions. 

"Dzungaria"  originated  from  the  name  of  a  small 
branch  of  a  Mongol  tribe,  and  when  that  branch  be- 
came powerful  and  built  up  an  empire,  the  name  was 
extended  to  the  whole  confederation  of  tribes  which 
that  empire  embraced.  The  original  territory  of  the 
Dzungars  was  of  much  greater  dimensions  than  the 
area  to  which  their  name  is  now  applied ;  but  the  site 

*  The  situation  of  Dzungaria  in  respect  to  China  Proper  justifies  its 
meaning,  namely,  "  on  the  left  hand." 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  375 

of  the  present-day  Dzungaria  always  formed  the  centre 
of  the  Dzungar  dominions. 

Racially  and  historically  the  name  is  now  a  thing  of 
the  past ;  but,  although  the  race  has  died  out,  to  this 
day  "  Dzungaria "  remains  as  a  definite  expression 
for  an  important  geographical  division  of  Asia. 

I  have  called  her  the  Land  of  Unrest,  for  Dzungaria 
has  been  for  all  time  a  debatable  land,  the  common 
battle-ground  of  rival  races  and  conflicting  creeds, — a 
veritable  cock-pit  of  Inner  Asia.  This  strange  land  is 
situated  midway  between  China  and  Siberia,  on  the 
boundaries  of  two  great  Empires,  yet  sufficiently  far 
away  from  the  centre  of  each  to  have  avoided — until 
quite  recently — being  caught  up  in  the  net  of  empire. 
She  is  not  rich  enough  to  tempt  a  permanent  coloniza- 
tion by  either  people,  she  is  too  far  away  for  either  to 
hold  securely.  Yet,  lying  on  the  high  road  to  every- 
where in  Asia,  every  one  passes  this  way ;  but  only  passes, 
for  nothing  seems  to  remain  permanently  in  Dzungaria. 
The  geographical  features  of  the  region  have  been  fatal 
to  permanence.  She  has  been  a  thoroughfare  for  migrating 
peoples,  the  abiding-place  of  none  ;  her  conquerors  have 
been  destroyers — not  constructors. 

Situated,  moreover,  on  the  threshold  of  the  Moslem 
and  Buddhist  worlds,  in  a  region  which  has  been  the 
camping-ground  of  all  the  wild  tribes  which  have,  at 
different  periods,  overrun  Asia,  Dzungaria  has  inevitably 
been  the  prey  of  each  recurring  wave  of  migration  which 
has  broken  across  its  boundless  steppes.  She  has  been 
the  scene  of  wars  and  massacres, — the  victim  of  the 
wildest  vicissitudes,  on  a  scale  such  as  only  Asia  can 
produce.  She  was  invaded  by  the  Huns  and  overrun 
by  the   Mongols  long  before  the   Dzungars,   suddenly 


376  DZUNGARIA 

rising  to  eminence,  first  set  up  a  kingdom.  While 
they,  too,  after  overrunning  wide  areas  of  Asia,  sud- 
denly collapsed  and  left  nothing  but  a  name.  When 
the  Chinese  invaded  Dzungaria  they  killed  off  her  popu- 
lation to  a  man — of  six  hundred  thousand  inhabitants 
not  one  remained.  In  order  to  repopulate  this  newly 
acquired  territory,  the  Dungans  (Chinese  Mohamme- 
dans) were  transported  from  Western  China  ;  but  the 
colonists  became  more  powerful  than  their  masters, 
and  Dzungaria  was  once  again  the  scene  of  massacres, 
for  Islam  rose  against  Cathay,  and  the  Dungans  killed 
the  Celestials  by  hundreds  of  thousands.  Small  wonder, 
then,  that  Dzungaria  has  remained  unsettled  and  un- 
civilized, that  she  has  produced  neither  cities  nor  large 
cultivated  areas,  and  that,  although  for  the  moment 
her  throbbing  deserts  are  at  rest,  her  atmosphere  is 
still  one  of  uncertainty  and  alarm. 

Although  the  name  Dzungaria  originally  denoted  a 
tribal  area,  it  happened  also  to  include  a  region  remark- 
ably well  defined  by^^atural  boundaries;  thus  "Dzun- 
garia "  now  represents  a  purely  topographical  division, 
standing  apart  and  distinct  from  the  surrounding 
regions.  The  Dzungaria  of  to-day  embraces  the  whole 
of  the  inter- Altai-Tian  Shan  region,  and  is  bordered  by 
Mongolia  on  the  east  and  Southern  Siberia  on  the  west. 
The  land,  as  a  whole,  is  lowland  as  compared  with  the 
rest  of  Mongolia,  and  forms  part  of  the  Siberian  plains 
rather  than  of  the  Central  Asian  tableland.  Yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  Dzungaria  has  the  character  of  an 
inclined  plain  with  a  long  and  gentle  ascent  from  the 
plains  of  Siberia  to  the  plateau  of  Mongolia.  The 
average  altitude  of  the  floor  of  this  plain  is  about  1,500 
ft,  above  sea-level ;  in  the  west  the  level  drops  to  700  ft., 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  377 

and  in  the  east,  where  it  merges  into  the  Gobi  Desert, 
rises  to  2,500  ft.  Of  a  total  area  of  147,000  square 
miles,  about  two-thirds  consists  of  plain,  the  remaining 
portion  being  composed  of  mountain-ranges,  situated 
like  a  wall  around  the  central  basin,  and  forming  in 
themselves  a  natural  frontier  against  Mongolia,  Siberia, 
Chinese  and  Russian  Turkestan. 

The  plains  of  Dzungaria  are  of  a  complex  character. 
For  the  most  part  they  are  composed  of  hard,  dry  steppe 
covered  with  a  scanty  growth  of  saxaul  and  tamarisk ; 
but  this  is  varied  by  large  areas  of  saline  desert  and  sand- 
dunes.  The  rivers  descending  into  the  plain  from  the 
border-ranges, — with  the  exception  of  the  Manas  River, 
— do  not  run  far  before  sinking  below  the  surface,  thereby 
forbidding  the  employment  of  irrigation  methods  and 
causing  the  interior  to  remain  arid  and  unproductive.  In 
consequence,  a  certain  portion  of  this  region  can  never 
be  of  economic  value,  while  the  remainder,  which  is 
either  reached  by  water  or  can  be  brought  within  its 
reach,  presents  itself  as  a  suitable  country  for  future 
expansion,  although  it  is  not  yet  utilized  to  any  great 
extent.  Nomad  life,  however,  is  not  entirely  absent  from 
these  regions,  for  even  the  sand-dunes  supply  a  little 
pasture,  and  this  is  used  by  the  shepherds  in  winter. 
In  summer  the  inner  deserts  are  destitute  of  human 
life,  and  even  the  explorer  will  find  them  most  tedious 
to  traverse,  owing  to  their  soft,  salt-encrusted  surface, 
the  lack  of  water,  and  the  great  heat.  No  one  but  a 
"Mongol,  a  misanthrope,  or  a  madman"  would  venture 
into  Central  Dzungaria  in  midsummer. 

The  border-ranges  are  the  Hfe  of  Dzungaria  ;  they 
supply  the  pasture  for  the  nomads,  and  the  water  for 
the  agriculturists ;  they, — together  with  the  warm  zone 


378  DZUNGARIA 

of  country  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  between 
them  and  the  deserts, — compose  the  whole  of  inhabited 
Dzungaria.  In  comparison  with  the  deserts,  the  sur- 
rounding highlands  are  paradises  of  wealth  and  beauty. 
Well-named,  indeed,  is  the  southern  border-range — the 
Tian  Shan — or  Heavenly  Mountains.  This  giant  range, 
together  with  its  continuation — the  Bogdo-ola  and  the 
Karlik  Tagh — runs  the  whole  length  of  Southern  Dzun- 
garia. A  continuous  line  of  ice-peaks  and  untrodden 
snow- fields  lift  themselves  in  exultation  above  the  dusty 
plain,  and  send  down  their  melting  waters  to  supply  the 
colonists  with  all  they  need  to  turn  their  lands  to  good 
account.  The  southern  wall  of  Dzungaria  is  almost 
unbroken.  In  a  length  of  eight  hundred  miles  there 
are  only  two  passes  suitable  for  wheeled  traffic  ;  one, 
leading  over  into  Chinese  Turkestan, — the  Dabachin, 
situated  to  the  south  of  Urumchi  at  the  junction  of  the 
Tian  Shan  and  Bogdo-ola,  and  the  other,  a  nameless  pass 
between  Tou-shui  and  Ta-shih-tu  which  leads  over  the 
plateau  between  the  Bogdo-ola  and  Barkul  ranges.  One 
other  pass  alone — the  Talki — permits  free  intercourse 
between  Dzungaria  and  the  Hi  Valley. 

The  second  range  of  importance,  which  affects  the 
welfare  of  Dzungaria,  is  the  Altai.  For  a  distance  of  four 
hundred  miles  these  mountains  form  a  frontier  between 
Dzungaria  and  Mongolia,  and  supply  not  only  immense 
pastures  for  nomads,  but  facilities  for  agriculture,  and 
rivers  which  form  a  water-way  to  Siberia.  The  Mongo- 
lian Altai  is  the  north-eastern  border-range ;  it  abuts  on 
the  Russian  frontier  on  the  one  hand,  and  stretches  out 
into  the  Gobi  Desert  on  the  other. 

On  the  north  and  west  a  string  of  ranges,  orographi- 
cally  disconnected,  but  geologically  the  same,  form  a 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  379 

barrier  between  Dzungaria  and  Siberia;  the  barrier  is, 
however,  sufficiently  broken  to  permit  of  easy  communica- 
tion between  the  two  countries.  The  Tarbagatai,  the 
Sair,  the  Urkashar,  and  BarUk  groups,  together  with 
the  Ala-tau,  form  this  northern  frontier.  They  are 
further  described  in  another  chapter. 

"  Mountains,"  says  Rickmers,  in  his  description  of  the 
physical  features  of  the  "  Duab  of  Turkestan,"  "  have 
been  called  the  skeleton  of  the  land,  being  guiding-Hnes 
to  the  eye;  but  we  can  extend  the  analogy  to  the  backbone, 
which  is  also  the  nerve-centre,  and  as  such  the  ruling 
influence  in  the  development  and  vitality  of  a  continent. 
The  solution  of  Asiatic  problems  lies  in  the  mountains." 

The  chief  peculiarity  of  Dzungaria  is  its  character  as 
a  mountain-locked  basin,  the  position  of  its  encircling 
ranges,  in  respect  to  the  Siberian  plains  and  the  prevailing 
moisture-laden  winds,  making  Dzungaria  subject  to 
phenomenal  climatic  conditions.  The  ranges  surrounding 
Dzungaria  are  peculiarly  situated  in  comparison  with  other 
mountainous  regions  of  Inner  Asia,  for  all  these  ranges, 
whether  in  the  north,  south,  or  west,  appear  to  exercise 
a  positive,  and  not  a  negative,  influence  (as  is  the  case 
with  so  many  of  the  ranges  in  Central  Asia)  on  the 
country  lying  between  them. 

The  Tian  Shan,  for  instance,  receives  a  heavy  rainfall 
on  its  northern  flank,  which  produces  pine-forests  and 
pastures,  while  the  southern  side  of  the  watershed  is 
a  veritable  abomination  of  desolation.  This  chain  of 
mountains  supplies  Southern  Dzungaria  with  refreshing 
summer  rains,  but  at  the  same  time  minimizes  the  precipi- 
tation on  its  southern  flank  in  Chinese  Turkestan.  We 
ourselves,  whilst  wandering  in  the  desert  zone  at  a  distance 
of  fifty  miles  from  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  experi- 


38o  DZUNGARIA 

enced,  at  the  end  of  May,  heavy  rain-storms.  It  rained 
continuously  for  twenty  hours  on  one  occasion,  making 
the  country  almost  impossible  for  travelling,  the  rain- 
storms creeping  up  from  the  west,  and  breaking  across 
the  plains  to  the  north,  as  frequently  as  they  did  on  the 
ranges  to  the  south. 

Curiously  enough,  the  north-western  border-range — 
the  Altai — has  reversed  climatic  conditions,  the  slopes 
facing    south-west,    and    not    those    facing    north-east, 
having  the  greater  precipitation.     Prof.  Sapoznikoff, — 
the  most  recent  as  well  as  the  most  trustworthy  writer  on 
the  Mongolian  Altai, — says  that,  if  the  volumes  of  water 
flowing  off  the  two  sides  of  the  range  be  compared,  it  is 
found  that  the  flow  of  water  from  the  south-west  is  by  far 
the  greater,  this  proving  to  be  an  exception  to  the  rule 
generally  accepted  in  regard  to  mountain-ranges  in  Inner 
Asia,  where  the  north  side  has  usually  the  greater  precipi- 
tation.    This  contradiction  is  explained  by  the  fact  that 
the  spurs  on  the   south-western   slopes  are  longer  and 
higher  than  those  on  the  north-east,  and  on  this  account 
become  the  better  condensers  of  the  moisture.     The  cur- 
rents of  air  from  the  west  and  north-west  encounter  these 
outlying  spurs  and  are  relieved  of  their  moisture ;  thus 
the  precipitation  on  the  farther  side  of  the  range  is 
greatly  minimized.     The  result  is  that  the  forests  and 
pastures  of  the  Dzungarian  slopes  of  the  Altai  make 
very   favourable   conditions   for   a   nomadic  life,    while 
the  river-valleys  grant  facilities  for  future  colonization. 
The   northern   border-ranges   of    Dzungaria   are,   in 
like  manner,  clothed  with  forests  and  grass,  the  lower 
portions  of  the  southern  flanks  alone  being  covered  with 
desert  flora. 

It  is  this  special  factor  in  the  climatic  conditions  of 


THE  LAND  OF  UNREST  381 

Dzungaria  that  causes  the  locality  to  be  such  a  well- 
favoured  one,  for  of  its  total  area  only  one-tenth  is  un- 
productive. The  course  of  desiccation,  now  in  progress 
in  Chinese  Turkestan,  does  not  extend  to  Dzungaria ;  no 
sand-buried  cities  or  dying  forests  are  to  be  found  ;  and, 
as  far  as  we  could  judge,  the  rivers  extend  as  far  out  into 
the  plain  as  they  have  done  during  a  very  long  period. 

The  hydrography  of  Dzungaria  is  also  peculiar.  The 
entire  drainage  from  the  encircling  mountain-ranges  is 
caught  by  self-contained  lake-basins,  with  the  exception 
of  a  portion  of  the  Altai  which  drains,  by  way  of  the 
Irtish  River,  into  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Much  water  drains 
from  the  surrounding  ranges  into  the  plain,  but,  on 
reaching  it,  the  majority  disappears  below  the  surface,  to 
reappear  again  at  the  level  of  the  lakes.  The  main  rivers 
of  Dzungaria,  namely,  the  Borotala,  the  Emil,  the  Manas, 
and  the  Urungu,  succeed  in  passing  the  belt  of  gravel  and 
reach  their  destinations  above  ground,  carving  out  for 
themselves  deep  ravines  in  the  soft  clay  of  the  plains. 

Between  the  highlands  and  the  plain  lies  a  zone  of 
country  neither  mountain  nor  desert,  free  from  extremes 
of  climate,  and  rendered  suitable  for  man's  use  by  its 
admirable  position.  This  zone  is  to  be  found  in  charac- 
teristic form  along  the  northern  foot-hills  of  the  Tian 
Shan,  where  rivers  from  the  snow-clad  ranges  to  the 
south  pour  down  their  waters  through  innumerable 
valleys  on  to  the  plain,  thus  supplying  material  for  the 
carrying  out  of  irrigation  schemes.  The  area  of  land 
rendered  productive  by  these  means  is  very  consider- 
able, and  by  systematic  irrigation  a  still  greater  area 
could  be  brought  into  use.  The  Manas  River,  for  instance, 
wastes  itself  by  evaporation  in  the  Telli  Nor,  while 
pregnant  lands  on  either  bank  lie  dry  and  unutilized. 


382  DZUNGARIA 

Much  water  disappears  also  in  the  zone  of  piedmont- 
gravel,  but  reapproaches  the  surface  at  about  twenty 
miles  from  the  foot  of  the  mountains  (at  an  altitude  of 
from  1,500  to  2,000  ft.)  in  sufficient  quantity  to  enable 
the  land  to  support  forests  of  stunted  poplars  and  jungles 
of  reeds  and  scrub.  The  productive  belt  is  very  narrow, 
but  here  and  there  tongues  of  vegetation  stretch  out  across 
the  plain,  and  denote  the  courses  of  the  various  rivers, 
which  supply  the  necessary  underground  moisture. 

This  zone  has  been  occupied,  from  time  immemorial, 
by  one  of  the  earliest  races  of  Central  Asian  agricul- 
turists— the  Uigurs — and  at  the  present  day  it  forms 
a  colony  for  Chinese,  Dungan,  and  Turki  cultivators. 
Here  have  been  built  the  large  towns,  including  the 
government  capital,  and  the  centres  of  internal  trade 
between  Siberia,  Mongolia,  Turkestan,  and  China  Proper. 
A  boom  in  land  speculation  is  taking  place,  which  may 
greatly  increase  now  that  the  former  dumping-ground 
for  colonists — Mongolia — ^has  become  a  forbidden  land 
to  the  Chinese ;  Dzungaria  alone,  of  lands  within  the 
Empire,  remains  untenanted. 

From  these  physical  features  and  climatic  conditions 
results  the  history  of  Dzungaria. 

Dzungaria,  before  taking  its  name  as  the  land  of  the 
Dzungars,  was  a  no-man's-land,  claimed  at  different 
periods  by  such  ephemeral  empire-builders  as  the  Kara- 
Kitai,  the  Uigurs,  the  Naimans,  and  the  Mongols  ;  yet, 
it  was  never  entirely  under  the  sway  of  any  of  these 
peoples.  The  earliest  traditions  about  this  region  centre 
around  either  the  southern  portion, — the  site  of  the 
present  capital,  Urumchi, — which  has  always  been  a 
favoured  locality,  or  the  Emil  Valley  on  the  northern 
border,  which,  on  account  of  its  situation  on  the  high- 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  383 

road  between  Eastern  and  Western  Asia,  has  for  ages 
formed  the  camping-ground  of  "  princely-shepherds " 
and  nomad-kings.  These  two  locahties  contain  all  the 
principal  historical  associations  of  Dzungaria. 

Landmarks  in  the  history  of  Dzungaria  are  difficult 
to  discern  at  so  great  a  distance ;  in  fact,  they  are  entirely 
lost  to  view  if  we  look  back  beyond  the  ninth  century  a.d. 
Before  that  date  all  Inner  Asia  was  the  play-ground 
or  battle-field  of  numerous  unsettled,  roaming  bands  of 
nomads,  about  whom  we  know  very  little.  During  the 
first  three  dynasties  of  China  (until  249  B.C.)  her  western 
borders  were  not  in  relation  with  the  Empire.  At  the 
commencement  of  the  Hun  Dynasty  the  spirit  of  con- 
quest resulted  in  the  incorporation  of  Kansu  as  a  pro- 
vince, but  no  notice  appears  to  have  been  taken  of  the 
far  western  regions,  such  as  Turkestan  and  Dzungaria,  nor 
is  there  any  mention  of  them  in  the  Imperial  Annals, 
before  the  reign  of  Chien-lung  in  the  eighteenth  century. 

Between  the  second  century  B.C.  and  the  fifth  century 
A.D.  one  particular  tribe — the  Huns — caused  great  changes 
and  upheavals  in  Inner  Asia.  Emerging  from  the  depths 
of  Manchuria,  they  harried  the  marches  of  China  and 
wandered  across  into  Dzungaria  on  their  way  to  Europe. 
This  great  human  flood,  however,  left  no  trace  behind 
it,  and  we  have  to  wait  until  the  ninth  century  a.d. 
before  we  find  any  part  of  Dzungaria  actually  occupying 
a  position  of  importance.  At  that  period  the  Uigurs, 
being  driven  out  by  pestilence,  famine,  and  Kirghiz 
invaders  from  their  home  in  MongoHa,  migrated  to 
Southern  Dzungaria,  and  set  up  their  second  kingdom 
on  the  slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan  mountains,  with  their 
capital  at  Bishbalik — the  site  of  the  present  Urumchi. 

The  Uigur  Kingdom  embraced  but  a  small  portion 
n— 5 


384  DZUNGARIA 

of  Dzungaria — namely,  the  southern  borders,  at  the 
foot  of  the  Tian  Shan — a  district  which  corresponds 
precisely  to  the  present-day  colonies  of  Chinese  and 
Dungans.  This  district  was,  in  fact,  the  only  portion 
offering  facilities  to  an  agricultural  people,  Dzungaria 
being  divided  into  two  zones,  the  northern  portion  for 
nomads  and  the  southern  for  agriculturists.  The 
remainder  of  the  Uigur  Kingdom  was  composed  of  the 
rich  oases  of  Chinese  Turkestan,  on  the  southern  side  of 
the  Tian  Shan. 

At  this  particular  period  Turki  nomadic  tribes,  such 
as  the  Naimans,  held  the  northern  portion  of  Dzungaria, 
and  the  Kirei  were  resident  in  the  Altai. 

This  state  of  affairs  continued  until  the  early  part 
of  the  twelfth  century,  when  another  immigration  of 
strangers  occurred.  In  1123  (according  to  Sir  Henry 
Howorth)  a  prince  of  the  Kitan,  or  Liao  Dynasty, 
emigrated  from  China  with  a  small  band  of  followers. 
Gathering,  on  his  way  through  Shensi,  a  considerable 
number  of  Turki  adventurers,  he  travelled  across  the 
confines  of  China  to  the  "  land  of  Kirghises,"  and  settled 
in  Northern  Dzungaria,  where  he  built  a  town  on  the 
banks  of  the  "  I  mil  "  (Emil).  The  result  was  the  origin 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  Kara-Kitai,  who  extended  their 
power  until  they  embraced  not  only  all  Dzungaria, 
but  also  Chinese  and  Russian  Turkestan.  The  Kara- 
Kitai  became  the  suzerains  of  the  Uigurs  and  all  the 
smaller  nomadic  peoples,  until  the  Mongol  avalanche 
was  set  in  motion  and  eventually  destroyed  them. 

Early  in  the  thirteenth  century  the  Mongols  arose, 
and,  sweeping  all  Inner  Asia,  entirely  altered  the  map  of 
racial-distribution.  The  Mongols  were  destroyers,  not 
organizers,  in  consequence  of  which  all  permanent  con- 


384] 


MONGOL    COIFFURE. 
A  woman  of  the  Khalka  tribe. 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  385 

ditions  in  Dzungaria  disappeared ;  but,  since  Northern 
Dzungaria  formed  the  high-road  between  the  extremities 
of  the  Mongol  Empire,  it  played  an  important  part,  and 
the  encampment  of  some  great  chieftain  was  always  to 
be  found  in  the  Emil  Valley.  After  the  death  of  Jenghis 
Khan,  Dzungaria  fell  to  the  lot  of  his  third  son,  Oktai, 
or  Ogodai,  who  also  held  Mongolia  Propei  ;  it  seems, 
however,  to  have  been  a  bone  of  contention  between 
Oktai  and  his  brother  Chagatai,  who  ruled  over  the 
Middle  Kingdom  of  Turkestan  and  Afghanistan,  and 
was  generally  in  a  state  of  unrest.  Later,  in  1254,  the 
Emil  district  of  Northern  Dzungaria  formed  the  head- 
quarters of  Kuyuk  Khan,  grandson  of  Jenghis. 

As  the  power  of  the  Mongols  decreased,  China 
regained  her  influence,  and  constant  fighting  took 
place  along  the  Chinese-Mongol  borders,  until,  in  the 
middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  she  finally  threw  off 
the  Mongol  yoke.  Then  Mongolia  and  Dzungaria  lapsed 
into  intrigues  and  quarrels  between  themselves,  and 
nothing  of  note  is  recorded  until  the  end  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  when  movements  of  great  importance 
again  took  place  in  Dzungaria. 

A  section  of  the  Western  Mongols,  named  after  their 
leader,  Eliutei,  or  Eleuth,*  had  been  slowly  gaining  power 
in  these  regions,  until  in  1690,  under  their  Khan  Galdan, 
they  conquered  Samarkand,   Bokhara,  and  Yarkand— 

^  The  Eleuths  are  generally  styled  Kalmuks,  a  name  which  has  stood 
for  all  branches  of  Western  Mongol  tribes,  but  has  in  itself  no  specific 
meaning.  "  Kalmuk  "  is  not  a  Mongol  word,  but  it  seems  to  have  been 
in  use  amongst  the  Turks  for  a  very  long  period.  Some  writers  claim 
that  the  word  means  "  remnant,"  i.e.  the  broken  branches  of  the  great 
Mongol  people  who  were  left,  as  it  were,  as  the  Mongol  flood  receded 
from  the  west ;  while  others  suggest  that  "  Kalmuk  "  is  only  a  corruption 
of  "  Kalpak,"  i.e.  "  fur  cap,"  a  name  in  use  among  Mohammedan  Turks 
for  all  Mongol  tribes. 


386  DZUNGARIA 

the  great  cities  of  Turkestan.  On  the  death  of  Galdan, 
his  nephew  Rabdan,  who  was  chief  of  a  small  branch  of 
the  Eleuths  named  Songares  or  Dzungars,  succeeded  to 
the  possessions  of  his  uncle.  He  established  a  firm 
hold  over  all  his  subjects,  and  gave  the  name  of  his  own 
tribe  to  his  entire  kingdom  ;  hence  the  origin  of  the 
name  Dzungaria.  Here  arose,  for  the  first  time,  a 
power  whose  headquarters  were  in  this  hitherto  name- 
less portion  of  Inner  Asia. 

Rabdan  must  have  been  a  man  of  remarkable  ability. 
He  is  said  to  have  hindered  the  Russian  advance  into 
Turkestan,  and  to  have  reduced  the  kingdom  of  Hami. 
He  warred  with  China  and  invaded  Tibet,  where  he 
contented  himself  with  looting  the  monasteries.  Eventu- 
ally the  Chinese  drove  the  Dzungars  out  of  Tibet,  and 
retook  Hami  on  behalf  of  its  Khan, — who  remained 
vassal  to  them, — while  the  Dzungars  were  pushed  back 
into  their  own  Dzungaria. 

Then  followed  a  short  period  when  the  Chinese  stood 
aside  and  allowed  anarchy  to  prevail  amongst  the  tribes 
on  the  far  w^estern  confines  of  her  dominion.  Rabdan, 
Khan  of  the  Dzungar  Empire,  died,  and  his  son  con- 
tinued a  similar  course  of  war  and  quarrel.  All  authority 
was  lost  on  account  of  continual  intrigue  and  assassina- 
tion, many  of  the  inhabitants  fled  from  the  country, 
including  the  Torguts,  who  migrated  en  masse  into 
Russian  territory,  and  the  Empire  gradually  fell  to 
pieces.  Finally  the  leadership  passed  to  an  adventurer, 
Amursana,  who  played  his  cards  first  for  the  Dzungars, 
and  then  for  the  Chinese,  and  created  such  disturbance 
that,  at  last,  when  the  Chinese  appeared  again  on  the 
scene,  they  annihilated  the  Dzungars  and  annexed 
their  country.     Of  a  population  of  600,000  souls  not  a 


THE  LAND  OF  UNREST  387 

Dzungar  was  left  alive,  and  this  country  became  once 
more  an  unhappy  and  depopulated  land. 

This  date,  1750,  marks  the  beginning  of  the  period 
of  Chinese  ascendancy  in  the  far  western  portion  of  her 
Empire,  under  the  great ,  Emperor  Chien-lung,  whose 
great  ambition  was  to  restore  Chinese  prestige  in  Central 
Asia.  Dzungaria  being  depopulated,  Chien-lung  im- 
ported, as  colonists  into  the  country,  Solons  and  Sibos, 
loyal  fighting  races  on  whom  the  Chinese  could  depend  ; 
these  people  were  given  land  in  the  Hi  Valley ;  while 
Dungans  (Chinese  Mohammedans)  settled  in  consider- 
able numbers  along  the  northern  foot-hills  of  the  Tian 
Shan.  Chinese  colonists  began  to  recognize  in  Southern 
Dzungaria  and  the  Hi  Valley  a  new  colony  where  life 
was  easier  than  in  the  crowded  home  provinces  ;  while 
criminals  and  outlaws  found  that  in  this  direction  they 
could  best  escape  the  long  arm  of  the  law.  Gradually 
Dzungaria  began  to  assume  a  respectable  and  almost 
settled  appearance.  Towns  of  importance  grew  up, 
and  even  the  Torguts,  after  their  none  too  pleasant 
experiences  in  Russian  territory,  were  invited  to  return 
and  were  offered  lands  in  which  to  dwell. 

All  went  well  until  disturbances  and  unrest  amongst 
the  Chinese  Mohammedans,  in  the  provinces  of  Kansu 
and  Shensi,  sent  a  wave  of  dissatisfied  insurgents  across 
to  Dzungaria.  In  1864  the  Mohammedans  rose  against 
their  rulers,  the  Dungan  colonists  captured  the  capital — 
Urumchi,  and  killed  130,000  Chinese  ;  the  Hi  Valley 
was  also  devastated,  five  out  of  its  six  towns  were  de- 
stroyed, and  Dzungaria  became  once  more  the  scene  of 
bloodshed  and  war.  For  seventeen  years  disorder  con- 
tinued, and  it  was  not  until  1878  that  the  Chinese  suc- 
ceeded in  crushing  the  revolt.     In  188 1  these  outlying 


388  DZUNGARIA 

regions — Turkestan  and  Dzungaria — which  had  for  ever 
been  "  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  "  of  the  Chinese,  and  had  been 
lost  and  won  several  times,  were  incorporated  into  a 
province  and  named  Sin-Kiang — the  New  Dominion. 
With  characteristic  persistency  the  tenacious  Chinese 
have  once  again  built  up  their  fabric  of  government, 
greater  towns  supersede  the  former  ones,  colonists 
continue  to  pour  into  the  country,  trade  grows, 
and,  although  ruined  towns  and  villages  still  dis- 
figure the  landscape,  there  is  not  only  every  likeli- 
hood of  progress  in  the  future,  but  less  chance  of 
retrogression. 

Such  is  the  kaleidoscopic  story  of  Dzungaria.  Small 
wonder  is  it  that  ethnological  confusion  reigns  at  present 
in  the  ancient  land  of  the  Dzungars.  The  migratory 
hordes  and  conquering  armies  passing  backwards  and 
forwards,  have  left  a  flotsam  and  jetsam  which  now 
forms  its  population  ;  within  this  area  reside  remnants 
of  every  race  which  has  used  it  as  a  camping-ground 
or  attempted  to  make  it  a  home.  There  are  Mongols, 
Kalmuks,  Kirghiz,  Turki  descendants  of  the  ancient 
Uigurs,  Chinese,  Dungans,  and  Russians. 

The  tribal  distribution  is  to-day  much  the  same  as  it 
was  formerly,  in  that  Northern  Dzungaria  is  still  the 
nomads'  land,  while  its  southern  borders  are  the  home 
of  the  agricultural  and  settled  section  of  the  population. 
In  enumerating  the  various  races  inhabiting  Dzungaria 
at  the  present  day,  I  shall  deal  with  them  under  the 
separate  headings  of  Nomadic  Residents  and  Sedentary 
Residents,  i.e.  agriculturists,  merchants,  and  officials, — 
including  in  this  category  occasional  visitors.  Roughly 
speaking,  the  Chinese  form  the  merchant  and  official 
class,  besides  being  the  market  gardeners  ;  the  Moham- 


in 


r'    c 
■■^  % 

XT:    •= 


;< 


O 
'4. 


j 

/ 


THE  LAND  OF  UNREST  389 

Pxiedan   Dungans  and  Chantos  are  the  grain-growers ; 
while  the  Mongols  and  Kirghiz  are  the  ranchers. 

All  Dzungaria  outside  the  cultivated  zone  lying 
under  the  northern  spurs  of  the  Tian  Shan  is,  practically 
speaking,  a  land  in  which  the  tribes  live  under  nomadic 
conditions.  Its  physical  features  have  been  dealt  with 
in  another  part  of  this  chapter,  and  we  can  now 
supplement  this  by  a  description  of  the  various  peoples 
who  wander  over  it.  Mingled  with  the  nomadic  popu- 
lation is  a  small  population  of  cultivators ;  the  lower 
Borotala  in  the  west,  for  instance,  holds  out  possibilities 
for  agriculture,  as  also  do  the  Emil  Valley  in  the  north,  the 
Irtish  in  the  east,  and  the  lower  Manas  River, — flowing 
through  the  very  heart  of  the  central  steppes, — all  these 
may  some  day  become  centres  of  large  sedentary  com- 
munities. The  nomadic  tribes  consist  of  the  Turkish 
Kirei  and  Kasaks,  as  well  as  the  Torguts  and  Charkhars 
of  Mongol  origin. 

The  distribution  of  the  main  section  of  the  Kirei 
has  been  given  in  Chapter  XII  ;  the  very  important 
mountain  district  surrounding  the  Emil  Valley,  on 
the  northern  frontier  of  Dzungaria,  is  inhabited  by 
a  western  branch  of  these  people.  The  Tarbagatai, 
Urkashar,  Barlik,  and  Maili  mountain-ranges  are  all 
used  by  them,  the  Kosho,  or  Kun  Valley,  between  the 
Chagan-oba  and  Maili  Mountains  forming  the  centre 
of  their  range. 

Kirghiz  tribes,  not  belonging  to  the  Kirei  family,  are  to 
be  found  in  certain  localities  in  Tian  Shan, — the  southern 
border-range  of  Dzungaria, — as  far  east  as  Urumchi ;  but, 
for  the  most  part,  Mongol — or,  more  truly,  Kalmuk — 
tribes  of  Torguts  hold  the  eastern  portion  of  this  range. 

The    Torguts    of   Dzungaria    are    divided    into    two 


390  DZUNGARIA 

sections :  those  of  the  Kobuk  Valley  in  the  north,  where 
they  live,  in  small  reservations,  under  their  hereditary 
Khan  ;    and  those  of  the  Tian   Shan,  who  have  their 
headquarters  on  the  Yulduz  plateau,  but  extend  in  small 
communities  along  the  whole  Dzungarian  side  of    the 
range.     The  story  of  the  Torguts  is  typical  of  the  history 
of  Inner  Asia,   being  that  of  a  people  buffeted  about 
by    changing    circumstances     and    generally    "  on    the 
move."      All  that  now  remains  of  the  Torgut  tribe  in 
Dzungaria,  is  merely  the  remnant  of  the  once  numerous 
and  important  section  of  the  Mongol  people,  who  were 
driven  out  during    the    storm}^    period    of  Dzungarian 
ascendancy  towards    the   end    of    the   seventeenth  cen- 
tury.     The     whole    tribe    then     wandered    westwards 
across  Southern  Siberia,  attempted  to  fight  the  Russians, 
and    finally    promised    them    allegiance    in    return    for 
territory  allotted  to  them  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga. 
The  exiles,  however,  did  not  rest  securely  in  their  new 
home  ;    the}-  were  harassed  by  the  other  nomad  tribes 
of   the  region,  who   were   jealous   of   their  possessions, 
and  they  eventually  fell  out  with  their  Russian  masters. 
In  1770,  within  eighty  years  of  their  migration  from 
the  east,   they  started  off  once  more  on  a  movement 
which  has  been  compared  to  the  Exodus  of  the  Israel- 
ites from   Egypt,   and  described  as   "  the   most  extra- 
ordinar}^  emigration   of  modern   times."         The   entire 
tribe,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  thousand  families,^ 

^  Accounts  vary  as  to  the  number  of  Torguts  resident  on  the  Volga 
and  of  those  who  attempted  the  journey  back  to  Dzungaria.  The  Torguts 
estimated  themselves  at  50,000  tents;  but,  as  this  did  not  include  lamas, 
and  as  they  naturally  minimized  their  total  on  account  of  the  levies 
demanded  of  them,  the  number  was  probably  nearly  65,000  to  70.000 
famiUes.  It  is  said  that  15,000  famiUes  remained  on  the  Volga.  Russian 
accounts  put  the  number  of  those  who  left  the  Volga  at  40,000  famihes, 
while  the  Chinese  claim  that  50,000  arrived  back  in  Dzungaria. 


THE  LAND  OF  UNREST  391 

under  their  leader  Ubashi  Khan,  attempted  to  escape 
from  the  arms  of  Russia  and  to  return  to  their  old  home, 
the   desire   being  increased  by  an  invitation  from   the 
Emperor  Chien-lung,  who,  after  depopulating  Dzungaria, 
wished   to   find   desirable   colonists    and   promised    the 
Torguts  a  home  in  their  native  land.     The  migration  of 
a  people,  including  men,  women,   children,   flocks   and 
herds  ;    the  transport  of  all  household  belongings  ;    the 
actual  journey,  undertaken— as  it  was — in  mid-winter, 
over  bleak  and  barren  steppes,  for  a  distance  of  three 
thousand    miles    from    the    Volga    to    Dzungaria,    form 
adequate  material  for  a  romance.     Harassed  by  enemies, 
decimated  by  disease,  starving,  fighting  for  their  lives  and 
their  belongings,  unable  to  retreat,  forced  to  advance 
or  to  die,   the  Torguts  marched  by  slow  and  painful 
stages    back    to    their    own   land.      After   running    the 
gauntlet    of  Russian   Cossacks   and   Kirghiz    plunderers 
for  eight  months,  the  remnant  arrived  on  the  confines 
of  China,  and  were  given  lands  in  the  Kobuk  district  ^ 
of   Northern  Dzungaria,  the    Yulduz   plateau,    and   the 
Kunguz  and  Tekes  Valleys  in  Tian  Shan.     There  exists 
also  a  small  section  of  Torguts  resident  in  the  southern 
slopes  of  the  Altai  at  the  sources  of  the  Urungu  River, 
and  on  the  Baitik  Mountains,  which  latter  region  they 
share  with  the  Kirei. 

In  Western  Dzungaria  is  another  reservation  for  a 
Mongol  tribe,  namely,  the  Borotala  Valley.  In  this 
abundantly  watered  and  well-protected  region  on   the 

^  My  reasons  for  considering  the  Kobuk  Torguts  a  portion  of  the 
tribe  who  migrated  to  the  Volga  and  back  again,  are  gathered  from  the 
accounts  given  by  Tsh'ovenn-iven,  first  Tao-tai  of  Southern  Dzungaria, 
who  relates  that  "  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  Kien-loung  (Chien-lung) 
the  Torguts,  having  at  their  head  their  chief,  Tortsi-bek,  settled  them- 
selves at  seven  days'  march  distant  from  and  to  the  east  of  the  town  of 
Tarbagatai,  in  a  place  called  Kiabek  saU  "  (Kobuk  saU,  or  Kobuk  Valley). 


392  DZUNGARIA 

south  side  of  the  Ala-tau  Range  dwell  a  section  of  the 
Charkhars,  the  story  of  whose  introduction  to  this  land 
compares  with  the  strange  wanderings  of  the  Torguts, 
in  that  the  migration  of  Charkhars  was  compulsory 
and  not  voluntary.  We,  in  these  days  of  sedentary  life, 
narrow  conventionalities,  and,  in  most  cases,  carefully 
delineated  frontiers,  can  scarcely  realize  the  magnitude 
of  those  men-movements  which  took  place  in  the  old 
days.  In  former  times  a  conqueror  thought  nothing 
of  shifting  a  whole  nation  across  a  continent,  or  of  colon- 
izing the  lands  he  had  laid  waste  by  importing  bands  of 
captives.  The  world  is  now  so  cramped  and  crowded, 
that  carefully  surveyed  and  jealously  guarded  frontiers 
forbid  such  excursions  as  those  made  by  the  Torguts,  the 
Eleuths,  and  the  Charkhars.  A  nation,  or  even  a  tribe, 
would  find  considerable  obstacles  in  its  way  if  it  started 
to  overrun  Asia. 

The  Charkhars  were  once  a  ruling  tribe  in  Southern 
Mongolia,  outside  the  Great  Wall.  Owing,  however, 
to  their  formidable  numbers  and  warlike  nature,  the 
Chinese  greatly  feared  them,  and,  when  opportunity 
occurred,  they  took  the  chance  of  breaking  their  power 
and  transporting  them  in  bulk  to  the  furthermost  corner 
of  the  Empire.  The  Borotala  Valley  was  given  them  as 
a  reservation  on  which  no  other  tribes  might  encroach, 
and,  if  I  mistake  not,  they  are  better  off  there  than  if 
they  had  been  left  in  Southern  Mongolia,  for  those 
"  lands  of  high  grass "  have  since  been  overrun  by 
Chinese  colonists,  to  the  detriment  of  the  few  nomads 
who  remained. 

The  Charkhars  abound  in  large  encampments  along 
the  banks  of  the  Borotala,  and  even  a  few  Chanto  and 
Chinese    farmers  have    found  a  footing    for  themselves 


A    CHAKKIIAK    Ol-    KANK. 


393] 


THE  LAND   OF  UNREST  393 

by  renting  land  at  an  exorbitant  price  from  the  chiefs, 
who  were  said  to  extort  from  them  50  per  cent,  of  their 
produce.  The  upper  portion  of  the  valley  belongs  to 
the  "  Kho-ching "  section  of  the  Charkhars,  who  were 
the  original  settlers,  while  the  "  Chi-ning  "  occupy  the 
lower  portion  and  the  district  of  Sairam  Nor. 

We  noted  the  superior  type  of  the  Charkhars,  in 
comparison  with  the  Torguts.  They  were  almost  clean- 
looking,  possessed  some  fine  yurts,  and  appeared  to  be 
well-to-do.  We  were  again  struck  by  the  paradoxical 
condition  of  a  people  having  the  appearance  of  being 
at  a  standstill  in  a  magnificent  and  pregnant  land.  There 
is  land  to  waste  in  the  Borotala ;  it  would  hold  a  far 
denser  nomadic  population,  not  to  mention  an  agricul- 
tural one  ;  the  Chinese  protection  of  the  Mongol  rights 
of  ownership  alone  hinder  the  Kasaks  and  the  Chantos 
from  overrunning  it.  Yet,  in  spite  of  every  advant- 
age, the  Charkhars  do  not  appear  to  increase. 

From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  the  nomadic  population 
is  chiefly  concentrated  on  the  border-ranges  of  Dzungaria. 
In  the  far  east — on  the  slopes  of  the  Altai — are  the  Tor- 
guts,  in  the  north-east — the  Kirei,  on  the  northern 
border-ranges — the  Torguts  and  Western  Kirei,  in  the 
west — the  Charkhars,  while  on  the  southern  side  is  a 
sprinkling  of  Torguts  and  Kirghiz.  The  central  plains, 
except  along  the  course  of  the  Manas  River,  are  practically 
uninhabited. 

There  now  remains  to  be  described  the  zone  of 
country  between  the  spurs  of  the  Tian  Shan  and  the 
deserts ;  the  area  where  much  water  from  the  snow-clad 
mountains  makes  irrigation-methods  practicable,  seden- 
tary life  an  advantage,  and,  consequently,  the  build- 
ing  of   towns    a    necessity.     The   inhabitants    of    this 


394  DZUNGARIA 

district  consist  of  the  resident-sedentary  class,  for  the 
most  part  new-comers,  and  include  colonists,  merchants, 
and  the  official  element.  The  vast  proportion  of 
the  settlers  are  Dungans  and  Chinese,  who  take  up 
small  holdings  and  lead  an  easy  and  profitable  existence. 
There  are  also  a  few  Chantos  from  Chinese  Turkestan, 
but  these  latter  fare  badh'  when  they  come  in  contact 
with  the  crafty  Celestials.  The  Dungan  population  is 
considerable,  especially  in  the  well-favoured  Manas 
district.  They  all  came  originally  from  the  provinces 
of  Kansu  and  Shensi,  but  be^^ond  this  fact  the  origin 
of  the  Dungan,  or  "  Turgani,"  is  very  vague ;  it  has, 
indeed,  been  called  "  the  most  obscure  problem  in 
Asiatic  history."  ^  The  Dungans  are  strict  Mohammedans, 
in  that  they  rigorously  observe  the  two  dogmas,  of 
abstinence  from  the  eating  of  swine's  flesh  and  from  the 
use  of  spirits  ;  neither  do  they  touch  opium.  They  are, 
in  consequence,  a  healthier,  hardier,  bolder,  and  braver 
race  than  the  Chinese,  and  of  even  greater  activity 
and  astuteness. 

The  Dungan  is  a  wonderful  fellow,  although  rather 
insolent  and  unmanageable.  He  is  even  superior  to 
the  wily  Chinese  when  it  becomes  a  question  of  business 
sagacity.  The  Chinese  formula  for  the  comparative 
capabilities  of  the  Christian,  the  Jew,  the  Dungan,  and 
the  Celestial  is  as  follows  :  One  Jew  can  cheat  ten 
Christians  ;  one  Chinaman  is  the  equal  of  ten  Jews  ; 
but  one  Dungan  can  get  the  better  of  ten  Chinese  ! 

The  Chinese  Mohammedan  has  caused  trouble  in 
the  past.  He  has  been  overcome  by  superiorit}'  of 
numbers,  but  he  has  forgotten  nothing,  and  only  waits 
until  his  chance  occurs  again.     If  there  were  no  likeli- 

1  See  Appendix  A. 


THE  LAND  OF  UNREST  395 

hood  of  interference  on  the  part  of  Russia,  the  Dungans 
would  revolt  again  on  the  least  provocation. 

The  Chinese  element  is  chiefly  official  and  com- 
mercial, and,  in  consequence,  makes  up  the  resident 
population  of  the  towns.  In  Dzungaria  there  are  alto- 
gether five  towns  of  greater  and  two  of  lesser  importance. 
Of  the  first  mentioned  there  are :  Urumchi,  the  capital, 
where  resides  a  Futai — the  governor  of  Dzungaria  and 
Chinese  Turkestan,  a  Grand  Treasurer,  a  Tartar  General, 
and  a  considerable  garrison ;  Chuguchak — on  the 
northern  frontier — of  economic  and  strategical  im- 
portance, but  not  at  present  utilized  to  any  great 
extent  ;  Manas,  the  agricultural  centre — ^the  granary 
of  Dzungaria ;  Guchen,  the  terminus  of  the  trans-Gobi 
trade-route,  and  Barkul,  of  no  particular  note.  Of  lesser 
size  are  Shi-kho,  at  the  junction  of  the  Chuguchak  and 
Hi  roadways,  and  Sharasume,  the  new  military  post  in 
the  Altai.  These  towns  form  the  temporary  homes  of 
the  Chinese  rulers,  the  military  element,  and  the 
traders. 

Here  the  Celestials  live,  completely  oblivious  of  the 
fact  that  they  are,  in  reality,  exiled,  among  entirely 
foreign  surroundings.  They  show  here  that  extra- 
ordinary adaptability  to  their  surroundings  which  marks 
them  all  the  world  over,  whether  in  the  Port  of  London, 
in  San  Francisco,  Australia,  or  South  Africa. 

Besides  the  Chinese,  Chanto  merchants  do  a  very 
considerable  trade  in  local  produce,  and  are  the  agents 
for  Russian  goods,  which  find  a  ready  market.  In 
Urumchi  alone  the  Turki  population  numbers  a  quarter 
of  the  whole. 

Over  this  nondescript  population  rules — or  rather 
ruled — the  Emperor  of  China  through  the  agency  of  the 


396  DZUNGARIA 

Viceroy  of  Kansu  and  Shensi,  who  deputes  a  Governor  to 
look  after  the  affairs  of  Dzungaria. 

Dzungaria  gave  me  the  impression  of  a  vast  land 
awaiting  development,  but  cursed  by  the  blight  of 
unrest,  continual  insurrection  and  rebellion.  With- 
out a  strong  government  these  potentially  wealthy 
lands  must  long  remain  vacant.  Dzungaria  represents 
the  neutral  zone  between  vast  China  and  vaster  Russia. 
Will  the  Dragon  arouse  herself,  and  send  her  surplus 
millions  to  make  this  land  a  garden,  or  will  Dzungaria  be 
swept  up  by  a  greater  Russian  Empire  ? 


CHAPTER    XIV 

FROM   THE   ALTAI   TO   THE   ILI   VALLEY 

On  September  20th,  1910,  we  reached  Sharasume,  a  small 
military  post  which  the  Chinese  have  built  comparatively 
recently  in  the  Kran  Valley,  with  the  intention  of  guard- 
ing this,  the  only,  route  connecting  Dzungaria  with 
Northern  Mongolia.  We  found  Sharasume  to  consist  of 
several  "  Yamens  " — residences  of  Chinese  officials — a 
mud  fort  for  the  garrison,  and  a  group  of  houses  and 
stores  belonging  to  Chinese,  Tartars,  and  Chantos/ 
This  post  represented  the  headquarters  of  the  Chinese 
Amban  of  the  Altai,  who  was  immediately  under  the 
Emperor  in  Pekin,  and  reported  directly  to  him.  Quite 
recently  the  garrison  had  been  strengthened,  and  there 
had  been  an  increase  of  military  activities,  in  order  to 
re-establish  the  prestige  of  the  Celestial  Empire.  When 
on  the  spot  we  were  at  a  loss  to  discover  the  exact  reason 
for  this  innovation,  but  recent  affairs  in  Mongolia  have 
proved  to  us  that  it  was  merely  an  attempt  to  bluff  the 

^  The  name  of  Chanto  will  constantly  recur  throughout  the  following 
chapters,  and  needs  some  explanation.  It  is  the  Chinese  generic  name 
for  all  Mohammedan-Turki  sedentary  people,  meaning  literally  "wound 
round  their  heads,"  or  turban- wearers.  It  corresponds  to  the  Russian 
term  "  Sart,"  as  applied  to  the  sedentary  population  of  Russian  Central 
Asia.  All  the  inhabitants  of  Chinese  Turkestan  are  Chantos,  but  they 
have  no  such  broad  title  for  themselves, — as  a  people  they  have  no  name, 
— describing  themselves  only  according  to  the  towns  to  which  they  belong, 
viz.  Kashgarlik,  Turfanlik,  Kumuhk. 

397 


398  DZUNGARIA 

Mongol  chieftains.  In  this  out-of-the-way  frontier  post, 
at  a  distance  of  1,500  miles  from  Pekin,  the  Chinese  kept 
up  as  great  state  as  if  they  were  at  home.  But  the 
prestige  of  the  Empire  they  represented  became  a 
negligible  quantity  when  we  reviewed  the  poorly  clad, 
slouching  band  of  ruffians  who,  armed  with  old  German 
rifles  and  pikes,  formed  the  garrison. 

Sharasume  had,  however,  the  makings  of  an  important 
settlement ;  it  was  not  only  the  centre  of  a  large  nomadic 
population,  thus  holding  out  good  prospects  for  trade, 
but  the  Kran  Valley — although  undeveloped — possessed 
all  that  was  necessary  for  the  creation  of  a  large  agri- 
cultural district.  Even  now  there  is  a  considerable  area 
under  cultivation,  though  supplying  only  sufficient  for 
local  consumption.  The  Chinese  and  Chantos  possessed 
promising  market-gardens,  in  which  they  grew  vegetables 
and  melons  ;  whilst  wheat,  millet,  and  a  few  oats  were 
cultivated  in  irrigated  fields  by  the  semi-nomadic  Kirei 
and  Torgut  Mongols.  This  led  to  the  interesting  dis- 
covery that  in  the  Kran  and  Upper  Irtish  Valleys  signs 
were  not  lacking  of  the  nomads  becoming  more  or  less 
sedentary,  in  that,  they  were  cultivating  the  land,  and 
even  building  occasional  isolated  farm-houses.  The 
population  of  the  Kran  Valley  must  be  considerable, 
but,  being  a  migratory  one — the  cultivators  of  the  land 
near  Sharasume  moving  down  to  the  steppes  after  the 
harvest  is  over — it  is  difficult  to  estimate.  The  settle- 
ment itself  had  a  population  of  about  2,000. 

In  the  bazaars  we  found  all  we  needed  in  the  form  of 
stores,  such  as  rice,  flour,  eggs,  tea,  and  sugar  ;  we  even 
bought  apples  which  had  come  from  Urumchi  in  Southern 
Dzungaria,  and  dried  apricots  imported  from  Turfan 
in  Chinese  Turkestan.     The  traders  were  chiefly  Chantos 


FROM  THE  ALTAI  TO  THE  ILI  399 

from  the  large  oases  of  Southern  Dzungaria,  all  of  whom 
had  originally  come  from  the  towns  of  the  Tarim 
basin.  Sharasume  is  an  isolated  settlement.  Its  nearest 
neighbour  is  Kobdo,  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  and  sixty 
miles,  but  from  Kobdo  it  is  separated  by  the  main  chain 
of  the  Altai ;  Chuguchak  in  Northern  Dzungaria  is 
about  two  hundred  and  forty  miles  distant,  while  Urumchi 
and  other  towns  of  Southern  Dzungaria  are  over  two 
hundred  and  sixty  miles  away.  Over  these  wide  stretches 
of  country  there  are  neither  towns  nor  villages. 

We  now  began  to  formulate  plans  for  our  intended 
exploration  in  Dzungaria.  Before  us  lay  the  fact  that 
the  fast  approaching  winter  would  hinder  all  scientific 
work,  the  birds  were  already  migrating  to  warmer  regions, 
the  mammals  were  hibernating  ;  and  a  country  under 
such  conditions  of  snow  and  intense  cold  would  render 
impossible  the  carrying  on  of  survey-work. 

Travelling,  however,  was  comparatively  easy,  and 
the  itinerary  drawn  up  gave  us  time  to  traverse  Dzun- 
garia and  to  bring  us  closely  in  touch  with  its  winter 
aspect  before  the  coming  spring  allowed  us  once  more 
to  start  detailed  work. 

Leaving  Sharasume  on  September  24th,  we  were  faced 
by  a  forty  days'  journey  along  the  northern  frontiers 
of  Dzungaria,  to  Kulja  in  the  Hi  Valley,  where  we  had 
our  winter  quarters  for  a  couple  of  months  during  the 
reconstruction  of  our  caravan  and  outfit.  There,  Price 
left  us  for  a  journey  through  Russian  Turkestan  and  the 
Caucasus  on  his  way  to  England,  while  early  in  January 
Miller  and  I  started  again,  and  followed  the  trade-route 
which  runs  the  whole  length  of  Southern  Dzungaria. 
During  March  and  April  we  explored  and  mapped  in 
detail  the  extreme  eastern  portion  of  the  Tian  Shan 
II — 6 


400  DZUNGARIA 

mountain-system — the  Karlik  Tagh.  In  summer  we 
again  traversed  Dzungaria  in  its  central  portion,  visiting 
the  Western  Kirei  in  their  home  on  the  Barhk  and  MaiU 
ranges  and  the  Charkhar  Mongols  in  the  Borotala  Valley, 
thus  completing  our  investigation  of  the  varied  inhabi- 
tants of  Dzungaria.  On  July  23rd  we  returned  to  Kulja, 
having  thoroughly  carried  out  our  programme. 

Our  objective  on  setting  out  from  Sharasume  was 
the  Chinese  frontier  town  of  Chuguchak,  two  hundred  and 
fifty  miles  distant,  which  we  hoped  to  reach  in  eighteen 
days,  with  the  help  of  twelve  Bactrian  camels  hired 
through  the  medium  of  the  ofhcials  at  Sharasume.  Our 
request  for  transport  met  with  immediate  response,  but 
we  were  given  to  understand  that  there  was  a  fixed 
rate  of  hire  for  such  transport.  This  little  incident 
brought  home  to  us  that  we  were  now  travelling  under 
new  conditions,  and  that  Mongolia,  with  its  tax  of  "  free 
transport  for  travellers  "  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  Dzun- 
garia forms  a  portion  of  a  vast  western  appanage  of 
China,  only  recently  incorporated  into  a  province,  and 
named  Sin-Kiang — a  term  which  means,  literally,  the 
New  Dominion  ;  it  includes  Chinese  Turkestan,  the  Hi 
Valley,  and  Dzungaria,  and  exists  under  the  same  ad- 
ministration as  does  any  province  of  China  Proper. 
Thus,  Dzungaria  is  subject  to  China,  and  differs  from 
Mongolia,  which  is — or  rather  was — under  the  protection 
of  the  Manchu  rulers. 

Our  route  led  us  across  the  valleys  of  the  lower  Kran 
and  of  the  Black  Irtish,  a  short  distance  to  the  east  of  the 
point  where  the  two  valleys  joined  ;  we  found  this  region 
to  be  one  of  vast  reed-beds,  lagoons,  and  sand-hills, 
with  belts  of  poplar  and  willow-trees  bordering  the 
river-courses.     The  altitude  was  not  more  than  1,500  ft. 


«4C   ■ 


FROM  THE  ALTAI   TO  THE   ILI  4O1 

above  sea-level,  and  the  pleasant  warmth  of  the  air 
felt  like  the  heat  of  midsummer  to  us — fresh  from  the 
bitter  winds  and  exposure  of  the  Mongolian  plateau. 
Small  wonder  is  it  that  these  low-lying  valleys  are 
favoured  so  greatly  as  winter  quarters  by  both  Kirghiz 
and  Mongol  shepherds;  it  arouses  in  us  no  surprise 
that  it  was  here  Jenghis  Khan  made  his  principal  "  rendez- 
vous," and  here  that  he  massed  his  troops  before  starting 
westwards  on  his  conquering  marches. 

The  upper  Irtish  Valley  is  fairly  well  populated  by 
Torgut  Mongols  and  Kirei  Kirghiz  ;  there  are  possibili- 
ties for  cultivation  and  openings  for  trade ;  it  is  also 
probable  that  in  the  near  future  the  Irtish  River  may 
be  used  for  the  purposes  of  transport.  In  the  summer  the 
Siberian  Irtish  is  navigated  as  far  up  as  Lake  Zaisan — a 
short  distance  away  on  the  Russian  side  of  the  frontier  ; 
recently,  however,  it  has  been  discovered  that  no  reason 
exists  why  the  river  should  not  be  used  for  navigation 
right  up  the  junction  of  the  Kran  and  the  Irtish,  at 
a  point  not  far  below  where  we  crossed  the  latter 
river.  Should  this  be  carried  out  it  would  be  a  con- 
siderable aid  to  the  wool-merchants,  who  buy  up  the 
produce  of  the  flocks  belonging  to  the  Kirei  and  the 
Torguts,  as  it  would  bring  the  Russian  markets  into 
much  closer  communication  with  them.^ 

We  crossed  the  Kran  with  ease  by  means  of  a  shallow 
ford,  but  found  the  Irtish  just  north  of  the  Ulungur  Lake 
a  deep-flowing,  sluggish  stream  of  a  hundred  yards  in 

^  A  name  which  looms  large  on  even  quite  recent  maps  is  Bulon-tokhoi, 
a  town  situated  at  the  southern  end  of  Lake  Ulungur.  Forty  years  ago 
Russian  travellers  described  the  town  as  a  fine  centre  for  commercial  pur- 
poses, and  as  consisting  of  two  quarters  containing  160  houses  of  Chinese 
and  1 50  of  Mongols.  Now,  however,  Bulon-tokhoi  has  disappeared,  and 
its  trade  has  shifted  to  the  better  situated  centre  of  Tulta  or  Sharasume. 


402  DZUNGARIA 

width,  and  we  were  obliged  to  search  carefully  before  we 
could  find  a  place  suitable  for  crossing  without  harm  to 
our  baggage.  The  water  was  clear  and  blue,  margined 
by  sand-banks,  which  showed  that  in  time  of  flood  the 
river  would  be  at  least  a  hundred  and  fifty  yards  wide. 

Beyond  the  Irtish  extended  a  barren  hill-country 
leading  over  the  Naryn  Kara  and  the  Kara-adir  to  the 
Kobuk  Valley,  another  centre  of  nomadic  life.  These 
isolated  localities,  inhabited,  probably,  by  people  of 
different  races,  are  typical  of  Dzungaria  ;  to-day  we 
may  be  with  the  Turki-Kirei,  to-morrow  with  a  Mongol 
colony  ;  while  a  week's  journey  over  uninhabited 
steppes  may  separate  these  from  a  Chinese  town  or  a 
Dungan  settlement.  The  unusual  variety  of  races  in- 
habiting Dzungaria  gives  an  interest  to  a  country 
which  might  otherwise,  from  lack  of  character,  be  mono- 
tonous and  tedious  to  traverse. 

This  stage  in  our  journey  led  us  past  Lake  Ulungur, 
which  stores  a  large  volume  of  water  descending  from 
the  slopes  of  the  Altai,  and  apparently  absorbs  the  same, 
having  no  visible  outlet.  We  caught  glimpses  of  this 
lake  from  the  Naryn  Kara  range,  and  noted  its  char- 
acter, as  being  that  of  a  typical  desert-lake  :  barren, 
yellow,  desert  hills  surrounded  it ;  no  margin  of  green 
bordered  its  shores,  the  only  vegetation  being  a  fringe 
of  dead  reeds.  A  Russian  explorer,  Miroshnishenko, 
took  some  trouble  in  1873  to  prove  that  the  Lake 
Ulungur  must  drain  into  the  Irtish,  which  flows  past 
only  four  miles  away.  There  is,  however,  no  visible 
communication  between  the  two,  though  a  Kirghiz  legend 
speaks  of  a  subterranean  passage  connecting  the  lake 
with  the  river.  By  measuring  the  volume  of  the 
Irtish    some    way    above    the    lake,    and  again  below 


FROM  THE   ALTAI  TO  THE   ILI  403 

Miroshnishenko  found  the  flow  of  the  river  to  increase 
89,000  cubic  ft.  of  water  per  minute,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  the  Irtish  receives  no  tributaries  throughout  this 
section  of  its  course.  The  most  recent  scientific  explorer 
in  these  regions,  Prof.  Sapoznikoff,  refutes  this  opinion, 
basing  his  arguments  on  the  following  grounds.  Firstly, 
the  water  of  the  lake  is  at  a  lower  level  than  that 
of  the  Irtish ;  secondty,  the  water  is  strongly  saline 
(2  gr.  to  the  litre),  a  peculiarity  of  enclosed  basins  ; 
and  thirdly,  neither  the  lake  nor  the  river  flowing  into 
it  contain  certain  fish,  peculiar  to  the  Irtish.  My  own 
opinion  is  that  the  Ulungur  does  not  now  connect  with 
the  Irtish,  although  it  may  have  done  so  at  an  earlier 
period  ;  even  then,  it  was  not  by  the  nearest  route,  on 
the  eastern  side — where  the  Irtish  and  the  lake  are  only 
a  few  miles  apart — but  by  way  of  the  low-lying  depression 
on  the  west. 

We  camped  for  a  night  in  this  plain,  called  Mukutai, 
and  noted  that,  although  the  ground  was  very  saline, 
good  grass  grew,  and  there  was  a  very  large  en- 
campment of  Kirei  making  use  of  it  for  pasture.  The 
whole  of  this  depression  showed  signs  of  being  under 
water  at  certain  seasons  ;  it  is  dead  level,  and  the  Ulungur 
Lake  spreads  itself  into  it  for  some  way  in  the  form  of 
lagoons  and  shallows  having  no  definite  boundary.  A 
small  rise  of  water  in  the  lake  would  bring  a  great  area 
of  the  Mukutai  plain  under  water.  We  camped  about 
ten  miles  from  the  margin  of  the  lake  ;  on  the  other  side 
of  us,  at  about  twenty  miles'  distance,  there  was  a  small 
stream  which  drained  direct  towards  the  Irtish  River, 
and,  were  it  not  for  lack  of  water,  would  undoubtedly 
reach  it.  Thus  it  seems  that,  if  at  one  period  the  water 
of  the  Lake  Ulungur  stood  at  a  higher  level,  it  must 


404  DZUNGARIA 

certainly  have  flowed  out  through  this  hollow,  and 
joined  the  Irtish  some  eighty  miles  farther  to  the  north- 
west. 

Travelling  westwards  as  rapidly  as  our  well-laden 
camels  permitted,  we  arrived,  three  days  after  leaving 
our  camp  near  Ulungur,  at  the  Kobuk  Valley.  The 
Sair  Mountains,  rising  on  the  north  to  an  altitude  of 
12,000  ft.,  supplied  ample  water,  which  irrigated  the 
Kobuk  pastures  before  running  to  waste  in  the  deserts 
to  the  south.  Here  we  found  a  large  community  of 
Torgut  Mongols  inhabiting  a  locality'  which,  since  the 
earliest  daj^s  of  recorded  history,  has  been  a  desirable 
camping-ground.  The  story  of  the  Torguts  of  the  Kobuk 
steppe,  and  of  their  migration  from  the  far  west  has  been 
given  in  a  previous  chapter,  and  their  past  condition, 
there  described,  is  decidedly  more  interesting  than  their 
present.  Exceptional  dirt  and  disease — even  for  Mongol 
degenerates — made  these  people  most  objectionable 
to  deal  with  ;  it  is  probable  that  at  no  very  distant 
date,  the  fast-increasing  Kirghiz  or  Kasak  tribes  will 
encroach  on  their  territory  to  the  lasting  detriment 
of  the  Torguts. 

There  was  an  air  of  settled  life  amongst  the  people 
of  the  Kobuk,  for  the  yurts  clustered  in  closely  packed 
groups  round  the  Buddhist  temple  and  the  residence 
of  their  Chief.  We  observed  attempts  being  made  to 
cultivate  the  soil,  and  the  yurts  frequently  possessed 
a  "kraal" — or  enclosure — close  by,  in  which  they  kept 
their  flocks  and  a  supply  of  hay  for  the  winter's  use. 
The  temple  and  its  precincts,  together  with  the  abode 
of  the  Chief,  composed  a  block  of  buildings.  The  Chief, 
who  held  the  title  of  Wang,  was  the  hereditary  ruler  of 
the  tribe,  and,  although  the  possessor  of  a  house  built 


MAKANDAROFF    AND    HI^     li-.iS. 


CAMP    BREAKi-Asl. 


404I 


FROM  THE  ALTAI   TO  THE   ILI  405 

in  a  quaint  mixture  of  Russian  and  Chinese  styles,  he 
preferred  to  use  his  yurt.  The  Wang  entertained  us 
in  the  house,  which  was  furnished  chiefly  with  large 
mirrors  and  numerous  clocks,  besides  a  gramophone 
and  a  photograph  of  himself ! 

The  Kobuk  being  half-way  between  Sharasume  and 
Chuguchak,  we  changed  our  camels  for  fresh  ones 
supplied  by  the  Wang,  and  made  tracks  westwards. 
Camel  transport  is  slow  work  under  the  best  conditions, 
and  is  exceptionally  tedious  when  all  ambition  is  centred 
on  advancing  as  quickly  as  possible  and  reaching  one's 
destination.  The  actual  distances  covered  by  either 
camels  or  horses  in  a  day's  march  does  not  really  differ 
to  any  great  extent.  Camels  move  more  steadily  and 
slowly,  keeping  up  continuously  from  dawn  to  dusk  ; 
horses,  on  the  other  hand,  trek  faster  but  for  a  shorter 
time.  We  used  to  break  camp  every  morning  at  7,  start 
the  caravan  by  9  one,  and  travel  till  about  4.30  p.m., 
thus  averaging  fifteen  to  eighteen  miles  a  day.  We 
covered  the  distance  between  the  Altai  and  the  town 
of  Chuguchak  in  two  stages  of  nine  and  eight  days  each, 
changing  camels  half-way.  The  cost  of  the  eleven 
camels  and  the  six  riding-horses  came  to  about  £22  for 
the  whole  journey.  We  ourselves  rode  on  horseback. 
Our  caravan  had  quite  an  imposing  appearance,  con- 
sisting, as  it  did,  of  a  string  of  eleven  baggage-camels, 
half  a  dozen  natives — and  our  own  party  of  four — all  on 
horseback ;  added  to  which  were  nineteen  of  our 
caravan-horses  from  far-distant  Siberia.  These  were 
driven  along  unladen,  as  we  intended  to  sell  them  on 
reaching  a  likely  market. 

Travelling  by  the  longest  stages  allowed  by  the 
rapidly  shortening  days,  we  left  the  Kobuk  steppe  and 


4o6  DZUNGARIA 

crossed  a  pass  of  6,300  ft.,  called  Kergen  Tash,  lying 
between  the  Urkashar  Range  and  the  Sair  Mountains. 
This  route  led  us  into  Russian  territory  for  ten  or  twelve 
miles,  before  it  turned  back  and  recrossed  the  frontier 
at  the  Bai  Musa  Pass,  which  was  an  open  gap,  of  4,300  ft. 
in  altitude,  between  the  Tarbagatai  Range  on  the  north 
and  the  Kojur  spur  of  the  Urkashar  on  the  south.  As 
a  means  of  communication  between  the  Chuguchak 
district  and  that  of  Zaisan,  this  track,  being  suitable  for 
wheeled  traffic,  is  of  some  importance.  Even  this  short 
return  to  Russian  territory  showed  us  definite  traces 
of  Russian  progression.  We  observed  a  picket  of 
frontier  guards  at  the  Bai  Musa  Pass,  and  in  the  distance 
— ^northwards — a  large  new  settlement,  where  there  was 
said  to  be  a  garrison  of  Cossacks  and  a  go-ahead  colony 
of  emigrants  from  Semipalatinsk. 

The  Emil  Valley — which  we  passed  through  on  our 
way  to  Chuguchak — is  of  much  historical  interest. 
This  valley,  situated  on  the  main  road  between 
Eastern  and  Western  Asia,  providing,  as  it  does,  the 
one  easy  means  of  access  from  the  east  to  the  west, 
is  now,  and  always  must  have  been,  of  great  strategical 
value.  It  was  mentioned  by  Carpini,  one  of  the  earliest 
Western  writers,  who  travelled  through  the  country  on 
his  way  to  visit  the  court  of  Ku3'uk  Khan — grandson 
of  Jenghis  Khan — in  Northern  Mongolia.  It  must 
have  been  in  those  days  a  district  of  real  importance,  for 
Carpini  wrote  that  the  Mongols  "  had  built  anew,  as 
it  were,  a  city  called  Omyl,  in  which  the  Emperor  had 
erected  a  house."  Evidently  the  old  city  was  destroyed 
when  Jenghis  first  sacked  the  Empire  of  the  Kara-Kitai 
— of  which  this  district  was  a  part.  The  Emil  district 
formed  the  seat  of  Kalmuk  ascendanc}-  at  the  end  of 


FROM  THE   ALTAI   TO  THE   ILI  407 

the  seventeenth  century,  and  it  was  here  the  Dzungars 
fixed  their  capital  during  the  short-lived  period  of  their 
empire.  China  now  holds  the  upper  half  of  the  Emil 
Valley,  but  Russia,  holding  the  lower  portion,  exercises 
her  control  over  this  gateway  between  east  and  west. 

The  district  is,  without  doubt,  a  rich  one ;  it  is  low- 
lying,  well  watered,  and  bordered  on  north  and  south 
b}^  sheltering  mountain-ranges.  On  entering  we  found 
the  country  positively  swarming  with  Kasaks,  who  were 
moving  with  their  flocks  into  their  winter  quarters  in  the 
sheltered  valleys  of  the  Kojur  and  Urkashar  ranges. 
As  far  as  the  eye  could  see,  were  herds  of  horses  and 
flocks  of  sheep,  numbering  tens  of  thousands, ;  here  and 
there  were  scattered  villages  of  yurts  and  isolated 
mud-houses — ^the  farms  of  the  sedentary  Kasaks  and 
Chanto  cultivators  ;  such  a  confusion  of  nomadic  and 
settled  conditions  of  life  we  had  never  before  witnessed. 
Should  a  future  colonization  of  the  nomads'  plain  take 
place  on  a  large  scale  much  trouble  is  obviously  in  store  for 
them.  Even  now  the  herds  of  the  nomads  were  wander- 
ing over  the  fields  of  the  farmers ;  but,  as  the  harvest 
was  over  and  the  grain  being  threshed,  the  confusion 
was  of  no  consequence. 

A  further  sign  of  the  approach  of  winter — confirmed 
a  week  later  by  the  first  fall  of  snow — was  a  remark- 
able migration  of  sand-grouse,  which  we  watched  on 
October  loth  and  nth,  as  we  moved  across  the  Emil 
steppes.  With  a  strong  west  wind  behind  them,  large 
packs  and  small  parties  of  sand-grouse  were  to  be  seen 
hurrying  towards  the  south-east.  During  the  two  days' 
trek  the  birds  continued  to  pass  over  us,  the  large 
packs  flying  high,  but  small  flocks  of  half-dozens  flying 
quite  low  and  all  moving  with  the   directness  of  flight 


4o8  DZUNGARIA 

and  the  great  speed  peculiar  to  the  sand-grouse  family. 
The  majority  consisted  of  the  common  Central  Asian 
variety,  Pallas' ;  but  there  were  also  many  large  Black- 
bellied  Sand-grouse  amongst  them.  This  was  probably 
the  great  autumn  migration  of  all  the  birds  of  the 
Sergiopol  and  Semipalatinsk  steppes  to  their  winter 
quarters,  in  the  plain  of  Dzungaria. 

On  October  nth  we  camped  outside  the  high  walls 
of  Chuguchak.  Although  we  had  been  travelling  for  nearly 
five  months,  this  was  the  first  town  of  any  description 
we  had  entered  since  leaving  the  Siberian  town  of 
Minnusinsk,  which  showed  the  true  character  of  the 
Siberian-Chinese  frontier, — a  sparsely  populated  nomads' - 
land,  not  requiring  much  administration.  Chuguchak 
was  a  typical  Chinese  town,  as  seen  throughout 
China  Proper,  with  high  walls,  great  gateways,  and 
yamens.  There  we  found  ourselves  once  more  in  touch 
with  civilization,  for  the  Russian  element  brought  into 
the  town  an  atmosphere  of  the  West,  and  progress  was 
represented  by  the  post-office  and  telegraph-lines  ;  we 
could  here  telegraph,  if  we  wished,  to  Pekin  or  Europe, 
and  did,  actually,  receive  letters  from  Europe. 

The  population  of  Chuguchak  is  estimated  at  9,000, 
this  figure  including  both  Chinese  and  Russians,  as  well 
as  a  very  mixed  community  of  traders  who  were  called 
Chantos  if  they  were  Chinese  subjects,  or  Sarts 
if  they  belonged  to  Russian  Turkestan.  There  existed 
also  a  small  colony  of  true  Russians  and  a  few  Tartars. 
Business  was  at  high  pressure  ;  the  streets  were  full 
and  the  bazaars  were  crowded,  the  buyers  being 
chiefly  Kirghiz  and  Kasaks  from  the  surrounding  steppe 
purchasing  their  winter  suppHes.  An  appearance  of  pro- 
gress prevailed,  as  well  as  a  somewhat  blatant  show  of 


FROM  THE  ALTAI   TO  THE   ILI  409 

military  strength  on  the  part  of  the  Chinese,  which 
must  have  greatly  amused  our  Russian  friends.  The 
morning  air  resounded  with  bugle-calls  and  the 
continual  firing  of  salutes ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether 
this  suggestion  of  power  impressed  even  the  natives. 

Chuguchak  is  the  chief  outlet  to  Siberia  for  all  Dzun- 
garia.  Its  future  may  be  full  of  possibilities.  Here 
lies  the  only  open  road  between  Western  China  and 
Russian  Asia;  for  all  other  tracks, — with  the  sole  ex- 
ception of  a  peculiar  deep-cut  trench,  the  Dzungarian 
Gate,  which  lies  to  the  west  of  Chuguchak, — must  pass 
the  mountain  barrier.  By  way  of  an  easily  graded  pass 
of  5,945  ft.  above  sea-level,  situated  about  eighty  miles 
to  the  south  of  the  town,  one  can  travel  without 
hindrance  from  the  Siberian  plains  to  the  Dzungarian 
deserts  and  on  to  China,  Mongolia,  or  the  Gates  of 
Pekin. 

Although  eager  to  pursue  our  journey  to  Kulja,  and 
with  no  desire  to  stay  more  than  a  day  in  Chuguchak, 
we  found  ourselves  delayed  for  fifteen  days  in  the  most 
aggravating  manner  before  being  able  to  start  again. 
The  nearness  of  a  Russian  post-road  and  its  methods 
of  quick  transport  made  us  think  of  reaching  Kulja 
through  Russian  territory  ;  telegrams  requesting  per- 
mission to  do  so  were  even  despatched  to  the  Governor- 
General  at  Tashkent,  but  when  the  reply  came  that 
the  permit  would  have  to  be  obtained  in  St.  Petersburg, 
former  experience  made  us  aware  that,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, it  would  be  far  quicker  to  walk  to  Kulja. 

Two  other  routes  were  open  to  us :  the  road  which 
runs  southwards,  joins  the  Pei-lu,  or  northern  high-road 
in  Southern  Dzungaria,  and  thence  turns  westwards  to 
the   Hi    Valley ;   or   a  horse-track  running  in  a  direct 


410  DZUNGARIA 

line  over  mountain,  hill,  and  hollow  by  way  of  the 
Barlik  Mountains,  the  Dzungarian  Gate,  and  the  Lower 
Borotala  to  Sairam  Nor  and  the  Hi  Valley. 

The  former  of  these  routes  was  a  well-used  trade-route, 
divided  into  regular  stages,  by  which  means  the  journey 
could  be  accomplished  in  twenty  days.  The  country  to 
be  passed  through  was  uninteresting,  had  often  been 
traversed  before,  and  the  thought  of  spending  twenty 
days  in  carts  did  not  in  the  least  attract  us.  We  decided 
accordingly  to  take  the  most  direct  but  most  arduous 
of  the  routes,  and  began  to  arrange  our  transport.  The 
finding  of  this  delayed  us  still  further,  owing  to  its  being 
the  busiest  season  for  caravans.  Eventually  we  pro- 
cured thirteen  camels  from  a  Chanto  owner,  at  the  rate 
of  365.  per  camel  for  the  journey  of  eighteen  to  twenty 
days  ;  the  Chinese  authorities  supplied  us  with  two 
"  jigits,"  or  out-riders,  who  would  escort  us  from  one 
frontier  guard-house,  or  "  karaul,"  to  another ;  and 
finally,  on  October  27th,  we  set  off  in  very  bad  weather, 
over  the  Emil  plain,  at  that  time  half  under  water  and 
most  unsuitable  for  camel  transport.^ 

The  route  we  followed  was  practically  the  frontier 
line  of  the  two  Empires  ;  we  managed  to  reach  a  Chinese 
guard-house  each  day,  and  were  informed  of  the  existence 
of  corresponding  Russian  posts  to  our  west.  On  one 
occasion  we  actually  visited  a  small  post  which  served  as 
a  quarantine  station  for  all  cattle  and  flocks  going  from 
China  into  Russian  territory  ;  apart  from  this  we  saw 
nothing  to  indicate  that  we  were  anywhere  near  the 
frontier.     As  we  rode  along  the  foot-hills  of  the  Barlik 

^  We  had  the  first  touch  of  winter  during  the  third  week  in  October, 
■when  snow  fell,  which  later  turned  to  rain.  The  temperature  varied, 
during  the  period  between  the  13th  and  27th,  from  80°  to  12"  Fahr. 


FROM  THE   ALTAI    TO   THE   ILI  411 

group  ^  we  beheld,  spread  out  to  the  west,  a  wonderful  ex- 
panse of  steppes  and  of  lakes,  shimmering  as  in  a  mirage, 
giving  strange  contrasts  of  blue  and  of  yellow,  and 
stretching  in  endless  succession  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
reach  towards  the  distant  plains  of  Northern  Turkestan. 
On  the  east  the  Barlik  ranges  rose  to  an  altitude  of 
9,500  ft.,  and,  far  away  in  the  dim  distance,  the  loftier 
snows  of  the  Ala-tau  lifted  themselves  into  the  blue ; 
but,  separating  us  from  them,  was  a  break  in  the  moun- 
tain-wall,— a  deep-cut  depression  dividing  the  Siberian 
plains  from  the  Dzungarian  deserts,  and  lying  between 
the  ramparts  of  the  Ala-tau  on  the  west  and  those  of 
the  Barlik  on  the  east. 

We  had  frequently  heard  of  the  terrors,  dangers,  and 
winds  of  the  Dzungarian  Gate.  We  had  read  the  records 
of  such  early  travellers  as  Carpini  and  Rubruck,  both 
of  whom  mentioned  that  "  there  blows  nearly  continu- 
ously such  a  wind  through  this  valley,  that  persons 
cross  it  with  great  danger,  lest  the  wind  should  carry 
them  into  the  sea."  We  therefore  approached  this 
remarkable  geological  phenomenon  both  with  interest 
and  a  certain  amount  of  anxiety,  for  the  weather  was 
unusually  unsettled,  snow-clouds  were  threatening  us, 
and  we  were  unwilling  our  caravan  should  be  "  blown 
away  into  the  sea." 

Even  at  a  distance,  with  the  Dzungarian  Gate  lying 
before  us — unseen,  we  instinctively  became  aware  of  its 
presence  ;  for  when  we  came  within  sight  of  Ala  Kul, 
whilst  crossing  the  open  foot-hills  of  the  Barlik  Range 

^  The  Barlik  proper  overlooks  the  Dzungarian  Gate  on  the  east. 
We  found  the  natives  using  BarUk  for  the  whole  mountain-group  to  the 
east.  I  use  the  term,  therefore,  to  include  the  Chagan-oba,  the  Dzusau> 
and  the  Maili  ranges. 


412  DZUNGARIA 

some  twenty  miles  from  the  lake-shore  and  some  2,000  ft. 
above  it,  we  were  in  absolute  stillness  ;  and  yet,  strangely 
enough,  the  waters  of  Ala  Kul  were  tossed  into  waves — 
the  white  crests  being  clearly  seen  with  a  glass,  while 
even  with  the  naked  eye  breakers  could  be  distinguished 
dashing  on  to  the  southern  shore  of  an  island  in  the 
middle  of  the  lake.  Although  we  were  becalmed,  there 
was  evidently  a  gale  blowing  through  the  "  Gate," 
and  as  we  approached  nearer  we  became  at  every  step 
more  keenly  alive  to  the  action  of  this  wind-trough. 
At  night  we  heard  a  distant  roar  as  the  imprisoned 
winds  of  the  Dzungarian  deserts  escaped  through  this 
narrow  defile.  The  only  night  we  camped  on  the 
very  shore  of  the  straits,  the  wind  increased  to  such 
a  violence  that  our  tents,  though  well  protected  in  a 
valley,  were  by  the  morning  all  blown  away,  for  the 
wind  swept  in  great  gusts  over  the  hills,  and  the 
back  eddies  tore  them  down  ;  the  noise  was  terrific, 
and  sleep  out  of  the  question.  This  wind  came  from 
the  south,  but  threatening  storm-clouds  to  the  north 
made  us  far  more  uneasy. 

Fortunately  we  succeeded  in  crossing  the  depression 
in  a  nine  hours'  trek  without  mishap,  a  strong  head-wind 
being  the  only  cause  for  annoyance.  Had  there  been 
rain  or  snow  falling,  travelling  would  have  been  im- 
possible, but  the  wind  was  luckily  from  the  south  and 
comparatively  warm,  the  temperature  at  night  only 
just  touching  freezing-point.  Only  just  in  time  did  we 
escape  from  this  home  of  the  winds,  for  the  day  after 
crossing  the  valley, — when  travelling  southwards  along 
its  western  flanks, — the  wind  swung  round  to  the  north 
and  swept  cruelly  through  the  gap,  bringing  with  it  hail 
and  frozen  snow.     Had  we  then  been  journeying  north- 


FROM  THE  ALTAI  TO  THE  ILI  413 

wards  the  making  of  any  headway  would  have  been  out 
of  the  question,  for  neither  man  nor  beast  could  have 
faced  the  elements ;  travelling  as  we  were — with  the 
wind — we  endured  the  cold  and  congratulated  ourselves 
on  our  fortunate  escape.  A  bleak,  inhospitable  land- 
scape now  surrounded  us,  mountains,  clad  in  fresh  snow, 
showed  up  here  and  there  through  breaks  in  the  blurred 
atmosphere,  and  great  cloud-banks  swept  through  the 
*'  straits,"  as  if  rushing  through  some  gigantic  funnel. 
We  enjoyed  no  rest  until  we  were  safely  ensconced  in 
the  broken  and  wind-worn  granite  range  lying  to  the 
north-west  of  Ebi  Nor. 

The  natives  relate  the  usual  traditions  as  to  the 
origin  of  the  winds  in  this  locality.  In  the  myths 
of  Central  Asia  a  ''hole  in  the  mountain,"  or  "an 
iron  gate  in  a  lake  "  is  the  usual  explanation  of  the 
origin  of  winds.  In  the  case  of  which  I  am  writing 
the  island  called  Ala-tyube — a  small  extinct  volcano  in 
Ala  Kul — is  made  responsible  for  the  furious  winds  which 
sweep  through  the  depression  ;  the  wind  is  called  "  ebe," 
or  "  yube  "  by  the  Kirghiz,  and  in  special  cases,  when 
it  reaches  its  maximum  velocity,  the  term  "  buran  "  is 
applied.  From  autumn  to  spring  the  prevailing  wind 
is  from  the    south-east.^      I  think,  however,   that  the 

^  I  found  considerable  difficulty  in  getting  reliable  information  as 
to  the  prevailing  winds  of  this  district.  A  Russian  who  had  lived  at  a 
frontier  post  in  the  Dzungarian  Gate  said  that  the  strongest  biu^ans  always 
came  from  the  south-east,  while  the  rain-winds  came  from  the  north-west. 
He  said  that  "  the  air  was  always  moving,"  but  that  autumn  and  spring 
were  especially  marked  as  the  windy  seasons.  Chinese  soldiers  in  the 
guard-houses  on  the  high-road  which  passes  the  south  end  of  Ebi  Nor 
where  there  is  a  belt  of  sand-dunes,  claimed  that,  when  the  sand  moved, 
it  always  came  from  the  north-west,  or  the  direction  of  the  Dzungarian  Gate. 
Their  statement  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  their  guard-houses  in  the 
sand-belt  were  banked  up  by  high  sand-dunes  on  the  north-west.  The 
burans,  they  said,  also  came  from  the  direction  of  the  Gate.     In  contra- 


414  DZUNGARIA 

wind  which  causes  havoc  amongst  the  nomads,  and  kills 
off  men  and  flocks  when  caught  unprotected,  is  this 
north  wind  when  it  attains  the  velocity  of  what  is  called 
a  "  buran." 

We  experienced  one  buran  only  during  our  journey 
across  Asia,  and  it  took  place  in  this  very  locality  during 
the  following  summer.  On  June  2oth  a  buran  struck 
us  from  the  north  when  camped  on  the  south  side  of 
the  main  ridge  of  the  Dzusau  portion  of  the  Barlik 
group,  which  stood  up  like  a  wall  close  above  our  camp, 
and  gave  us  protection  from  that  quarter.  In  Central 
Asia  the  highest  gale  is  inconsiderable  in  comparison 
with  a  buran.  A  vast  difference  lies  between  the 
two  :  a  buran  blows  steadily,  without  lulls,  and  with 
a  force  against  which  it  is  useless  to  contend. 

Miller  describes  how  this  buran  caught  him,  when  on  a 
hunting  expedition  : — "On  the  second  day  away  an  ever- 
increasing  wind  began  to  blow  from  the  north-west, 
though  the  sky  was  cloudless.  By  the  evening  it  had 
blown  up  into  such  a  gale  that  we  had  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty in  reaching  the  yurts  for  which  we  were  making. 
It  was  all  our  horses  could  do  to  move  against  the  force 
of  the  wind,  which  frequently  shifted  us  in  our  saddles. 
By  night-time  the  yurt  in  which  we  had  taken  shelter 
began  to  suffer.  The  huge  pieces  of  felt  which  covered 
the  roof  worked  loose,  and  were  whisked  away,  causing 
the  frame-work  to  rattle  down  upon  us.     It  was  only  the 

diction  of  this,  1  noticed  that  all  the  sand-dunes  at  the  south  end  of 
Ebi  Nor  were  formed  by  winds  which  must  have  blown  from  the  east- 
north-east.  Ebi  Nor,  by  its  very  name,  is  "  A%-ind-lake,"  and  it  would 
be  hard  to  give  an  impression  of  the  sight  its  frozen  waters  presented  in 
mid\\'inter.  We  saw  it  in  January,  from  the  crest  of  a  sand-dune  on 
its  southern  edge.  Its  southern  shores  were  a  jumble  of  great  blocks 
of  ice  piled  up  in  fantastic  shapes,  and  the  actual  surface  of  the  ice  was 
as  if  its  waves  had  been  instantaneously  frozen  sohd  in  stormy  weather. 


n 


; ! 


FROM  THE  ALTAI  TO  THE   ILI  415 

heavy  pile  of  household  belongings  heaped  against  the 
wall  that  kept  it  standing,  and  afforded  us  shelter.  The 
morning  light  revealed  the  havoc  which  had  been 
wrought.  Some  of  the  yurts  had  been  blown  over  intact, 
and  lay  on  their  sides  like  discarded  bee-hives,  while 
others  had  been  completely  demolished,  and  this  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  a  yurt,  owing  to  its  shape  and  con- 
struction, is  of  all  tents  the  most  perfectly  adapted  to 
withstand  wind.  Our  own  flimsy  tents  had,  of  course, 
been  demolished  at  an  early  hour,  and  an  uncomfortable 
night  was  spent  in  holding  on  to  various  belongings." 

But  that  was  in  summer,  and  under  the  leeward  side 
of  a  mountain-range.  I  leave  the  reader  to  imagine 
what  the  buran  would  have  been  in  the  trough  of  the 
Dzungarian  Gate,  carrying  possibly  frozen  snow,  or 
sand,  and  in  the  winter,  when  the  atmosphere  with  no 
wind  is  scarcely  endurable,  and  when  the  temperature 
runs  down  to  —20°  and  —30°  Fahrenheit.  Stories  are 
told  of  shepherds  and  their  flocks  being  killed  off  after  a 
few  hours'  exposure  to  the  winter  burans,  it  being  the 
chief  concern  of  the  nomads  of  the  district  to  find 
shelter  from  these  terrific  wind-storms. 

The  Dzungarian  Gate  is  a  defile  about  six  miles  wide 
at  its  narrowest  point,  and  forty-six  miles  long,  con- 
necting Southern  Siberia  with  Dzungaria.  It  forms  a 
natural  pathway  from  the  plateau  of  Mongolia  to  the 
great  plain  of  North-western  Asia,  and  is  the  one  and  only 
gateway  in  the  mountain-wall  which  stretches  from  Man- 
churia to  Afghanistan,  over  a  distance  of  three  thousand 
miles.  On  the  west,  the  Ala-tau  drops  suddenly  from 
peaks  above  snow-line  to  the  level  of  the  floor  of  the 
depression,  700  ft.  above  the  level  of  the  ocean, — the 
lowest  altitude  in  the  inland  basins  of  Central  Asia,  with 
II — 7 


4i6  DZUNGARIA 

the  exception  of  the  Turfan  depression,  which  is  actually 
below  sea-level.  Several  deep-cut  valleys  drain  the 
waters  from  these  highlands  into  the  gorge  and  supply 
the  waters  of  Lakes  Zalanash  and  Ala  KuL  On  the  east 
the  exceedingly  arid  and  denuded  slopes  of  the  Barlik 
rise  at  an  easier  gradation  than  do  the  ranges  to  the 
west.  The  country  immediately  facing  the  depression 
on  the  east  is  barren,  rugged,  and  scarred  with  dry 
ravines ;  farther  back  it  rises  eventually  to  about 
5,000  ft.  in  altitude.  The  actual  floor  of  the  depression 
consists  of  a  smooth,  level,  gravelly  steppe,  swept  clean 
of  all  loose  material  by  the  winds  which  unceasingly  rush 
backwards  and  forwards  through  the  trough.  At  the 
northern  end  of  the  gorge  reed-beds  extend  over  the 
swampy  southern  end  of  Lake  Zalanash ;  there  are  also 
reed-beds  and  a  little  grass  close  to  a  small  spring  of 
water  near  the  centre. 

The  general  aspect,  however,  is  "an  abomination  of 
desolation,"  the  scene  of  perpetual  storms  and  great 
extremes  of  climate.  During  the  winter  the  choice  of 
a  bad  day  to  cross  the  depression  may  cause  disaster 
to  both  man  and  beast,  while  in  summer  the  intense  heat 
experienced  in  this  low  hollow  is  almost  as  dangerous. 
Our  own  experience  of  crossing  in  June  was  not  of  the 
most  comfortable  nature,  our  horses  and  dogs  being 
lamed  by  the  roughness  of  the  surface  and  exhausted 
by  the  heat. 

As  a  geological  and  physical  phenomenon,  the  Dzun- 
garian  Gate  is  as  unusual  as  that  of  the  Jordan  depres- 
sion. They  are  both  examples  of  a  rift-valley  caused  by 
the  movement  of  the  earth's  crust,  not  by  the  action  of 
water.  This  valley  once  formed  the  connecting  link 
between  the  drainage  of  Dzungaria  and  that  of  Southern 


FROM  THE  ALTAI  TO  THE   ILI  417 

Siberia.  The  chain  of  lakes  at  either  end  of  the  valley 
(Balkash,  Ala  Kul,  Ebi  Nor,  etc.),  are  the  remains  of  the 
great  Asiatic  Mediterranean  Sea ;  if  their  waters  were 
to  rise  a  few  hundred  feet  they  would  break  through  the 
Gate,  flooding  the  plains  to  the  north  and  south.  Even 
within  the  historical  period  it  is  probable  that  some  of 
these  lakes,  now  quite  isolated,  were  then  connected. 
Rubruck  mentions  that,  when  passing  Ala  Kul  in  1254, 
he  could  see  "  another  big  sea  "  through  the  gorge,  and 
that  the  two  were  connected  by  a  river  ;  Rockhill,  in  his 
translation  of  Rubruck,  suggests  that  the  other  "  big  sea  " 
is  Ebi  Nor.  This  is  improbable,  however,  Ebi  Nor  not 
being  visible  from  the  Siberian  side  of  the  gorge ;  my  own 
opinion  is  that  it  was  the  Zalanash  Lake — in  the  northern 
mouth  of  the  gorge — that  Rubruck  saw. 

In  prehistoric  days  the  Dzungarian  Gate  must  have 
presented  a  still  more  wonderful  sight.  It  then  formed 
a  narrow  strait  joining  the  Dzungarian  inlet  with  the 
vast  seas  of  Western  Siberia.  "  This  was  probably  in 
the  recent  Quaternary  and  also  in  the  Tertiary  times. 
Deep  deposits  of  fine  mud,  now  carved  out  by  streams 
into  rolling  downs,  are  to  be  seen  on  the  north  side  of 
the  Barlik  Mountains.  There  deposits  containing  marine 
shells,  which  will  probably  prove  to  be  Quaternary,  rise 
to  the  altitude  of  3,100  ft.  Near  the  Barlik  Range  there 
is  abundant  evidence  of  marine  glaciation, — the  debris  of 
icebergs  from  a  frozen  sea.  Nearer  to  the  gorge  the  mud- 
deposits  begin ;  they  contain  seams  of  pebbles, — false- 
bedded,  showing  that  the  currents  and  tides  must  have 
been  strong. 

"  One  can  picture  the  Dzungarian  Gate  in  the  Ice 
Age:  a  narrow  strait  through  which  the  Arctic-Aralo- 
Caspian  Sea  ebbed  and  flowed  into  the  seas  of  Central 


4i8  DZUNGARIA 

Asia,  scoured  by  icebergs  descending  from  ancient  glaciers 
on  the  Ala-tau  and  Barlik  Mountains  and  forested 
perhaps  down  to  the  water's  edge, — not  unhke  the  Straits 
of  Belle  Isle  at  the  present  day.  Now  a  change  has  been 
wrought  ;  earth-movement  has  drained  the  sea.  But 
away  to  the  north  there  still  remain  the  lakes  of  Ala 
Kul,  Sasik  Kul,  and  Balkash,  and  on  the  south  Ebi 
Nor, — pools  left  in  the  desert — all  that  remains  of  the 
great  icy  sea.  The  alluvial  plains,  once  its  bed,  are  now 
covered  by  desert  grasses,  while  the  forest  clings  only  to 
the  shaded  slopes  and  gullies  on  the  northern  slopes  of 
the  mountains."  * 

The  Dzungarian  Gate,  however,  is  not  such  an  im- 
portant dividing-line  as  might  be  expected,  for  although 
the  Barlik — on  the  one  side — was  at  one  period  geo- 
graphically cut  off  from  the  Ala-tau  portion  of  the  Tian 
Shan  mountain-system — on  the  other  side, — yet  geologi- 
cally they  appear  to  be  the  same,  and,  judging  from  the 
observations  we  made  during  our  visit  to  these  ranges 
in  the  summer  of  1911,  we  find  the  Barlik  is  really  also 
linked  to  the  Tian  Shan  group  by  ties  of  similarity  of 
flora  and  fauna.  For  instance,  the  spruce-pine  peculiar 
to  the  Tian  Shan  {Abies  schrenkiana)  grows  on  the  Barlik 
group  but  does  not  extend  farther  to  the  east ;  these 
mountains  forming  also  the  north-easterly  limit  of  the 
Chukar  Partridge  (Caccahis  chukar).  "  The  real  dividing- 
line  between  Tian  Shan  and  Altai  types  probably  lies 
somewhere  between  the  Barlik  group  and  the  Sair  Moun- 
tain, and  not,  as  might  be  expected,  in  the  rift-like 
depression  called  the  Dzungarian  Gate.^    The  Sair  Moun- 

1  Price's  brief  summary  of  his  observations,  as  published  in  the 
Geographical  Journal  for  February  191 1. 

"  The  question  of  the  easterly  continuation  of  this  dividing-Une  between; 
the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai  is  dealt  with  in  the  Appendixes. 


FROM   THE   ALTAI   TO  THE   ILI  419 

tains — an  easterly  extension  of  the  Tarbagatai — were  not 
explored  by  our  party,  but  it  was  noticed  that  they  formed 
the  southern  limit  of  the  Siberian  larch.  Between  these 
ranges,  the  Barlik  and  the  Sair,  are  other  mountain-groups 
which  must  at  one  period  have  formed  a  chain  of  islands 
in  a  wide  strait,  connecting  the  northern  sea  with  the 
seas  of  Central  Asia  ;  the  Dzungarian  Gate  was  merely 
a  strait  between  one  of  the  islands  (the  Barlik)  and  the 
mainland  of  Ala-tau." 

Remarkable  as  are  the  geological  and  geographical 
features  of  the  Dzungarian  Gate,  its  historical  aspect 
also  lays  a  claim  to  our  interest.  Such  a  scene  as  the 
Dzungarian  Gate  presents  to  the  onlooker  appeals  most 
strongly  to  the  imagination.  One  is  tempted  to  look 
back  into  the  past,  and  conjure  up  the  scenes  of  which 
this  great  natural  highway  must  have  been  a  silent 
witness.  This  special  route  must  have  been  the  one 
through  which  the  invading  hordes  of  Asiatics  marched 
w^estwards ;  every  succeeding  wave  of  migration  that 
swept  across  Asia  must  have  passed  through  these  narrow 
*'  straits."  This  was  the  natural  route  for  merchants, 
caravans,  and  for  all  nations  on  migration  bent ;  no  small 
part  has  this  deep-cut  gorge  played  in  the  history  of 
Asia  and  even  of  Europe.  It  requires  but  a  stretch  of 
imagination  to  recall  the  thundering  tramp  of  passing 
armies  and  to  hear  the  strain  of  wild  barbaric 
music,  as  savage  hosts  of  Huns,  Mongols,  and  Turks — 
filled  with  lust  of  conquest — moved  westwards,  eager 
for  the  spoil  of  the  great  cities  of  the  Turkestan  plains 
lying  beyond  the  mountain-barrier,  the  Dzungarian 
Gate  alone  allowing  these  mounted  troops  to  continue, 
unhindered,  their  conquering  way.  Samarkand,  Bok- 
hara, Persia,  Russia,  lay  beyond  ;   the  plains,  their  own 


420  DZUNGARIA 

free,  open  plains,  led  them  irresistibly  onwards  to  the 
very  gates  of  Europe  ! 

A  peculiar  feature  of  travel  in  Central  Asia  is  the 
sudden  manner  in  which  a  new  country  opens  up  before 
the  traveller.  Through  gaining  the  summit  of  a  small 
pass,  or  the  rounding  of  some,  it  may  be,  insignificant 
shoulder,  he  may  come  within  view  of  an  immense 
stretch  of  country  never  seen  nor  even  guessed  at 
by  him  before.  Such  a  view  was  obtained  as  we  left 
the  Dzungarian  Gate  and  climbed  the  foot-hills  of  the 
wind-worn  granite  range  situated  to  the  north-west  of 
Ebi  Nor.  Over  the  lake,  and  appearing  to  rise  out  of 
it,  the  chain  of  the  Tian  Shan — the  great  mountain - 
system  of  Central  Asia — was  spread  out  in  long  array, 
its  snow-clad  summits  stretching  unbroken  across  the 
whole  width  of  the  horizon.  All  this  had  been  com- 
pletely hidden  from  us  up  to  this  moment,  and  this 
sudden  introduction  gave  us  a  clearer  understanding 
of  the  vastness  of  Central  Asia. 

We  now  followed  an  easy  route  across  the  lower 
portion  of  the  Borotala  Valley,  over  the  Kanjik  Range 
by  a  nine-thousand  foot  pass,  into  the  basin  of  Sairam 
Nor  and  joined  the  Chinese  Imperial  High-road  at  the 
wayside  station  of  Santai,  which  connects  the  towns  of 
Dzungaria  with  the  Hi  Valley.  Once  on  the  road  we 
made  fair  pace  and  reached  Kulja  on  November  14th, 
nineteen  days  after  leaving  Chuguchak. 

Kulja  and  the  IH  Valley  are  too  well  known  to  need 
description.  They  are  outside  the  regions  we  had  under- 
taken to  study  ;  in  fact,  we  were  only  induced  to  visit 
this  locality  by  the  opportunities  it  gave  us  for  recon- 
structing our  caravan,  for  despatching  our  collections 


FROM  THE  ALTAI  TO  THE  ILI  421 

to  England,  and,  incidentally,  for  resting  a  short  time 
after  seven  months  of  continual  travel. 

Our  stay  in  Kulja  was  made  pleasant  by  the  hospitality 
afforded  us  by  Father  Raemdonck,  a  Belgian  missionary, 
who  placed  a  house  at  our  disposal  and  gave  us  such 
help  as  cannot  be  adequately  acknowledged  by  words 
of  thanks.  On  November  26th  our  party  was  broken 
up  by  the  departure  of  Price  for  England.  Travelling 
by  way  of  Tashkent,  Transcaspia,  and  the  Caucasus,  he 
reached  England  in  March  1911,  and  has  since  written 
an  account  of  the  social  and  political  condition  of  Siberia, 
from  impressions  he  gained  during  this  journey.  He 
took  with  him  Makandaroff,  our  interpreter,  whose 
place  was  filled  by  John  Pereira,  a  Cingalese — of  great 
parts — who  had  lived  at  different  times  in  Pekin,  St. 
Petersburg,  Chinese  Turkestan,  and  England,  who  could 
not  only  speak  several  languages,  but  cook  a  good  dinner. 
From  Kulja  I  wished  to  send  home  my  maps  and 
notes,  up  to  date,  so  as  not  to  run  any  risk  through 
carrying  them  over  thousands  of  miles  of  country.  This 
was  arranged  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  T.  P.  Miller, 
who  was  on  his  way  back  to  England  after  a  hunting- 
trip  in  the  Tian  Shan,  and  who  undertook  to  convey 
them  home. 

All  were  delivered  safely  to  the  Royal  Geographical 
Society,  but  the  maps  and  notes  did  not  reach  their 
destination  without  some  risk,  as  well  as  giving  consider- 
able trouble  to  the  bearer,  for  immediately  Mr.  Miller 
crossed  the  frontier  into  Russian  Turkestan  he  was 
arrested,  and  maps,  diaries,  and  note-books  were  con- 
fiscated. To  all  intents  and  purposes  the  results  of  the 
last  seven  months'  work  were  lost ;  however,  owing  to  the 
apparent  inability  of  the  secret-service  officials  to  read 


422  DZUNGARIA 

the  various  papers  they  had  got  hold  of,  and  by  a  display 
of  bluff  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Miller,  all  were  eventually 
returned  intact. 

In  arranging  a  programme  of  exploration  in  Central 
Asia,  the  traveller  has  one  great  difficulty  to  contend 
with — namely,  the  winter.  Some,  having  experience 
of  lower  latitudes,  may  be  prone  to  criticize  ;  but  let  them 
remember  that  in  these  regions  the  explorer  has  practic- 
ally to  stop  work  for  four  months  owing  to  the  cold. 
From  November  to  March  we  found  it  impossible  to  do 
any  survey-work  ;  the  forming  of  scientific  collections 
was  out  of  the  question,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that 
we  gained  any  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  country, 
for  all  was  hidden  under  snow.  On  the  road  through 
Southern  Dzungaria  we  hoped  to  get  an  idea  of  the 
number  and  size  of  the  rivers ;  but  we  were  baulked  in 
our  efforts,  for  we  could  not  locate  them;  ice  covered 
the  rivers,  and  snow  hid  the  ice.  The  land-relief  was 
equally  deceiving ;  small  depressions  assumed  gigantic 
proportions,  and  low  ranges  of  hills  had  the  appearance 
of  high  mountains. 

During  December  and  the  first  half  of  January  we 
amused  ourselves  in  various  ways.  Miller  went  off,  in 
spite  of  the  cold,  to  the  Kok-su  Valley  in  the  Tian  Shan 
to  try  for  wapiti,  where  he  remained  for  two  weeks 
without  getting  a  chance  of  securing  that  most  valued 
of  trophies.  I  remained  in  Kulja  the  greater  part  of 
the  time,  plotting  out  my  plane-table  sheets,  in  pre- 
paration for  next  summer's  work.  I  prepared,  on  a 
scale  of  1:400,000,  large  sheets  of  all  the  Russian  maps 
of  the  regions  we  hoped  to  visit,  on  which  I  intended 
to  sketch  in  all  the  fresh  detail  that  I  obtained.  This 
work  was  varied  by  duck-flighting, — various  hot  springs 


FROM   THE  ALTAI   TO   THE  ILI  423 

allowing  many  wild-fowl  to  remain  in  this  ice-bound 
country, — ^which  gave  me  amusement  for  about  twenty 
minutes  every  evening ;  while  a  visit  to  the  valley 
of  the  Kash,  right  affluent  of  the  Hi,  supplied  all  the 
specimens  of  the  pheasants  of  the  locality  that  I  desired 
for  my  collection.  On  Miller's  return  from  the  Kok-su 
we  began  to  arrange  our  plans  for  our  journey  to  the 
far  east  of  Dzungaria. 


CHAPTER    XV 

A    WINTER    JOURNEY    IN    SOUTHERN    DZUNGARIA  ;     ALONG 
THE  "  IMPERIAL  HIGH-ROAD  "  FROM  KULJA  TO  KUMUL 

Snow  had  fallen  on  several  occasions  since  our  arrival 
in  Kulja.  Not  in  the  great,  slow-falling  flakes  of  an 
English  winter,  but  in  a  steady,  continual  fall  of  minute 
particles.  These  fell  swiftly,  and  lay  or  drifted,  as 
the  case  might  be,  whether  in  sheltered  valleys  or  on 
open  steppe,  causing  the  immense  Central  Asian  land- 
scape of  endless  plains  and  gigantic  ranges  to  be  under 
a  mantle  of  glistening  snow-fields.  The  white  expanse 
lay  unbroken,  except  where  black  lines  of  dead  vegeta- 
tion defined  the  river-courses  or  where  dark  blue 
shadows  on  the  mountains  proved  the  existence  of  *'  riven 
ravine  and  splintered  precipice," — where  snow  found  no 
resting-place.  Central  Asia — always  a  land  of  immen- 
sity— is  seen  at  its  best  and  in  its  truest  character  in 
midwinter.  The  countless  leagues  of  "  white  silence  " 
then  produce  an  awe-inspiring  impression,  but  during  the 
hot,  dusty  summer  the  dreary  monotony  of  the  region 
dissipates  this  impression,  and  although  its  vastness 
dwarfs  all  one's  previous  ideas  of  sameness,  no  sense  of 
attraction  remains. 

The  dreary  winter  began  at  the  end  of  November 

in  the  Hi  Valley.     It  commenced  with  a  series  of  snow- 

424 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  425 

storms  accompanied  by  a  hard  frost ;  by  the  first 
week  in  December  the  IH  River  was  frozen  stiff,  and  the 
whole  land  was  frost-bound.  Snow  occurred  every 
ten  or  twelve  days,  the  intervening  period  bringing 
bright  and  sunny  weather  with  a  very  low  temperature. 
So  long  as  the  air  was  still,  the  50  degrees  or  so  of  frost 
were  not  much  felt ;  but  when  the  wind  rose  the  elements 
were  too  severe  for  man  to  face. 

Across  the  frozen  landscape  moved  occasional  natives^ 
Kalmuks  and  Kirghiz,  wrapped  in  great  sheepskin  coats 
and  wearing  fox-skin  headgear,  or  Chinamen  in  quilted 
jackets  and  quaint,  but  most  practical,  ear-caps.  For 
the  most  part  the  inhabitants  of  this  dreary  land  had 
gone  into  winter  quarters, — hibernating,  in  fact, — and 
would  not  appear  again  until  the  following  spring.  The 
groaning  ox-wagons  gave  place  to  silent  sledges,  and  men 
used  this  easy  mode  of  transport  to  move  their  grain  and 
merchandise  ;  consequently,  the  noisy  bazaars  of  Kulja 
— trade  centre  of  the  Hi  Valley — became  silent  owing  to 
the  wheelless  traffic. 

The  great  trade-routes  of  the  world  are  now  almost 
entirely  superseded  by  railways  or  lines  of  steamships. 
The  tea-trade  of  China  is  carried  to  Europe  by  ship, 
and  men  go  to  Mecca  by  railway.  In  far-distant  and 
exceptionally  isolated  regions  alone  are  the  old  caravan- 
tracks  still  in  use  as  they  were  a  thousand  years  ago. 
It  is  to  Asia,  with  her  civilization  of  immense  antiquity, 
that  we  must  look  in  order  to  find  this  state  of  affairs  ; 
Asia,  where  men  are  still  "  plunged  in  thought,"  still 
heedless  of  the  West,  where  commerce  and  transport 
are  still  solely  dependent  upon  beasts  of  burden,  where 
the  old  routes,  which  always  carried  the  trade  between 
Europe  and  Far  Cathay,  are  still  in  use,  where  the  same 


426  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

difficulties  beset  one  and  the  same  old  caravanserais  give 
one  shelter. 

Not  until  we  reached  Southern  Dzungaria  did  we 
come  in  contact  with  the  great  high-roads  and  caravan- 
routes  which  connect  East  and  West,  and  which  are  to- 
day as  they  ever  have  been  since  the  Far  East  first 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  West  and  the  two  sought 
each  other's  company.  North  of  this  zone  little  inter- 
course has  been  carried  on.  What  trade  could  flourish 
between  China  and  Siberia,  and  what  could  the  cold 
north-land  send  to  China  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
furs  ? 

We  can  well  visualize  the  varied  scenes  that  the  high- 
road granted  in  the  old  days,  before  modern  methods 
of  transport  diverted  the  trade.  In  those  early  days 
the  markets  of  China  exchanged  their  wares  for  those 
of  Western  Asia,  traffic  poured  in  and  out  through  these 
landward  gates  of  the  Empire,  and  endless  caravans 
bore  the  wealth  of  Cathay  to  Western  bazaars.  A  vast 
internal  trade  between  town  and  town  added  to  the 
throng  of  transport-animals  and  foot-passengers  on  the 
highways.  Thousands  of  donkeys  pattered  along  the 
road,  and  strings  of  groaning  ox-wagons  moved  at  even 
slower  pace  than  the  stately  lines  of  great  Bactrian 
camels.  The  gorgeous  cortege  of  a  Chinese  official, — 
with  an  armed  escort,  moving  on  the  Emperor's 
business, — was  surpassed  by  that  of  some  great  Mandarin, 
borne  in  a  high-wheeled  mule-cart  at  gentler  pace, 
relays  of  transport  animals  taking  him  from  post  to 
post ;  following  in  his  wake  was  a  slower-moving 
cavalcade  composed  of  his  wives  and  concubines  and  a 
host  of  retainers.  Amongst  all  these  travellers  and 
caravans  of  merchandise,  by  the  road-side  in  the  dust 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  427 

moved  a  host  of  foot-passengers, — colonists,  pedlars,  and 
beggars. 

The  outlying  provinces  of  the  great  Chinese  Empire 
are  even  now  only  connected  by  roads  with  the  heart  of 
the  Empire,  and  it  will  be  long  before  the  shriek  of  the 
locomotive  replaces  the  bells  of  the  camel-caravan.  It 
requires  months  for  a  despatch  from  the  capital  to  reach 
the  Governors  of  these  regions,  officials  travel  by  cart 
for  four  months  from  Pekin  to  take  up  their  posts,  while 
emigrants  think  nothing  of  eight  months  on  the  road 
before  arriving  at  their  destination. 

Hi,  one  of  the  richest  as  well  as  the  most  remote  of 
Chinese  possessions,  is  linked  up  with  Pekin  by  over 
2,000  miles  of  roadway,  the  track  owning  the  high- 
sounding  title  of  the  "  Chinese  Imperial  High-road.*^ 
"  Imperial  "  in  name,  but  not  in  design  ;  for  at  its  best  it 
is  a  mockery  of  a  high -way.  In  its  varying  degrees  of 
excellence  it  corresponds  to  the  different  stages  through 
which  the  "  Great  Wall "  passes  on  its  course  of  1,500 
miles.  This  typical  Chinese  monument,  which  at  the 
Pekin  end,  under  the  eyes  of  the  Emperor,  is  a  magnificent 
brick-built  structure,  dwindles  eventually  into  a  broken 
mud  wall,  and,  farther  away,  degenerates  to  occa- 
sional, isolated  watch-towers.  In  the  same  way  the 
Chinese  Imperial  High-road  deludes  the  traveller  at  the 
Pekin  end,  but  becomes  a  sad  reality  farther  west  ta 
those  who  are  unlucky  enough  to  travel  over  it.  No 
one  would  do  so  of  choice,  for  in  summer  the  traveller 
is  smothered  in  dust,  choked  by  heat,  or  poisoned  by 
brackish  water,  whilst  in  winter  he  is  lucky  if  he  survives 
the  cold  and  the  filthy  caravanserais  which  render  his 
life  intolerable.  Nevertheless,  in  blissful  ignorance  of 
such  things  we  made  our  preparations,   and  arranged 


428  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

for  transport  to  carry  us  over  800  miles  of  the  worst 
section  of  this  road,  from  Kulja  to  Kumul  on  the  edge  of 
the  Gobi. 

Being  winter,  this  route  alone  was  open  to  us,  and 
we  had  no  choice  but  to  follow  the  high-road,  which 
passes  out  of  the  Hi  Valley  over  the  Boro-Khoro  range 
by  the  Talki  Pass,  and,  entering  Dzungaria,  leads  by  a 
route  of  unrelieved  monotony  along  its  southern  borders. 
This  is  the  Pei-lu — the  "  great  North  Road  "  of  the 
Chinese  ;  it  runs  along  the  northern  side  of  the  Tian 
Shan  Mountains,  and  is  thus  called  in  order  to  distinguish 
it  from  the  Nan-lu,  or  South  Road,  which  runs  the  entire 
length  of  Chinese  Turkestan  on  the  south  side  of  the  Tian 
Shan.  Had  it  been  summer  we  might  have  varied  the 
tediousness  of  a  continuous  cart-journey  along  the  high- 
road by  taking  a  mountain-track  for  a  portion  of  the 
way  ;  but  even  in  the  best  season  these  hill-tracks  in 
the  Tian  Shan  are  difficult  and  dangerous,  while  the 
time  occupied  in  traversing  them  would  be  far  greater 
than  that  entailed  by  the  journey  along  the  main-road. 

*rhe  season  of  the  year,  which  limited  us  in  our  choice 
of  routes,  also  permitted  only  one  method  of  transport. 
The  deep  snow  and  the  bitter  winds  rendered  exposure 
dangerous  even  to  the  inured  and  hardened  natives  ; 
transport  by  camel  or  horse-caravan  would  have  been 
impossible  in  the  face  of  such  intense  cold,  with  so  great 
a  distance  to  cover  ;  the  only  other  means  of  getting  to 
Kumul  was  by  cart. 

The  Chinese  officials  and  merchants — all,  in  fact,  who 
can  afford  to  do  so — travel  over  the  roads  of  the  New 
Dominion  by  wheel-transport.  They  come  from  rail- 
head at  Honan  in  China  Proper  to  these  far  western 
dependencies  by  cart ;    when  they  have  served  their 


FROM   KULJA  TO  KUMUL  429 

appointments   or   made   their   "  pile "   they  return   by 
cart,  thinking  nothing  of  the  time  occupied  by  such  a 
slow  method  of  transport  so  long  as  it  does  not  entail 
any  undue  exertion  on  their  part.     In  Kulja  we  found 
a  useful  adaptation  of  the  Russian  "  telega,"  or  springless, 
four-wheeled  cart,  which  was  far  more  useful  and  con- 
siderably lighter  than  the  high,  heavily  built,  two-wheeled 
carts    generally    used    by    the    Chinese.     The    Dungan 
owners — for  the  Mohammedans  appear  to  have  the  mono- 
poly of  the  carrying-trade  in  Western  China — ran  these 
**  telegas  "  from  Kulja  to  Urumchi  in  eighteen  or  twenty 
days.     They  charged  55  tael  (about  £6)  for  a  winter's 
journey  when  fodder  was  scarce  and  dear,  but  slightly 
less  during  the  summer  months.     The  actual  distance 
between  the  two  towns  was  432  miles,  divided  up  into 
eighteen  stages.     The  stages  averaged  90  li  each,  which 
corresponds  to  about  thirty  miles  ;  we  found,  however, 
that  the  Chinese  mode  of  reckoning  distances  was  very 
unreliable ;  an  easy  downhill  stage  of  about  90  li  often 
being  found  to  consist  ol  120,  or  even  more  ;   whereas  a 
sandy  track,  without  water,  would  be  considered  90  li 
because  it  felt  like  90,  when  in  reality  it  should  have 
been  60  li. 

On  January  14th  we  rattled  out  of  the  famiUar  old 
bazaars  of  Kulja,  and,  to  the  "  Hoa-hoa-hoa  "  of  the 
drivers,  drove  out  across  the  melancholy,  dreary  land- 
scape of  the  Hi  Valley.  In  six  hours  we  made  the 
Chinese  town  of  Sweeting,  a  "  rabbit-warren "  of  a 
place,  a  maze  of  mud-walls,  a  city  risen  out  of  the 
ashes  of  destruction,  and  repeopled  after  horrible 
massacres.  The  history  of  the  Hi  Valley  is  somewhat 
like  that  of  the  valley  of  the  Hoang  Ho.  Periodically 
nature  has  let  loose  floods, — either  of  water  or  human 


430  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

floods  of  fanatics, — over  these  two  luxuriant  valleys,  with 
disastrous  results  to  tens  of  thousands  of  Celestials. 
No  sooner,  however,  do  the  floods  recede,  or  are  the 
insurrections  quelled,  than  the  Chinese  swarm  again 
into  the  valleys,  where  they  live,  as  it  were,  on  the  slopes 
of  a  volcano.  No  other  fact  shows  so  well  the  remarkable 
tenacity  of  the  race.  The  Yellow  River  overflows  its 
banks  and  drowns  millions  of  human  beings,  but  im- 
mediately the  dykes  are  rebuilt  the  Chinese  go  back 
to  cultivate  the  soil,  heedless  of  the  future,  until  once 
again  catastrophe  bursts  upon  them.  So  with  the  Hi 
Valley  ;  its  fertility  attracts  them  to  such  a  degree 
that  they  shut  their  eyes  to  the  possibility  of  annihila- 
tion. It  has  been  said  of  the  British,  that  they  are 
like  ants :  if  one  finds  a  good  bit  of  meat,  a  thousand 
will  follow.  I  think  this  applies  equally  to  the  Chinese, 
that  slow,  persistent  race,  to  whom  neither  the  Hi  Valley 
nor  the  valley  of  the  Hoang-Ho  will  ever  be  lost, — not 
even  in  the  face  of  the  greatest  of  calamities. 

The  next  day  we  reached  Lao-tzao-gou,  a  small 
village  now,  but  formerly  one  of  the  six  towns  of  the  Hi 
Valley.  The  old  walls  and  parapets,  showing  its  former 
size  and  ancient  importance,  were  now  merely  the  haunts 
of  owls  and  foxes,  while  the  rich  lands  around  them 
awaited  the  hand  of  the  cultivator.  So  we  passed  on, 
out  of  the  Unhappy  Valley,  up  through  the  winding 
Talki  Gorge,  where  the  highway  first  shows  any  signs 
of  actual  road-making.  This  track  alone  gives  access, 
to  Turkestan  from  China,  and  all  who  come  or  go  must 
pass  by  this  route  ;  of  necessity,  therefore,  the  road  has 
been  built  up  to  some  pretension  of  a  highway. 

That  night  we  spent  in  a  miserable  serai  at  the  foot 
of  the  pass,  and  as  bad  weather  came  on  we  had  to  make 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  431 

the  best  of  a  whole  day  in  our  very  draughty,  cold 
quarters,  being  afraid  to  negotiate  the  pass  in  such  rough 
weather.  The  wind  grew  to  a  hurricane,  the  snow  drifted 
accordingly,  whilst  we  smoked  ourselves  out  of  our  mud- 
built  room  in  vain  attempts  to  keep  warm.  A  few 
inhabitants  of  the  miserable  place  came  to  stare  at  us, 
and  their  dogs  in  turn  fought  my  dog  ;  and  so  we  spent 
a  somewhat  melancholy  day.  In  winter  these  serais 
are  the  very  essence  of  discomfort,  and  most  unattractive. 
Men  do  not  choose  these  cruel  months  in  which  to  travel, 
for  food  is  scarce  and  dear  ;  all  who  have  business  to 
transact  accomplish  their  work  during  the  summer. 

The  inevitable  carts,  laden  heavily  with  merchandise 
and  goods  from  Pekin,  are,  of  course,  always  encumbering 
the  road,  and,  now  and  then,  the  retinue  of  some  Chinese 
official  moving  to  a  new  post ;  these,  together  with  caval- 
cades of  Kalmuks,  Chinese  soldiers,  and  nondescript 
foot-passengers,  make  up  the  list  of  winter  travellers. 
Yet  we  saw  this  same  portion  of  the  road  in  late 
autumn,  when  the  Talki  Pass  was  literally  blocked  with 
traffic,  and  the  serais  were  full  to  over-flowing.  Here, 
in  this  veritable  Suez  Canal  of  Central  Asia,  crowded 
the  entire  trade  and  traffic  that  exists  between  Cathay 
and  Western  Asia.  There  were  Chinese  horsemen,  well- 
mounted  and  proud  of  purse,  and  miserable  foot-sore 
emigrants  bound  for  the  Hi  Valley — the  El  Dorado  of 
the  Celestials.  There  were  long  caravans  of  camels  laden 
with  grain,  cotton,  and  felt  ;  lumbering  carts  and  fast, 
three-horsed  coaches,  which  came  in  a  cloud  of  dust — 
carrying  passengers  between  the  few  and  far-removed 
towns.  All  these  crowded  the  high-road  in  summer,  as 
well  as  slither-heeled  Tartars,  slouching  Mongols,  Mussul- 
man merchants,  and  crafty  Dungans. 
II— 8 


432  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

When  we  eventually  tackled  the  Talki  Pass  we  found 
it  so  bad  for  carts  that  we  feared  a  long  delay.  Snow 
had  drifted  across  the  track,  and  our  spades  were  in 
constant  use.  Streams,  which  flowed  across  the  road, 
had  frozen  solid  in  flowing,  and  the  white  track  pre- 
sented the  appearance  of  a  miniature  glacier.  But  with 
five  horses  to  each  cart  we  succeeded  in  reaching  the 
summit  of  the  pass — hot  and  panting  in  spite  of  40°  of 
frost  and  a  biting  wind.  Below  the  pass  was  a  guard- 
house, occupied  by  Chinese  soldiers  whose  business  it 
was  to  keep  the  road  open.  Their  laziness,  no  doubt, 
accounted  for  the  hopeless  state  of  the  track,  when  very 
little  work  would  have  kept  it  free  from  ice-floes. 

We  now  entered  upon  the  wide  plain  of  Sairam  Nor, 
whose  immense  sheet  of  water  lay  under  ice,  and  whose 
panorama  consisted  of  an  unbroken  snow-field.  A  long, 
downhill  "  rough  and  tumble  "  brought  us  to  Santai,  a 
rather  more  numerous  collection  of  hovels  and  inns  than 
usual,  situated  on  the  edge  of  the  lake.  Close  by  here  the 
road  was  built  out  round  a  rocky  promontory  which  jutted 
out  into  the  lake  and  which,  by  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
formed  a  strategical  point.  Here  the  ponderous  Celes- 
tials had  built  mud  fortifications  to  guard  the  road, 
a  sign  of  strength,  no  doubt,  but  quite  inadequate.  A 
group  of  twenty-four  grave-mounds,  near  by,  suggested 
a  conflict  at  some  time  or  other.  Leaving  Santai,  we 
passed  through  the  gaps  between  the  Kanjik  and  Kuz- 
imchik  ranges,  by  means  of  which  the  whole  of  the  basin 
of  Sairam  Nor  must,  at  one  time,  have  been  drained, 
before  a  land-movement  blocked  the  passage.^ 

Once  out  of  the  Sairam  Nor  basin  we  made  good 
pace  into  the  plains  of  Dzungaria.     The  next  stopping- 

^  See  Appendix  B. 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  433 

place,  Sutai,  we  considered  to  be  a  still  more  melancholy 
spot  for  a  halt ;  not  a  blade  of  grass  or  scrub,  nor  even 
water,  was  to  be  found,  while  the  foul  mud-huts,  and  the 
evil-looking  rascals  inhabiting  them,  did  not  make  the 
place  more  inviting.  We  found  gazelle  near  by,  but, 
failing  in  our  attempts  to  hunt  them  by  driving,  we  once 
again  resorted  to  our  old  occupation  of  smoking  our- 
selves warm. 

Later  we  decided,  since  there  was  a  good  moon,  to 
make  a  night-drive,  and  accordingly,  after  a  good  meal, 
hitched  up  and  started  off.  The  road  was  simply  a  stony 
waste,  over  which  we  bumped  and  rattled  to  the  "  Hoa- 
hoa-hoa  ! "  of  the  drivers,  till  the  dawn  flushed  the  sky 
and  we  turned  out,  lit  a  fire  of  scrub  near  the  road,  and 
warmed  ourselves. 

Thus  we  journeyed,  da}^  by  day,  across  Southern 
Dzungaria.  It  would  be  tedious,  and  vastly  uninteresting, 
to  describe  every  stage  of  the  forty  that  lay  between 
Kulja  and  Kumul;  it  is  hard,  however,  to  give  a  true 
impression  of  the  region  without  undue  monotony  of 
description. 

We  usually  drove  for  about  seven  or  eight  hours, 
and  averaged  twenty  to  thirty  miles  a  day;  sometimes 
we  drove  all  night,  but  we  gave  this  up  after  losing  two 
horses  from  frost-bite.  If,  when  travelling  at  night, 
we  pulled  up  even  for  a  few  minutes,  to  let  the  sweating 
horses  gain  their  breath,  they  ran  the  risk  of  freezing 
as  they  stood. 

At  this  season  of  the  year  the  track  was  comparatively 
good,  for  the  hard  frozen  snow  had  filled  up  the  in- 
equalities of  the  ground  and  made  the  going  easy  ;  there 
was  no  dust,  and  the  air  was  glorious. 

The  location  of  the  stopping-places  controlled  our 


434  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

stages  ;  these  were  sometimes  a  farce,  as  frequently  neither 
food  nor  water  could  be  procured,  and  occasionally  we 
sent  our  men  a  mile  to  cut  ice  with  which  to  cook,  and 
even  this  we  had  to  buy  ! 

The  same  type  of  cheerless  serai  offered  us  a  resting- 
place  each  night,  the  same  skin-clad  native  bade  us 
welcome,  and  tried  to  cheat  us  on  the  bill  when  we 
departed  next  morning.  The  serais  were  always  quad- 
rangular structures  composed  of  many  small  rooms,  like 
cubicles,  boasting  paperless  windows,  and  no  chimney  ; 
some  possessed  a  larger  (and  colder)  guest-chamber  for 
the  use  of  Chinese  olhcials  when  on  the  road  ;  but  we 
nearly  always  used  the  smaller  ones,  being  the  more 
easily  heated. 

On  arrival  a  sleepy,  "  huddled-up  "  native,  looking 
twice  his  natural  size  owing  to  the  number  of  sheep-skin 
coats  he  was  wearing,  would  kindle  a  smoky  fire,  whilst 
our  servants  commandeered  every  egg  the  village  could 
produce.  The  food-supply  was  sometimes  an  important 
question,  for  the  markets  seemed  to  disappear  like 
the  inhabitants  during  the  winter  months,  and  we  could 
not  always  rely  upon  getting  the  most  ordinary  articles 
of  diet.  Nights  were  often  made  hideous  by  the  quarrel- 
ling animals ;  there  were  always  dog-fights ;  and  I  re- 
member, on  one  occasion,  the  whole  inn  was  kept  awake 
by  the  mad  ravings  of  a  holy  man,  a  Dungan  lunatic  at 
large.  If  the  serais  were  too  uninviting,  or  the  smoky 
rooms  impossible  to  rest  in,  we  were  always  able  to  resort 
to  our  carts  for  the  nights. 

One  advantage  alone  seemed  to  result  from  a  winter's, 
journey  along  the  Imperial  High-road,  and  that  arose 
from  the  fact  that  everything  was  frozen  solid  ;  the 
insanitary   conditions    of   our   surroundings   were    thus 


FROM   KULJA  TO    KUMUL  435 

without  danger.  Even  dead  camels  lying  about  outside 
our  quarters  did  not  matter  under  these  conditions ; 
but  we  scarcely  dared  to  imagine  what  would  have  been 
the  effect  in  summer. 

We  sought,  in  vain,  for  interest  or  romance  in  the 
surroundings  of  the  sordid  villages  and  mud-built  cara- 
vanserais, which  staged  our  route  along  Southern 
Dzungaria.  All  were  stamped  with  the  unrelieved 
monotony  of  Central  Asia. 

On  reaching  the  low  plain  of  Dzungaria  the  road-side 
scenery  was  varied  by  a  zone  of  vegetation  caused  by 
the  presence  of  much  water,  which,  at  this  altitude, 
approached  closely  to  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and 
either  rendered  it  moist  or  actually  appeared  as  streams. 
This  fact  accounted  for  a  string  of  villages  lying  along 
the  route. 

Takianzi,  the  first  of  these  settlements,  was  typical 
of  them  all.  A  group  of  ancient  elm-trees  surrounding 
a  Chant o,  or  a  Dungan  mosque,  is  generally  the  most 
prominent  feature  on  approaching  one  of  these  villages, 
which,  on  entrance,  has  the  appearance  of  a  long, 
straggling  street  composed  of  mud-built  houses,  small 
bazaars,  and  a  few  inns.  In  summer,  life  and  colour  are 
added  to  the  scene,  nomads  from  the  surrounding  country 
are  haggling  with  the  shopkeepers  and  crowding  the  serais ; 
but  in  winter  even  the  benumbed  yet  inquisitive  inhabi- 
tants have  not  the  energy  to  turn  out  and  form  a  crowd, 
as  is  their  habit  on  the  arrival  of  strange  travellers  such 
as  ourselves. 

The  population  was  composed  largely  of  Chanto 
emigrants  from  the  overcrowded  oases  of  Chinese  Turke- 
stan, such  as  Turfan,  Aksu,  and  Kashgar,  in  all  of 
which  there  exists  a  surplus  of  inhabitants.    They  had. 


436  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

in  many  cases,  been  ousted  from  their  homes  by 
the  iniquitous  methods  of  Chinese  usurers,  whose  one 
aim  is  to  ruin  the  Chanto  land-owners  and  so  gain 
possession  of  their  wonderfully  fertile  farms.  Here 
the  Chantos  eke  out  a  poor  livelihood  as  small  shop- 
keepers and  agriculturists,  and,  it  was  said,  were  freed 
from  taxation  in  return  for  settling  on  the  Pei-lu,  or 
North  Road/  Besides  the  Chantos  there  were  always 
Dungans  and  Chinese,  who  farmed  small  holdings,  kept 
the  inns,  and  carried  on  a  certain  amount  of  trade. 
The  villages,  indeed,  presented  a  curious  mixture  of 
races  and  creeds.  It  was  instructive  to  notice  that  the 
Chanto,  Chinese,  Dungan,  and  Kalmuk  mixed  freely  and 
even  fraternised  here,  where  all  Asiatics  are  of  one  brother- 
hood and  the  European  is  altogether  outside  the  circle. 
Religion  seems  to  be  of  secondary  consideration,  when 
it  is  a  question  of  Europe  versus  Asia ;  these  being 
far  more  distant  from  each  other  than  are  Buddhism, 
Islam,  and  Agnosticism — as  represented  by  the  Mongols, 
the  Chantos  and  the  Chinese. 

Takianzi  showed  signs  of  recent  increase,  as  proved  by 

1  These  Chantos,  however,  do  not  make  very  good  colonists.  From 
the  day  they  arrive  they  are  in  the  hands  of  Chinese  money-lenders.  Even 
the  grain  necessary  to  sow  their  fields  is  borrowed,  for  each  sack  of  which 
they  must  return  two,  and  in  some  cases  three,  in  the  autumn.  It  is 
said  that  half  the  population  of  Kulja  live  by  lending  to  the  other 
half.  The  Chinese  settlers  in  Sin-Kiang  are  in  many  cases  bad  char- 
acters who  have  emigrated  by  necessity  and  not  by  choice.  They  work 
their  way  across  the  desert  to  Hami  and  other  outlying  oases,  make 
a  Uttle  money,  and  gradually  move  on  westwards  to  Urumchi  and  Manas  ; 
but  their  goal  is  always  the  lU  Valley.  Some  succeed,  but  many  fail, 
judging  by  the  fact  that  only  20  per  cent,  manage  to  make  enough 
to  return  to  their  own  country.  In  the  far  west  they  are  a  lazy  lot  com- 
pared with  what  they  are  in  China  Proper,  spending  most  of  their  time 
in  riotous  living  and  gambling — chmate  or  lack  of  competition  being  pro- 
bably the  cause.  In  the  Ih  Valley  a  labourer  gets  as  much  pay  in  a  month 
as  would  satisfy  him  for  a  whole  3^ear  in  the  home  provinces. 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  437 

newly  built  houses  and  bazaars  ;  an  exploration  of  the 
surrounding  country,  however,  showed  that  there  were  not 
only  large  areas  of  an  earlier  cultivation  now  overgrown 
with  reed-beds,  but  the  remains  of  many  old  irrigation 
canals.  For  six  or  eight  miles  to  the  east  of  the  village 
I  noticed  disused  canals  and  fields  overgrown  with  reeds 
and  scrub  showing  no  traces  of  recent  cultivation.  There 
was  ample  water  in  this  locality ;  the  present  state  of 
the  country  being  probably  an  example  of  what  it  must 
have  been  formerly,  before  Dungan  rebellions  and  Chinese 
massacres  swept  away  prosperity  and  left  the  land 
destitute. 

It  was  difficult,  at  this  season,  to  tell  the  amount 
of  water  these  settlements  were  dependent  upon,  for  the 
streams  were  frozen  and  the  water-courses  hidden  under 
snow.  Even  the  largest  rivers,  which  issued  from  great 
valleys  in  the  mountains  to  the  south,  could  hardly  be 
traced  where  we  crossed  their  wide  beds  on  the  plain. 
The  villagers  depended  on  deep  wells,  and  the  nomads 
used  ice,  which  they  cut  out,  in  great  blocks,  from  the 
rivers  and  transported  on  camel-back  to  their  "  yurts." 

From  Takianzi  the  road  led  us  to  Djinko,  a  town  of 
rather  more  than  usual  importance,  situated  at  the 
south  end  of  Ebi  Nor.  It  was  a  busy  centre  for  the 
Kalmuks  from  the  Borotala  district,  and  was  inhabited 
by  about  three  thousand  Chinese  and  Chant os,  who 
traded  salt  procured  near  Ebi  Nor.  Djinko  was  in  a 
well-watered  region  ;  miles  of  reed-beds  standing  10  to 
15  ft.  high,  scrub,  and  small  forests  of  gnarled  and  stunted 
poplars  showed  that  nearly  all  this  country  could  be 
brought  under  cultivation.  As  it  was,  the  district  only 
supported  a  small  population  of  Kalmuks,  whom  we 
occasionally  saw  making  use  of  the  points  of  vantage 


438  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

granted  by  the  mounds  which  alone  allowed  a  clear  view 
over  the  reed-beds.  These  circular  mounds  of  earth  were 
a  special  feature  of  the  landscape,  and  the  appearance 
of  Kalmuk  shepherds  on  their  summits  suggested  to 
me  that  they  were  probably  constructed  for  the  very 
purpose  of  "spying,"  either  for  their  flocks  or  on  their 
enemies. 

Beyond  Djinko  we  entered  upon  a  heavy  stage  of  our 
journey,  the  track  passing  over  the  belt  of  sand-dunes 
which  lie  to  the  south-east  of  Ebi  Nor.  The  sand-hills, 
of  no  great  height,  were  irregularly  formed,  and  were  for 
the  most  part  covered  on  the  leeward  sides  with  small 
tamarisk -scrub.  There  appeared  to  be  very  little  move- 
ment of  sand  by  the  wind,  though  at  a  Chinese  guard- 
house, called  Kum  Chaza, — where  there  were  a  few  Kal- 
muk soldiers  who  were  supposed  to  look  out  for  travellers 
or  caravans  in  distress,  as  often  happens  when  the  winds 
are  very  high, — the  sands  were  encroaching  on  the  high 
walls  from  the  direction  of  Ebi  Nor  and  the  Dzungarian 
Gate,  whence  come  the  strongest  winds.  These  dunes 
were  high  and  free  from  vegetation.  The  ground — where 
the  sands  left  it  exposed — seemed  to  be  composed  of 
very  fine  lake-deposits,  ploughed  up  into  the  finest  dust, 
thus  making  the  going  very  heav}'. 

The  distribution  of  snow  was  very  peculiar ;  the 
high,  windy  basin  of  Sairam  Nor  was  deep  in  snow, 
the  country  to  the  east  of  it  was  comparatively  clear, 
here  again  snow  was  lying,  while  the  reed-beds  and  jungle 
were  altogether  free.  After  leaving  the  sand-belt  we 
immediately  entered  a  forest  of  poplars,  which  continued 
— with  small  breaks — all  the  way  to  Shi-Kho.  The 
trees  were  evidently  effected  by  the  severe  climatic 
conditions   and  a  none  too   abundant  supply  of   water, 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  439 

for  they  presented  a  most  weird  appearance,  with  twisted, 
gnarled  trunks  and  branches,  and  dwarfed  growth,  few  of 
them  being  more  than  20  ft.  high. 

Shi-Kho  we  found  to  be  a  thriving  and  busy  centre 
of  trade  and  transport,  with  a  "  moving  "  population 
of  about  three  thousand.  Even  in  January  the  four 
big  inns  were  full  to  overcrowding,  for  here  converges 
the  entire  trade  between  Siberia  and  Urumchi,  and 
constant  traffic  passes  through.  From  Shi-Kho  a  road 
runs  northwards  to  the  frontier  town  of  Chuguchak, 
which  the  traveller  may  reach  in  ten  stages.  It  traverses 
a  bleak  and  inhospitable  country,  without  habitation, 
and  with  a  poor  water-supply  ;  in  time,  no  doubt,  it  will 
be  superseded  by  another  track  following  the  line  of  the 
Manas  River,  which,  besides  easing  the  discomfort  of 
the  journey,  will  open  up  a  country  at  present  awaiting 
development. 

There  being  no  inducement  to  halt  at  Shi-Kho,  we 
continued  our  journey  for  another  stage  eastwards  to 
the  village  of  Yandzhikhai,  where  we  stopped  a  day,  as 
Miller  wished  to  hunt  the  surrounding  country.  The 
exceptional  conditions  imposed  by  the  rigid  winter 
on  the  fauna  of  these  regions  were  shown  by  Miller's 
discovery  that,  on  the  low  hills  to  the  south  of  the 
road,  wild-asses  and  wild-sheep  actually  ranged  over 
the  same  ground.  These  hills  were  scarcely  a  thousand 
feet  above  the  plain,  and  formed  an  isolated  ridge  separ- 
ated from  the  main  range  of  the  Tian  Shan,  which  started 
some  miles  farther  to  the  south. 

Another  two  days  took  us  to  Manas,  the  centre  of 
an  important  district.  As  a  town  it  did  not  impress 
us,  the  bazaars  being  small,  and  the  walled  "  city  " 
little    else    but    an   empty    enclosure.      The   passer-by 


440  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

might  be  easih^  misled  as  to  the  population  and  import- 
ance of  this  region  ;  for  Manas  itself  is  merely  the  trade- 
centre  of  a  large  agricultural  district,  the  population 
being  scattered  over  the  surrounding  country  in  small 
villages  and  isolated  farms.  This  is  the  best  and  richest 
farming  country  of  the  Pei-lu,  for  here  is  an  unlimited 
area  of  the  finest  soil  extending  along  the  banks  of  a 
big  river,  at  the  point  where  it  leaves  its  mountain- 
gorge  and  spreads  itself  out  in  many  channels  over  the 
plain,  thus  rendering  irrigation  easy.  The  water-supply  is 
reliable ;  even  in  the  driest  season  there  is  a  surplus  of 
water,  which  finds  its  way  to  the  deserts  below  and 
there  evaporates.  At  the  most  critical  season  of  the 
year,  when  the  crops  most  need  water,  the  alpine 
regions  of  the  great  ranges  to  the  south  send  down 
their  melted  snows  in  such  abundance,  that  the  river 
assumes  almost  dangerous  proportions.  We  could 
scarcely  believe  that  the  mile-wide  shingle-bed  we 
crossed  just  outside  the  town, — almost  without  realizing 
that  it  was  the  bed  of  a  river, — could  later  on  be  trans- 
formed into  a  flood  which  would  hinder  traffic  and 
cut  off  communication  for  days  together.  Yet  in  July 
and  August  the  Manas  River  rises  to  this  extent,  and 
passenger  traffic  is  only  kept  up  by  the  employment  of 
high-wheeled  carts  especialty  built  for  the  purpose. 
These  ferry  travellers  across  the  river  so  long  as  the  water 
does  not  run  too  deep  for  the  horses  to  find  the  bottom ; 
when  this  happens  the  blocked  traffic  causes  the  town  of 
Manas  to  become  the  centre  of  a  busy  scene,  until  the 
flood  lessens. 

The  Manas  region  forms  an  area  suitable  for  develop- 
ment in  the  future,  but  irrigation  works  on  a  large  scale 
are   necessary.     There  is  land   and  water,   an   equable 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  441 

climate,  and  a  market  for  all  produce  close  by.  It  is,  even 
now,  the  granary  of  Urumchi,  and  its  cultivators  have  the 
advantage  of  a  large  and  ever-increasing  population  at 
their  very  doors.  Wheat,  rice,  and  maize  are  a  speci- 
ality, while  grapes  and  apples  grow  to  perfection. 

During  our  j  ourney  down  the  Manas  River  at  the  end 
of  the  month  of  May,  we  found  that  cultivation  extended 
for  about  twenty  miles  along  its  right  bank;  beyond 
that,  the  nature  of  the  river-channel  made  irrigation 
works  impracticable,  the  river  having  carved  out  for 
itself  a  deep  bed  in  the  soft  clay  and  being  bordered  by 
steep  cliffs  of  50  and  100  ft.  in  height.  The  bed  of  the 
river  was  constantly  changing,  the  cliffs  being  continu- 
ally cut  away  ;  in  several  places  we  found  this  had  re- 
sulted in  the  destruction  of  the  irrigation-canals  which 
had  been  dug  at  immense  cost  and  labour.  We  saw,  too, 
a  place  where  the  Chinese  Government  had  endeavoured 
to  cut  a  canal  which  would  carry  water  to  lands  50  or 
60  ft.  above  the  level  of  water  at  its  start ;  but  even  this 
had  been  left  unfinished,  and  the  farmers  had  set  about 
irrigating  their  lands  on  their  own  account  by  damming 
the  river  at  suitable  places,  so  as  to  minimize  the  labour 
of  making  long,  deep  canals,  and  leading  the  water 
thence  by  comparatively  small  channels.  We  saw  one 
of  these  dams  in  the  course  of  construction.  It  was 
built  entirely  of  bundles  of  willow-branches  and  straw, 
and,  it  was  said,  was  always  destroyed  beyond  repair 
by  the  summer  floods  and  had  to  be  rebuilt  every  year. 
For  a  month  or  six  weeks  the  entire  village  turned  out 
and  built  the  dam,  on  which  depended  their  harvest. 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  real  cultivated  areas 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Manas  River  come  to  an  end 
twenty  miles  to  the  north  of   the  town,  beyond  this 


442  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

point  there  being  only  small  farms  dependent  upon 
separate  canals.  On  the  west  side  there  appears  to  be 
more  cultivation.  Apparently  the  ground  here  was 
easier  to  irrigate,  for  we  discovered  a  very  extensive 
area  of  country,  well  watered,  both  by  canals  from  the 
Manas  River  and  from  other  sources  farther  west.  The 
water-supply  must  be  ample,  as  the  main  produce  is 
rice.  Rice  is  being  introduced  more  and  more ;  it  is  of 
the  best  quality,  and  is  in  great  demand.  The  natives 
get  a  living  so  easily  that  they  idle  away  most  of  the 
time  in  gambling. 

The  whole  of  the  lower  Manas  River,  except  where 
hemmed  in  by  sand-dunes  or  where  running  in  a  deep 
ravine,  is  capable  of  being  extensively  used  for  irrigation 
purposes.  Truly  Manas,  itself,  is  well  situated.  As  we 
rode  out  on  the  road  to  Urumchi  and  saw  its  inspiring 
background  of  snow-mountains  rising  to  20,000  ft.,  the 
lands  awaiting  the  hand  of  man,  the  fields  already  "laid 
out," — lined  with  old  irrigation-canals  needing  only  to 
be  redug,  we  marvelled  at  the  starving  millions  of 
China  who  leave  their  own  country  for  Australia  and 
America,  when  the}^  have  this  fertile  land  awaiting 
them. 

On  leaving  Manas  the  atmosphere  became  more  alive, 
and  our  impressions  more  interesting.  We  were  now  only 
a  few  days'  journey  from  the  capital,  as  was  shown, 
even  if  we  had  not  known  it,  by  the  increased  amount 
of  traffic  on  the  road.  Many  a  monotonous  day's 
journey  had  been  relieved  by  counting  and  tabulating 
the  traffic  en  route.  For  instance,  between  Kulja  and 
Shi-Kho  we  passed  three  hundred  and  fifty  laden  camels 
going  westwards  and  a  hundred  returning  ''empty"  to 
Urumchi,  but  after  leaving   Manas   we  had   our   work 


442] 


DUXGAN    BOYS. 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  443 

cut  out  to  keep  the  record  without  a  break.  The  first 
day  we  passed  seventy  camels  on  their  way  to  Manas 
to  fetch  grain,  six  wagons  of  merchandise  bound  for 
Kulja,  and  three  average-sized  caravans  carrying  cotton 
and  wool  to  Chuguchak.  Farther  on  we  counted  twelve 
wagons  of  grain  going  west  and  seventeen  going  east, 
two  camel-caravans  of  seventy  and  ninety  camels  each, 
numberless  foot-passengers — mostly  colonists  from  the 
home  provinces,  long  strings  of  coal-carts  bearing  an- 
thracite from  the  mines  situated  to  the  south  of  Manas, 
besides  two  theatrical  companies  "  on  tour." 

Although  the  country  appeared  to  be  busier  and  the 
roads  more  full,  the  region  between  Manas  and  Urumchi 
presented  a  spectacle  of  ruin.  The  destruction  caused 
by  the  disturbances  of  1865-75  defies  all  description. 
Ruined  towns  dotted  the  landscape ;  we  encountered  only 
two  villages  where  the  old  maps  marked  five.  For  this 
district  was,  and  still  is,  the  centre  of  Dungan  coloniza- 
tion, and  it  was  here  that  the  hand  of  the  destroyer 
worked  with  the  most  disastrous  results.  The  traces  of 
earlier  irrigation-canals  were  to  be  seen  on  lands  now 
lying  idle.  The  country  was,  however,  slowly  recover- 
ing, for  small  villages  and  farmsteads  were  springing  up 
alongside  the  road,  and  in  time  it  may  assume  a  more 
normal  aspect. 

Immediately  on  leaving  Manas  we  sighted  the  peaks 
of  the  Bogdo-ola  Mountains,  which  mark  the  position 
of  the  capital.  Our  first  view  of  this  remarkable  alpine 
summit  was  that  of  a  single  ice-clad  peak  showing  its 
crest  over  a  far  horizon,  but  on  reaching  Urumchi  we 
found  that  it  formed  an  imposing  background  to  the  city 
lying  close  under  its  slopes. 

Urumchi,    Ulu-muchi,    or   Tihua-fu,    the   provincial 


444  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

capital  of  Sin-Kiang,  or  the  New  Dominion,  is  situated  in 
the  midst  of  attractive  surroundings,  in  a  bay  in  the 
mountain-wall  at  the  point  where  the  Tian  Shan  dips  be- 
fore joining  the  Bogdo-ola.  Tucked  away  close  under  the 
mountains,  in  a  sheltered  locality,  and  with  an  ample 
water-supply,  it  presents  a  pleasing  aspect  to  the  traveller 
after  the  bleak  and  featureless  deserts. 

The  position  of  Urumchi,  although  not  practical 
from  a  strategical  point  of  view — being  commanded  by 
the  surrounding  hills,  is  well  chosen,  for  the  capital  is 
situated  in  the  heart  of  its  administrative  area,  and  also 
at  the  junction  of  two  great  trans-continental  trade- 
routes,  and  of  many  local  lines  of  communication.  At 
Urumchi  the  two  main  roads  from  China  meet,  namely, 
the  northern  route  across  Mongolia  and  the  southern 
route  through  Lan-chow  and  Hami ;  Urumchi  is,  also, 
on  the  road  to  Hi,  the  most  fertile  and  valued  portion  of 
the  New  Dominion.  As  the  capital  of  Dzungaria  and 
Chinese  Turkestan,  its  position  is  admirable,  being  close  to 
the  only  point  at  which  the  great  mountain-chain  of  the 
Tian  Shan  drops  low  enough  to  permit  the  easy  passage 
of  caravans  between  the  two  countries.  The  internal 
trade,  therefore,  of  these  regions  and  all  traffic  between 
Chinese  Turkestan  and  the  north  must  pass  through 
Urumchi. 

Although  only  the  recently  named  capital  of  a  newly 
incorporated  province,  Urumchi  ^  has  already  grown  to  be 
a  town  of  size  and  importance.  It  forms  the  residence 
of  the  Governor  of  the  province,  a  Fan-tei  and  Nea-tei 

^  Urumclii  appears  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Mongol  name  Ulu-muchi. 
Tihua,  Tihua-fu,  or  Tih-hua-fu  is  the  Chinese  official  name  ;  but  the  locals 
always  speak  of  the  capital  as  Houng-miao-tze — "  Red  Temple,"  a  name 
which  originated  from  the  existence  of  a  temple  built  on  a  red  hill,  close 
by  the  town. 


FROM    KULJA  TO   KUMUL  445 

(Provincial  Judge),  a  Tartar  General,  and  a  considerable 
garrison,  some  of  whom  have  been  drilled  under  Euro- 
pean instruction  and  armed  with  modern  weapons.  The 
population  is  said  now  to  stand  at  70,000  ;  Bonin,  in 
1900,  estimated  it  at  40,000  ;  and  in  1905  it  was  placed  at 
50,000.  These  figures  show  the  advance  Urumchi  has 
made  during  recent  years.  Of  this  number  of  inhabitants, 
one  quarter  are  said  to  be  Chantos,  some  of  whom  are 
Russian,  and  some  Chinese  subjects.  Outside  the  walls 
of  the  city  there  exists  a  quarter  entirely  composed  of 
Russian  subjects,  represented  by  Chantos  or  Sarts, 
Tartars,  and  a  few  Siberian  merchants,  to  advance  whose 
interests  a  paternal  Government  has  placed  a  Consul- 
General,  a  Vice-Consul,  and  a  guard  of  fifty  Cossacks. 

Here  alone  does  the  traveller  in  the  New  Dominion 
encounter  a  real  Chinese  town.  Urumchi  is  typically 
Chinese,  its  streets  lack  nothing  of  the  atmosphere  of  a 
town  in  China  Proper.  You  may  see  the  retinues  of  high 
officials,  and  Chinese  ladies  in  the  latest  Pekin  fashions  ; 
you  can  buy  Pekin  goods — at  three  times  the  original  cost, 
and  encounter  men  from  every  province  in  the  Empire. 
Urumchi  is  the  centre  of  trade  and  fashion  ;  there  are 
several  theatres,  a  gunpowder  factory,  an  electric-light 
plant  ;  and  a  far  better  choice  of  goods  in  the  bazaars 
than  one  could  find  in  any  other  town  in  Central  Asia. 

An  innovation,  which  has  recently  brought  Urumchi 
and  Sin-Kiang  into  greater  prominence  and  into  closer 
proximity  to  the  outside  world,  is  the  wise  employment 
by  the  Chinese  Government  of  Europeans  to  reconstruct 
and  manage  the  postal  system.  Mr.  Petersen,  to  whom 
this  work  had  been  entrusted,  was  our  host  whilst  staying 
at  Urumchi,  and  we  owe  a  great  deal  to  his  hospitality. 
After  two  years'  work  he  has  organized  a  complete  postal 


446  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

system  from  this  most  out-of-the-way  corner  of  China 
to  all  points  of  the  compass.  Urumchi,  by  this  new 
system,  is  brought  within  forty-five  days  of  Pekin,  and 
letters  will  reach  London,  via  Siberia,  within  thirty 
days.  The  local  post  is  carried  to  Kulja,  a  distance  of 
430  miles,  in  four  and  a  half  days,  and  to  Chuguchak 
in  the  same  length  of  time.  In  earlier  days,  under 
Chinese  management,  the  post  took  three  times  as  long, 
and  even  then  safe  delivery  was  uncertain.  This  is  the 
result  of  careful  organization,  by  means  of  a  sj'stematic 
staging  of  the  route  into  regular  distances,  and  by  the 
enforcement  of  a  time-limit.  Well-mounted  riders,  in 
relays,  carry  the  mail-bags  for  stages  of  80-90  li  each  ; 
the  service  being  kept  up  day  and  night  across  the 
whole  width  of  China.  A  combined,  local,  passenger  and 
mail  service  has  been  organized  on  this  same  principle 
between  the  capital  and  Guchen,  and  the  journey,  which 
formerly  took  from  five  to  six  days,  is  now  accomplished 
in  a  day  and  a  half. 

In  spite  of  the  distance  from  Pekin,  caravans  of  mer- 
chandise creep  across  from  China  to  Urumchi,  taking 
eight  months  or  a  year  on  the  road.  These  caravans 
generally  come  direct  by  the  northern  route  across  Mon- 
golia, for  they  carry  wares  especially  for  the  Urumchi 
market.  The  capital  thus  laid  out,  however,  obliges  the 
merchants  to  charge  at  the  rate  of  200  to  300  per  cent, 
on  the  Pekin  price.  On  the  other  hand,  we  bought 
cigarettes  of  the  "  Aden  Tobacco  Co."  at  the  rate  of 
3s.  per  hundred  ;  whether  they  were  Japanese  "  fakes  " 
or  not  we  cannot  say,  but  they  seemed  uncommonly 
good  to  us  after  a  year's  experience  of  all  kinds  of  local 
products — both  Russian  and  Chinese.  They  were,  in  any 
case,  cheap  enough,  after  being  transported  1,500  miles 


BACTRIAN     CAMK].    IN     M.M.MI.l^    CdAl 


BACTRIAN     CAMELS    IN     WIxNTER    COAT. 


446] 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  447 

by  camel  to  a  town  where  only  a  small  demand  could 
be  made  for  them. 

At  Urumchi  we  paid  calls  on  Governors,  Generals, 
and  Provincial  Judges,  and  we  enjoyed  for  a  season 
grotesque  Chinese  dinners  and  polite  society,  but  our 
desire  was  to  move  on,  so  we  did  not  rest  long.  Some 
days  were  occupied  in  arranging  money  matters,  for, 
although  the  Russian  rouble  has  penetrated  thus  far 
into  Middle  Asia,  beyond  Urumchi  we  found  it  necessary 
to  use  Chinese  coinage.  We  needed,  however,  money 
which  was  current  over  the  whole  province,  a  local 
coinage  being  useless  to  us ;  so  we  carried  paper- 
money  in  i-tael  notes,  silver  pieces  of  the  same  value, 
and  very  bulky  copper  coins  which  filled  a  sack  and 
weighed  seventy  pounds,  the  exchange  working  out 
at  a  loss  of  30  per  cent. 

On  February  12th  we  set  off  on  the  second  stage  of 
eighteen  days,  following  the  northern  road  to  Guchen. 
We  decided  to  go  direct  by  the  Guchen  route  to  Kumul 
instead  of  by  the  southern  road,  which  passes  through 
Turf  an,  in  order  to  confine  our  attentions,  as  far  as  possible, 
to  Dzungaria.  In  spite  of  the  cold  and  the  deep  snow 
the  north  road  seemed  to  us  the  more  worthy  of  traversing, 
it  being  less  known  than  the  southern,  or  Turf  an  route. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  time  the  two  routes  are  about 
the  same  during  the  winter  months,  the  hindrances 
caused  by  a  heavy  snowfall  on  the  north  being  more 
than  counterbalanced  by  those  resulting  from  the  sand 
on  the  southern  road  ;  but  in  summer  the  Guchen  route 
is  greatly  to  be  recommended,  the  traveller  thus  avoiding 
the  excessively  hot  basin  of  Turf  an.  The  difference  in 
the  height  of  the  passes  over  to  the  Nan-lu  is  of  little 
consequence,  for,  although  the  Guchen  route  leads  over  a 
II— 9 


448  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

6,000  ft.  pass,  and  a  pass  of  only  3,500  ft.  lies  between 
Urumchi  and  Turfan,  yet  the  higher  pass  is  the  more 
easily  approached  from  either  side. 

A  misadventure  during  the  first  day's  journey  from 
Urumchi,  the  loss  of  a  tent-bale,  which  fell  off  the  cart, 
and  was  apparently  stolen  from  the  road  before  our 
men  could  pick  it  up,  as  well  as  the  attempt  on  the 
morrow,  made  b}^  a  member  of  our  escort,  to  steal  one 
of  our  horses,  showed  that,  even  close  to  the  capital,  no 
great  amount  ot  law  and  order  prevailed.  In  former 
days  this  road  was  feared  by  Chinamen  on  account  of 
highwaymen  and  thieves,  and  even  now  it  is  customary 
for  foreign  travellers  to  be  provided  with  an  escort  of  two 
mounted  men,  road-guards,  who  are  picketed  at  intervals 
along  the  route,  and  are  responsible  for  the  safety  of 
travellers  over  their  particular  portion.  The  danger, 
however,  is  more  imaginary  than  real,  owing  to  the  prompt 
action  taken  at  the  start  by  the  Chinese  officials.  Their 
method  of  dealing  with  the  robbers  was  most  effective, 
for  they  immediately  hamstrung  those  they  caught. 
The  pickets  are  supplied  from  the  Kalmuk  reserves,  or 
the  Chinese  rabble,  in  accordance  with  the  Chinese 
principle  that  **  you  do  not  turn  good  men  into  soldiers 
any  more  than  you  make  nails  out  of  good  iron." 

Skirting  close  under  the  foot-hills  of  the  massive 
Bogdo-ola  Range,  across  unbroken  snow-fields,  we  passed 
onwards  to  Guchen,  which  we  reached  in  three  days  of 
actual  travelling  from  Urumchi. 

Guchen,  or  Ku-ching — the  ancient  town — appeared  to 
be  a  large  and  busy  place,  which  might  be  described  as 
the  "  port  "  of  Urumchi,  for  it  entirely  owes  its  existence 
to  the  position  it  holds  as  the  terminus  of  all  trans- 
Gobi  trade.     Here,  the  overland  trade  from  Kalgan  and 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  449 

Kho-Kho-Koto,^  first  finds  rest  after  a  continuous  trek 
— one  long  desert  stage — of  fifteen  liundred  miles.  Here 
the  caravans,  which  outfitted  at  the  "  Blue  "  city  on  the 
northern  bend  of  the  Hoang  Ho,  deposit  their  loads,  and 
wait  until  a  sufficient  quantity  of  goods  has  been  collected 
for  transport  eastwards ;  the  merchandise  they  bring 
being  here  stored  and  sorted  for  further  distribution  by 
fresh  caravans,  which  work  the  transport  of  the  regions 
westwards  of  Guchen. 

It  is  a  far  cry  from  the  Pacific,  or  even  from  the 
industrial  centres  of  China,  to  Guchen,  yet  a  sufficient 
trade  exists  between  them  to  call  a  regular  caravan- 
trade  into  existence  and  to  employ  a  whole  army  of  men 
as  transport-riders.  Far  Western  China  is,  in  fact, 
in  closer  connexion  with  the  European  markets  by  way 
of  Chinese  ports  than  she  is  bj^  way  of  Russia.  Man- 
chester goods  compete  with  Russian  wares  in  the  bazaars 
of  Urumchi,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  goods  coming 
to  Sin-Kiang  from  the  east,  i.e.  from  Pekin  or  the  coast, 
are  distinguished  by  a  name  which  signifies  the  "  Best," 
as  opposed  to  those  which  come  from  the  west,  or  Russia  ; 
Urumchi  merchants  crack  up  their  wares  as  coming  from 
the  East.  Mr.  Hunter,  of  the  China  Inland  Mission,  who 
has  resided  a  long  time  in  the  capital,  told  me  that  he 
thought  more  English  goods  reach  Guchen  via  Pekin 
than  reach  Kashgar  via  India.  It  might  be  supposed  that 
the  cost  of  transport  would  be  prohibitive  ;  the  tariff 
being,  according  to  Petersen,  20  tael  per  167  lb.  A 
camel  carries  about  500  lb.  on  such  a  journey  ;  the  cost 
would,  therefore,  run  roughly  at  60  tael  or  £6  los.  per 
camel-load  ;    but  the  Urumchi  merchants  charge  quite 

^  Ku-ku-koto,  or  Kou-kou-koto,  also  called  Kwei-huaching,  the  start- 
ing-place of  the  caravans. 


450  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

enough  to  realize  a  handsome  profit  on  all  they  sell. 
The  rate  is  rather  high,  for  even  on  the  easy  road  from 
Guchen  to  Kulja  the  rate  is  15  tael  per  camel-load,  and 
the  distance  is  about  one-third  of  the  journey  from 
Pekin  to  Guchen. 

Time,  of  course,  is  no  object  ;  the  caravans  move  at 
the  rate  easiest  for  the  camels  ;  they  travel  continuously 
over  the  barren,  fodderless  region,  stopping  to  feed  and 
to  recuperate  when  they  reach  a  locality  with  ample 
food  and  water.  Any  time  between  six  months  and  a  year 
may  be  occupied  with  the  journey ;  this  depending  on 
the  quantity  of  fodder  the  desert  produces  at  the  season 
they  make  the  passage, — if  there  is  little  food  they  move 
more  slowly, — and  on  whether  they  decide  to  take  a 
direct  line  from  the  Hoang  Ho  to  Guchen  or  to  call  en  route 
at  Uliassutai  and  Kobdo  in  Northern  Mongolia.  The 
reason  is  obvious  for  using  the  trans-Mongolian  route 
for  the  transport  of  heavy  goods.  Large  caravans  can 
find  nourishment,  no  cost  is  entailed  on  account  of  food, 
the  track  is  level,  crosses  no  mountain-ranges,  is  not 
encumbered  with  other  traffic,  and  does  not  pass  through 
towns  where  delay  or  expense  can  be  incurred. 

Chinese  officials,  when  in  haste  to  return  to  Pekin, 
sometimes  travel  by  this  northern  route  in  preference 
to  the  southern.  By  using  carts  drawn  by  camels,  they 
can  make  the  entire  distance  between  Guchen  and  Kho- 
Kho-Koto  in  fifty  days.  The  discomfort  of  the  desert 
journey  forbids  all  except  those  in  great  haste  to  take 
this  line,  the  eight  months  spent  in  loitering  along  the 
southern  road  being  much  more  after  the  heart  of  the 
Celestial.  It  proves,  however,  that  there  is  a  good, 
hard,  direct  route  suitable  for  wheeled-traffic  between 
Sin-Kiang  and   the  capital   of   the  Empire,  practicable 


-"f^ 


^■p7 


DZUNGARIA    IN    MID-WINTER. 
Tne  Basin  of  Sairam  Nor. 


»5o] 


THE  LEADKi:  ol   IHE  CARAVAN. 


FROM   KULJA   TO   KUMUL  451 

on  account  of  the  presence  of  food  and  water,  and 
which,  m  the  event  of  an  opening  up  of  Northern 
MongoHa,  would  become  a  well-used  track. 

The  first  part  of  the  route  is  the  same  as  that  which 
connects  Urga  with  Pekin  ;  this  part  will  shortly  be 
superseded  by  a  railway.  In  Mid-Gobi,  half-way  to 
Urga,  the  track  branches  off  towards  the  north-west, 
passes  along  the  northern  edge  of  the  Gobi,  and  skirts 
the  lower  and  most  easterly  spurs  of  the  Mongolian 
Altai.  Water,  draining  from  these  ranges,  flows  out  and 
eventually  loses  itself  in  the  Gobi,  and  the  caravans  must 
keep  in  touch  with  them.  A  more  northerly  line  may 
be  taken,  to  include  Uliassutai  and  Kobdo,  in  which  case 
ample  fodder  and  water  will  be  found  ;  but  the  crossing  of 
the  eastern  part  of  the  Mongolian  Altai  necessitates  an 
ascent  to  8,000  ft.  above  sea-level ;  caravans,  therefore, 
more  frequently  take  the  direct  route  leading  to  Guchen. 

Guchen  is  now  the  terminus,  for  it  appears  to  have 
superseded  the  town  of  Barkul,  which  lies  a  hundred  and 
seventy  miles  to  the  east,  and  was  formerly  the  old 
**  port  "  for  steppe-bound  caravans.  According  to  the 
Russian  maps,  the  trans-Gobi  route  leads  from  the 
Southern  Altai  to  Barkul  and  thence  to  Guchen  ;  there 
is  no  signification  on  them  of  any  track  leading  direct  to 
Guchen  without  touching  at  Barkul,  yet  this  track  exists, 
and  though  for  ten  days'  journey  there  are  no  habitations, 
it  is  a  well-worn  road  over  hard  steppe,  and  is  staged  by 
guard-houses. 

In  winter,  when  food  is  scarce  along  the  high-road 
between  Guchen  and  Barkul,  and  when  snow  forms  a 
water-supply  on  the  desert  to  the  north,  the  caravans 
may  well  take  a  bee-line  from  Guchen  to  the  southern 
spurs  of  the  Altai ;    but  in  summer  they  must  needs 


452  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

go  due  north  on  leaving  Guchen,  until  they  pick  up 
the  wells  of  the  Baitik  Range  ;  they  then  turn  eastwards, 
eventually  joining  the  winter  route  near  the  Koko- 
undur  and  Aji  Bogdo  Mountains. 

In  these  days,  caravans  invariably  take  one  of  the 
desert  tracks  and  never  include  Barkul  in  their  itinerary  ; 
yet  we  were  told  that  they  did  so  in  the  old  days.  It 
has  been  said  that  this  route  was  abandoned  in  con- 
sequence of  the  Dungan  riots,  but  I  think  a  far  more 
likely  theory  as  to  the  cause  of  this  change  is  that  Guchen 
alone,  at  the  present  day,  possesses  a  neighbourhood 
suitable  for  the  feeding  of  large  herds  of  camels,  during 
their  enforced  stay  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town  where  they 
deposit  their  loads,  and  where  the  freight  for  the  return 
journey  is  collected  and  made  up.  Barkul,  for  instance, 
possesses  excellent  grazing  in  the  near  neighbourhood, 
but  the  Barkul  basin  supports  a  Government  stud  of 
horses,  the  grazing  being  thus  monopolized  by  thousands 
of  horses.  Urumchi,  on  the  other  hand,  is  surrounded  by 
cultivation,  and  there  is  no  place  for  camel-herds.  Guchen, 
then,  alone  remains,  and  when  approaching  this  town 
in  the  month  of  May,  on  our  urnetr  from  the  steppes 
to  the  north-east,  we  had  reason  to  appreciate  the 
facilities  afforded  by  that  region  as  a  resting-place  for 
the  camel-caravans. 

Here,  at  about  twenty  miles'  distance  from  the  town, 
was  a  land  covered  with  high  grass,  with  plenty  of  water 
at  a  depth  of  ten  feet  below  the  surface  ;  many  wells  had 
been  dug,  and  around  each  we  found  two  or  three  en- 
campments of  caravaneers.  Each  was  represented  by 
a  blue  or  white  canvas  tent,  the  temporary  home  of  the 
caravan-bashi,  or  leader,  around  which  were  piled  the 
bales  of  merchandise ;  we  counted  the  signs  of  twenty 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  453 

separate  "  outfits,"  the  whole  country  being  dotted  with 
the  camel-herds  feeding  vigorously  on  the  excellent 
grass.  Here  the  caravans  rest  until  they  receive  from 
the  agents  in  Guchen  sufficient  loads  to  enable  them  to 
start  back  on  the  ret  urn- journey.  The  caravans  never 
actually  enter  the  town  of  Guchen,  but  remain  outside, 
where  the  bales  are  gradually  collected  until  a  caravan- 
bashi  has  his  full  complement.  Then  the  slow  freight- 
train  starts  on  its  journey  eastwards. 

The  long,  snaky,  camel-caravan  is  such  a  feature 
of  the  trade-routes  of  Asia  and  so  large  a  number  of  men 
gain  a  living  by  caravanning  and  occupy  their  whole 
hves  in  moving  to  and  fro  across  the  heart  of  the  con- 
tinent with  their  charges — the  camels,  that  this  allu- 
sion to  camel-transport  would  be  incomplete  without 
a  description  of  a  caravan  on  the  march.  We  met 
many  of  a  prodigious  size,  slowly  moving  along  the  well- 
worn  routes,  and  all  presenting  much  the  same  appear- 
ance. The  approach  of  a  caravan  was  heralded  by  the 
far-away  sound  of  low-toned  bells,  wind-borne  across 
miles  of  desert,  and  mellowed  by  distance  ;  an  hour  might 
easily  elapse  before  any  sign  of  it  would  appear. 
First  prowled  the  dogs — guards  of  the  camp — of  a  breed 
kept  and  highly  valued  as  watch-dogs  ;  they  were  black, 
shaggy  animals  of  a  sturdy  build.  All  day  they 
roamed  at  will,  but  at  night  their  duty  was  to  watch 
over  the  bales  of  merchandise  ;  after  dark  they  became 
uncommonly  savage,  and  any  one  foolish  enough  to 
approach  an  encampment  on  foot  and  unarmed  would 
be  certain  of  a  bad  mauling.  Even  when  on  horseback, 
it  is  often  necessary  to  tuck  one's  legs  well  up  to  escape 
their  teeth.  Following  the  dogs,  at  the  head  of  a  string  of 
camels,  slouched  a  big  Mongol,  with   hands  behind   his 


454  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

back,  eyes  on  the  ground,  and  apparently  with  no  thought 
beyond  his  feet.     He  had  slouched  all  his  life,   across 
Asia  and  back  again,  and  would  probably  continue  to  do 
so  until  he  could  slouch  no  longer.     He  was  clothed 
almost  entirely  in  sheepskins  and  felt ;  even  his  trousers 
were  made  of  sheepskin — with  the  wool  inside,  and  these 
our  interpreter  persisted  in  calling  "  mutton-trousers." 
These  caravan-men  are  of  a  hardy  breed,  their  faces 
burnt  to  the  colour  and  consistency  of  a  walnut  by 
constant  exposure  to  the  fierce  heat,  biting  cold,  and 
continuous  winds  of  the  Gobi.     They  have  a  character- 
istic movement  peculiar  to  their  calling  :    the  body  is 
bent  slightly  forward,  and  they  drag  their  legs  with  an 
effortless  scrape  at  a  pace  which  would  kill  an  English- 
man ;  so  slow,  indeed,  that  they  seem  scarcely  to  move 
their  feet  at  all,  and  so  dully  and  so  hopelessly  that  it  is 
easy  to  understand  why  Asia  has  lagged  behind  in  the 
world's  progress.     It  is  nearly  always  possible  to  pick  out 
these  men  amongst  the  cosmopolitan  crowd  in  a  Central 
Asia  bazaar.     The  monotony  of  their  lives  would  be  hard 
to  exaggerate  ;    it  consists  of  trudging  at  the  head  of  a 
string  of  camels  for  months  over  a  barren  country — desti- 
tute of  towns  or  habitation,  with  every  feature  of  which 
they  must  be  thoroughly  familiar.     All  they  have  to 
look  forward  to  is  a  short  stay  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
a  town,  while  the  bales  are  being  collected  for  another 
journey.     The  only  occupation  we  saw  them  indulging 
in  was  the  spinning  into  coarse  twine  of  the  camels' -hair, 
which  they  collected  in  the  spring  when  the  animals  cast 
their  long,  woolly  winter-coats. 

The  work  of  the  men,  however,  must  be  heavy,  in 
spite  of  their  slowness  on  trek,  for  the  entire  caravan 
has  to  be  loaded  and  unloaded  every  twenty-four  hours. 


454] 


BACTRIAX    CAMliL. 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  455 

and  the  camels  have  to  be  taken  out  to  graze  in  the 
bitterly  cold  nights.  There  were  generally  twenty 
camels  to  the  charge  of  each  man,  an  average  caravan 
being  made  up  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  camels,  under 
six  cameleers  and  a  caravan-bashi,  who  alone  was 
mounted  and  who  rode  at  the  rear,  armed  with  an  old 
"blunder-buss." 

After  the  leading  cameleer  came  the  camels,  slow, 
stately  and  cynical,  twenty  in  a  string — tied  nose 
to  tail,  and  carrying  full  loads  of  500  lb.  The 
heavily  built  Bactrian, — the  weight-carrier,  the  freight- 
train, — compares  poorly  with  the  fast  dromedary — the 
desert-express  ;  yet  amongst  all  the  various  means  of 
transport  used  in  Asia  the  Bactrian  camel  holds  first 
place.  You  may  find  him  from  China  to  the  Caspian  ; 
you  may  safely  depend  upon  him  for  the  crossing 
of  a  terrible  sand-desert,  and  you  may  meet  him  at 
18,000  ft.  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  on  a  Himalayan  pass. 
He  is  ubiquitous,  adaptable,  and,  in  fact,  indispensable 
to  the  traveller  and  merchant  in  Asia.  The  Bactrian 
camel  is  in  his  true  home  in  Mongolia.  The  finest  breeds, 
according  to  Prjevalsky,  come  from  the  Ala  Shan  district 
in  the  south  ;  but  I  am  doubtful  whether  equally  fine 
types  do  not  exist  in  the  excellent  pastures  of  the  north- 
west, on  the  slopes  of  the  Mongolian  Altai.  Heavy  loads 
and  short  stages  is  the  order  for  caravans  bound  for  far- 
distant  regions  ;  and  whenever  food  is  found  in  ex- 
ceptional quantity  a  halt  of  several  days  is  often  made, 
in  order  to  rest  and  feed  up  the  camels. 

I  have  diverged  from  my  narrative,  by  describing 
the  ways  and  means  of  communication  between  Guchen 
and  the  Far  East,  for  it  is  the  camels  and  the  caravans 
which  are  essentially  the  features  of  this  town  situated 


456  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

on  the  edge  of  the  desert.  There  was  httle  else  of 
interest  to  be  noted,  the  town  itself  existing,  for  the 
most  part,  as  a  sorting-house  for  goods  in  transit.  Its 
surroundings  were  exceptionally  fine,  with  the  illimitable 
plains  stretching  to  the  north,  east,  and  west,  and  with  a 
background  composed  of  the  giant  peaks  of  the  Bogdo-ola. 
It  was  up  to  this  point  that  the  most  recent  traveller, 
Professor  Merzbacher,  had  carried  on  his  systematic 
exploration  of  the  Tian  Shan,  but  beyond  this  point 
eastwards  he  had  not  worked  ;  here,  therefore,  I  in- 
tended to  take  up  my  surveying  in  order  to  continue  it 
to  the  furthermost  limit  of  the  Karlik  Tagh,  some  three 
hundred  miles  to  the  east.  The  season  of  the  year, 
and  the  deep  snow,  compelled  us  to  put  off  any 
idea  we  had  of  travelling  in  the  mountains  until  a 
much  later  date.  We  had  to  content  ourselves  with 
the  wonderful  spectacle  which  this  range — under  fresh 
snow — presented  to  us  with  a  desert  foreground  of  forty 
miles  ;  we  determined,  therefore,  to  penetrate  its  upper 
valleys  and  visit  its  sacred  lake  on  our  return  to  these 
regions  during  the  following  summer. 

In  strange  contrast  to  the  snows  on  the  south  of 
Guchen  were  the  sands  on  the  north.  Since  leaving 
Urumchi  we  had  noticed  a  long  line  of  sand-dunes,  running 
parallel  to  our  route  on  the  north,  at  a  distance  of  about 
fifteen  miles.  These  belonged  to  an  outlying  portion  of 
the  great  sand-belt  of  Central  Dzungaria,  which  here 
approaches  to  within  a  day's  journey  of  the  southern 
border-ranges.  The  heart  of  Dzungaria  had  been  crossed 
by  the  Russian  explorers  Prjevalsky  and  Kozloff,  but 
we  had  little  information  as  to  the  character  of  the 
central  plains  or  as  to  the  type  of  sand-desert  found 
in  their  midst ;    we  knew  nothing  as  to  the  extent  of 


FROM   KULJA  TO    KUMUL  457 

sedentary  life  and  cultivation  towards  the  north,  nor 
had  we  any  knowledge  of  a  nomadic  population  in 
those  regions. 

We  vaguely  imagined  those  central  deserts  to  be 
untenanted  by  nomads,  there  being  no  indication  of  a 
water-supply  ;  we  had  not  counted,  however,  upon  the 
possibility  of  the  existence  of  winter  residents,  depend- 
ent upon  snow  for  their  drinking-water.  In  Guchen, 
noticing  many  Kirghiz  in  the  bazaars,  we  inquired  who 
they  were,  and  they  told  us  proudly  that  they  were  of 
the  Kirei  clan,  supplementing  this  information  by  adding^ 
that  they  were  "  Kum  dan  " — from  the  sands.  This  led 
us  to  make  further  inquiries,  and  we  eventually  made 
friends  with  their  representative  in  the  town.  Each 
different  tribe  or  race  in  the  cosmopolitan  towns  of  Inner 
Asia  has  a  head-man  to  represent  it  and  to  look  after 
its  interests  in  all  matters  ;  the  nomads  of  the  sur- 
rounding districts  have  also  a  similar  figure-head  whose 
duties  partake  of  those  of  a  "  consul."  The  "  Shangea," 
or  representative  of  the  Kirei  in  Guchen,  was  a  man  of 
wealth  and  importance,  who  showed  us  hospitality  and 
furthered  our  plans  for  a  visit  to  the  "  sands." 

On  February  19th,  in  company  with  a  Kirei,  whom 
we  had  to  "  mount,"  for  the  desert  nature  of  inner  Dzun- 
garia  does  not  allow  the  nomads  to  bring  their  horses 
with  them  on  their  winter  migrations,  we  rode  out  of 
Guchen  to  the  north-east,  and  in  five  hours  reached  the 
edge  of  the  sand-belt.  Here  was  a  guard-house  called 
Kuntiza,  and  here  the  track  divided,  one  going  north 
across  the  sand  to  the  Baitik  Mountains  and  on  to  the 
Irtish  and  the  Altai,  while  the  other  followed  along  the 
edge  of  the  sands  to  the  north-east.  The  former  of  these 
was  a  level  road,  practicable  for  carts,  with  forage,  fuel, 


458  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

and  water  in  sufficient  quantity,  and  formed  a  regular 
way  of  communication  between  the  Irtish  district  and 
Southern  Dzungaria.  We  noticed  that  it  was  well  used 
by  camels  and  carts  carrying  coal  to  Urumchi,  from 
some  mines  situated  three  stages  from  Guchen  on  the 
road  to  the  Baitik,  the  coal  being  found  in  great  quantity, 
near  the  surface,  on  the  northern  edge  of  the  sands. 

Between  Guchen  and  the  sands  is  an  area  of  semi- 
cultivated  land.  Many  small  streams,  unfrozen  even 
at  this  season,  flowed  across  the  steppe  and  ended  in 
the  sand-belt,  beside  which  were  situated  a  few  scattered 
farms  and  Chinese  villages.  None  of  these  streams 
flowed  into  the  Olon  Nor  basin,  to  the  north-west  of 
Guchen,  but  lost  themselves  in  the  sand.  Irrigation- 
canals  and  water-courses  could  be  traced  amongst  the 
outermost  dunes,  while  the  amount  of  vegetation  and 
trees  on  the  sand-hills  showed  that  water  was  close 
under  the  surface.  The  sands  seem  to  have  encroached 
on  the  cultivated  area,  for  we  found  a  few  ruined 
houses  surrounded  by  sand-hills;  this  made  us  pay 
rather  more  attention  to  the  story  told  us  by  a  Chanto 
who  had  lived  twenty-five  years  at  Sin-tai,  a  small  village 
on  the  high-road  near  the  south  end  of  Olon  Nor, 
who  said  he  knew  of  an  old  Kalmuk  town  called 
Khopuza,  to  the  north-east  of  the  lake,  which  was  buried 
in  sand 

Trees  existed  only  around  the  villages,  and  near  the 
water-courses  ;  the  country  as  a  whole  was  barren,  form- 
ing a  pasture-land  suitable  only  for  the  feeding  of  camel- 
herds  as  described  earlier  in  the  chapter.  The  scattered 
nature  of  the  farms,  which  were  all  Chinese,  showed 
the  difference  in  character  between  the  Celestial  and  the 
Chanto.     Here  were  Chinese  families  living  ten  miles 


TVI'L    UF    KIREl    KIRGHIZ. 


KIREI    AND    DROXCO. 


458J 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  459 

away  from  their  nearest  neighbour,  when  apparently 
there  was  ample  room  for  them  nearer  the  villages.  Had 
the  colonists  been  of  Chanto  race  they  would  have  worked 
together  and  formed  small  communities ;  but  the  in- 
dependent Chinese,  possessing  more  initiative,  started 
ranches  on  their  own  account. 

On  entering  the  sand-belt  we  found  that  the  dunes 
were  well  covered  with  tamarisk  and  small  saxaul  ;  as 
far  as  the  drainage  extended  were  reeds  and  small 
poplars  in  the  hollows;  the  dunes  lay  across  our 
track,  having  been  formed  by  south-westerly  winds. 
We  rested  at  a  solitary  Kirghiz  yurt  that  night,  and  the 
next  day  passed  over  a  similar  country  for  several 
hours,  until  reaching  the  northern  edge  of  the  sand- 
belt.  At  this  point  the  sands  were  about  twelve  miles 
across, — in  a  direct  line  north  and  south ;  farther  east 
the  zone  narrows  down  to  three  or  four  miles,  and 
then  runs  out  in  a  wedge-shaped  tongue  until  it  ends 
abruptly  about  thirty  miles  east  of  the  Karaul  Kuntiza  ; 
we  noted  at  once  that  this  sand-area  was  wrongly  defined 
on  the  existing  maps. 

On  reaching  the  northern  edge  of  the  sand  we  entered 
a  dense  forest  of  saxual ;  travelling  through  this  for 
several  hours  towards  the  east,  we  reached  a  group 
of  ten  yurts,  one  of  many  small  encampments  of  Kirei, 
snugly  ensconced  amongst  the  saxaul  trees  or  in 
hollows  in  the  dunes.  This  was  the  home  of  our  guide, 
who  in  his  of&cial  capacity  was  "  over  fifty  yurts," 
he  being  responsible  for  their  good  conduct  and  the 
payment  of  their  taxes.  The  people  presented  the  usual 
aspect  of  healthy,  clean-living,  well-to-do  nomads  of 
Mussulman  faith ;  not  fanatical,  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
showing  any  desire  to  offer  their  services  to  travellers 


46o  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

unless  tempted  by  the  hope  of  a  large  reward,  or  unless 
compelled  to  do  so  by  order  of  a  superior.  They  seldom 
came  in  contact  with  the  sedentary  people,  since  the 
whole  extent  of  their  territory  touches  on  only  two 
settled  localities — Guchen  in  the  south,  and  Sharasume 
in  the  north. 

A  description  of  the  Kirei  and  their  range  has  already 
been  given  in  Chapter  XIT  This  branch  of  the  clan 
belonged  rightly  to  the  Baitik  Mountains,  and  migrated 
southwards  only  under  stress  of  bad  seasons.  Accord- 
ing to  report,  the  last  few  winters  had  been  exception- 
ally severe,  as  was  the  case  with  the  present  winter,  snow 
lying  deeper  than  had  been  seen  for  years  ;  consequently 
the  Kirei  had  come  southwards  in  larger  numbers,  and 
had  even  tried  to  establish  themselves  permanently  on 
the  Bogdo-ola  Range  ;  in  this  attempt  they  had  been 
frustrated  by  the  Chinese.  From  this  encampment  I  ex- 
plored the  sand-dunes,  while  Miller  hunted  the  "  kulon," 
or  wild-ass,  on  the  steppes  to  the  north. 

This  sand-area  was  chiefly  composed  of  small,  station- 
ary dunes,  well  covered  with  growth ;  but  on  the  eastern 
edge  it  had  thrown  out  a  narrow  tongue  of  high,  moving 
sand-hills.  These  hills,  with  their  back,  as  it  were,  to  the 
stationary  dunes,  ran  out  eastwards  until  they  faded 
away  to  nothing.  Immediately  to  their  north,  along  the 
edge  of  the  sand-hills,  was  a  zone  of  fine  saxaul  forest, 
where  the  trees  grew  to  a  height  of  20  ft.  The  forest  did 
not  extend  far  on  to  the  dunes,  nor  were  the  trees  so  well 
developed  there.  Whether  the  existence  of  this  heavy 
growth  had  caused  the  gradual  heaping  up  of  the  sand 
to  the  south  and  south-west  it  is  difficult  to  say  for 
certain  ;  the  prevailing  wind  and  the  size  of  the  dunes 
suggest  it,  for,  contrary  to  the   observations  of   other 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  461 

travellers,  I  noticed  that  the  dunes  showed  the  prevalence 
of  a  west,  and  not  an  east,  wind.  The  moving  dunes  were 
all  steep-sided  towards  the  east,  and  long-backed  towards 
the  west,  and  during  the  three  days  we  were  on  them 
the  wind  came  from  the  south-west  or  west.  The  early 
mornings  were  often  characterized  by  strong  south  winds, 
which  veered  round  to  the  west  during  the  day. 

Although  the  nature  of  the  stationary  dunes  was  the 
same  throughout,  that  of  the  moving  sands  varied  con- 
siderably. Some  dunes  presented  the  phenomena  of 
enclosed,  crescent-shaped  pits,  the  sandy  hollows  of 
which  lay  50  ft.  below  the  average  level  of  the  sands. 
There  was  rarely  any  trough  between  the  lines  of  the 
dunes,  for  the  arms  they  had  thrown  out  had  joined  up 
with  other  dunes,  and  I  was  thus  enabled  to  travel  "up- 
stream," as  it  were,  or  transversely  to  the  lines  of  the 
sand-hills,  without  any  effort.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the 
formation  was  often  due  to  varying  winds.  I  noticed 
repeatedly  that  the  hollows  between  the  dunes  had  been 
banked  up  by  miniature  dunes  formed  from  the  south  ; 
and  on  one  occasion  I  found  a  high  dune  formed  by 
a  south  wind,  situated  on  the  top  of  an  ordinary  dune 
formed  by  a  west  wind. 

A  considerable  movement  of  sand  was  in  progress — 
for  while  the  stationary  dunes  were  snow-covered,  these 
moving  dunes  were  practically  bare  ;  a  careful  examina- 
tion showing  that  the  snow  had  been  blown  as  the  sand 
was  blown,  and  that  in  certain  places  where  it  had 
collected  were  successive  layers  of  snow  and  sand.  On 
the  crest  of  some  of  the  highest  dunes  were  several 
strata  of  snow  and  sand,  showing  how  each  fall  of  snow 
had  been  covered  up  by  a  succeeding  movement  of  sand. 
The  stationary  dunes  were  all  of  an  insignificant  size. 


462  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

and  very  malformed  ;  the  moving  sands  were  heaped 
up  to  a  greater  height, — I  estimate  the  highest  dunes 
at  100  ft.  from  crest  to  hollow, — these  keeping  their 
ranks  and  preserving  their  form  with  the  monotonous 
precision  peculiar  to  wind-blown  sands. 

Other  information  we  acquired  through  this  visit 
to  the  Kirei  related  to  the  first  spurs  of  the  Altai  Moun- 
tains, which  gave  us  some  conception  of  the  nature 
of  the  gap  of  a  hundred  miles  which  separates  these 
mountain-systems,  namely,  the  Altai  and  the  Tian  Shan, 
as  represented  by  the  Baitik  and  Bogdo-ola  ranges. 
From  our  encampment,  on  a  clear  morning,  we  could  just 
discern  the  snows  of  the  Baitik  Mountains,  an  outlying 
range  belonging  to  the  Altai  group.  This  range,  accord- 
ing to  the  information  given  by  the  nomads  who  call  it 
their  home,  is  an  isolated  mass,  not  actually  reaching  to 
a  summer  snow-line,  but  sufficiently  high  to  afford  good 
grazing  ;  water  is  found  in  small  springs,  rising  in  the 
valleys,  and  flowing  a  short  distance  before  drying  up ; 
the  forests  on  the  northern  flanks  consist  of  poplar 
and  alder  in  the  valley  bottoms,  and  larch  on  the 
heights  above.  Taken  altogether  the  description  of  the 
home  of  these  Kirei  seemed  most  in\dting,  and  did  not  in 
any  way  tally  with  the  manner  in  which  it  was  depicted 
on  the  maps,  as,  lacking  in  names,  in  waterings,  and  in 
everything  that  suggested  an  inhabited  area. 

The  water-supply,  the  Kirei  told  us,  is  ample  for 
the  nomads  who  live  there  during  the  dry  est  months,  and 
is  even  sufficient  to  support  a  small  population  of 
Torgut-Kalm.uk  residents,  who  never  move  as  the  Kirei 
do.  The  Torguts  live  a  semi-nomadic  existence,  growing 
a  httle  barley,  and  grazing  their  flocks,  but  still  occupy- 
ing yurts  in  preference  to  houses  ;    they  are  sufficiently 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  463 

well  off  in  flocks  and  herds,  but  are  by  no  means  on  an 
equality  with  the  Kirei.  We  find,  therefore,  that  the 
plains  which  separate  the  Tian  Shan  from  the  Altai  are, 
at  this  point,  composed  of  a  hard,  barren  steppe,  broken 
by  a  narrow  zone  of  sand-dunes ;  on  the  south  of  this 
is  the  agricultural  district,  while  on  the  north  lies  a 
partially  used  nomads' -land.  The  average  altitude  of 
this  section  of  the  gap  between  the  Bogdo-ola  and 
Baitik  Mountains  is  2,200  ft.  above  sea-level. 

On  our  return  to  Guchen  we  engaged  carts  from  a 
Chanto  owner  and  set  off  eastwards  for  Kumul.  It  being 
now  February  24th,  the  thaw  had  set  in,  and  we 
realized  the  time  and  trouble  we  had  saved  by  ac- 
complishing the  greater  part  of  our  journey  eastwards 
in  midwinter.  East  of  Guchen  the  snow  lay  very 
deep,  and  it  was  as  much  as  the  three  horses  could  do 
to  drag  the  heavy  Chinese  carts  up  the  long  incline 
to  the  Tou-shui  plateau,  across  which  lay  the  road  to 
Kumul. 

On  reaching  the  small  town  of  Mu-li-kho,  two  stages 
to  the  east  of  Guchen,  we  endeavoured  to  get  some 
knowledge  of  the  mountain-region  to  our  south  by  making 
a  lateral  journey  from  the  high  road,  and  we  actually 
spent  an  entire  day  trying  to  get  round  an  official  who 
refused  to  supply  us  with  a  guide,  on  account  of  his 
being  quite  certain  that  we  should  succumb  if  we  attempted 
to  travel  in  the  mountains  at  this  season,  and  that  he 
in  consequence  would  be  beheaded  !  After  a  dinner 
given  in  our  honour,  at  which  he  consumed  prodigious 
quantities  of  Chinese  spirit,  he  became  sufficiently  affable 
to  supply  us,  on  our  own  responsibility,  with  two  mounted 
men  as  guides.  Sending  the  carts  along  the  high-road, 
we  rode  southwards  into  the  hills  which  lie  within  a  short 
II— 10 


464  SOUTHERN  DZUNGARIA 

distance  of  Mu-li-kho;  then,  turning  east,  we  traversed 
the  region  between  this  point  and  Ta-shih-tu,  following 
a  chain  of  farms  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  mouths  of 
the  valleys  some  ten  to  fifteen  miles  to  the  south  of  the 
road.  Farther  into  the  hills  we  could  not  go,  owing  to 
deep  snow  and  lack  of  inhabitants ;  but  even  these 
few  daj^s  on  the  foot-hills  gave  us  a  clearer  insight  into 
the  nature  of  the  eastern  Bogdo-ola  and  its  varied  in- 
habitants, the  region  appearing  to  be  a  sort  of  Tom 
Tiddler's  ground. 

A  wide  expanse  of  out-lying  foot-hills  shut  off  from 
the  high  road  the  main  Bogdo-ola  and  all  signs 
of  existing  habitation ;  but,  on  crossing  the  first  spurs, 
pleasantly  situated  settlements  and  farmsteads  came 
into  sight.  We  first  visited  Bain-kho,  a  small  Chinese 
village  where  we  found  a  little  cultivation,  and  later 
in  the  same  day  we  reached  Borstan — a  few  scattered 
farms  belonging  to  Chantos  and  Chinese.  The  Chantos 
were  emigrants  from  Turf  an ;  but,  as  nobody  would 
emigrate  of  choice  to  this  region  in  preference  to  a  life 
in  Turf  an,  we  asked  an  old  Turfanlik  what  brought  him 
to  these  parts.  The  old  man  replied  that  he  had  lost  his 
land  in  Turfan  through  a  Chinese  money-lender,  into  whose 
clutches  he  had  fallen  during  a  bad  season.  He  bewailed 
the  fate  of  having  to  live  in  a  country  more  or  less 
dependent  upon  rain,  whereas  in  the  Turfan  there  was  a 
constant  supply  of  water  from  wells  and  kariz.  Yet  the 
rainfall  on  this  portion  of  the  Bogdo-ola  must  be  consider- 
able, for  the  forest-zone  continues  in  a  broad  belt  along 
the  main  ridge  half  a  day's  journey  to  the  south.  The 
water-courses,  however,  had  the  appearance  of  being  full 
only  at  spring-flood.  Ice  formed  the  winter's  water-supply, 
in  order  to  accumulate  which  the  farmers  led  off  water 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  465 

from  their  irrigation-canals  and  filled  up  any  depression 
that  chanced  to  be  handy,  allowing  the  water  to  freeze 
solid. 

East  of  Borstan  the  main  ridge  of  the  Bogdo-ola  sank 
to  a  lower  altitude  and  lost  itself  in  a  jumble  of  wild, 
formless  hills  which  stretched  eastwards  as  far  as  the 
eye  could  see.  To  have  entered  the  hills  at  this  season 
would  have  greatly  increased  our  difficulties,  so,  skirting 
along  under  the  foot-hills,  we  rested  another  night  at  the 
house  of  a  Chanto,  or  rather  a  Sart,  for  our  host  had 
found  his  way  hither  from  the  Ferghana  of  Russian 
Turkestan.  Living  a  semi-nomadic  existence  in  a  yurt 
during  the  summer,  and  in  a  house  during  the  winter, 
herding  cattle  and  growing  grain,  our  host  was  probabty 
making  a  small  fortune  on  which  he  would  retire  eventu- 
ally to  his  own  country.  He  had  several  advantages,  for 
being  a  Russian  subject,  he  could  not  be  turned  out  by 
the  Chinese,  and,  having  taken  a  Kirghiz  girl  to  wife,  he 
received  much  useful  aid  in  matters  relating  to  cattle 
and  sheep  ranching,  besides  being  thus  placed  on  good 
terms  with  the  Kirei  nomads. 

Truly  these  ranges  are  inhabited  by  a  nondescript  lot 
of  people  ;  near  to  our  host,  who  hailed  from  across  the 
Russo-Chinese  border,  was  a  settlement  of  discontents 
from  the  kingdom  of  Kumul, — Kumuliks  who  had  escaped 
from  the  serfdom  of  their  Khan,  and  who  preferred  a  freer 
if  somewhat  harder  life  in  this  region  ;  besides  these  were 
occasional  encampments  of  Kirei  Kirghiz,  wanderers 
from  the  far  north,  already  beginning  to  start  on 
their  march  back  to  their  real  home.  No  wonder 
these  nomads  attempt  to  settle  permanently  on  these 
ranges, — ^forming,  as  they  do,  the  most  remarkable  winter 
resort  for  shepherds  and  their  flocks,  these  rolling  foot- 


466  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

hills  being  free  of  snow  at  a  season  when  the  plains 
below  were  deeply  covered.  This  favourable  district, 
although  scarcel}/  used  at  the  present  time,  is  capable  of 
supporting  a  far  larger  population.  Its  value  in  earlier 
days  is  attested  by  the  presence  of  many  old  tumuli,  as  well 
as  a  few  grave-mounds  surrounded  by  upright  stones. 

On  reaching  the  main  road  at  Ta-shih-tu,  and  finding 
that  our  carts  had  not  yet  arrived,  we  decided  to  spend 
a  few  days  in  the  neighbourhood,  Miller  hunting  wild- 
sheep,  which  were  fairly  numerous,  while  I  mapped  the 
most  important  features  of  the  plateau  to  our  south. 
The  thaw,  which  had  set  in  a  few  days  previously,  was 
now  increased  by  a  strong,  hot  wind  from  the  south,  its 
effect  on  the  country  being  magical ;  the  roads  became 
quagmires,  streams  began  to  flow  down  the  valleys,  snow- 
fields — ^previously  hard  enough  to  support  the  traveller — 
now  became  serious  obstacles,  and  the  bare,  frozen  soil 
changed  into  mud.  We  were  not  surprised,  therefore, 
when  the  carts  turned  up  two  days  late,  having  taken 
three  and  a  half  days  to  do  two  ordinary  stages  and 
having  lost  one  horse,  which  died  on  the  road. 

Ta-shih-tu  consists  of  only  a  few  houses,  but  the 
name  will  often  occur  in  these  pages,  there  being  no  other 
by  which  to  identify  this  locality,  where  the  northern 
high-road  turns  to  the  south-east  and  crosses  the  water- 
shed between  Dzungaria  and  Chinese  Turkestan,  and 
where  a  side-track  leads  onwards  to  Barkul.  The 
actual  plateau  which  the  high-road  crosses,  and  which 
is  an  important  geographical  feature,  is  also  nameless  ; 
I  shall,  therefore,  call  it  the  Tou-shui  plateau,  from  the 
halting-place  of  that  name  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
watershed. 

Ta-shih-tu  stands  at  an  altitude  of  5,000  ft.,   and 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  467 

from  this  point  the  plateau  rises  in  an  easy  incline  to 
its  average  altitude  of  6,000  ft.  ;  the  plateau  is  crowned 
with  a  bewildering  maze  of  isolated  crests  and  summits 
which  form  in  themselves  a  wild  turmoil  of  hill-country, 
most  difficult  to  map  ;  I  found  it  hard  to  gain  even  a 
broad  idea  of  the  essential  features.  Looking  westwards, 
a  higher  ridge  showed  where  the  first  spurs  of  the  Bogdo- 
ola  rose  out  of  the  plateau  ;  eastwards  the  jumble  of  hills 
continued  as  far  as  eye  could  reach  without  any  indica- 
tion of  the  existence  of  the  Barkul  range. 

To  climb  on  to  the  watershed  necessitated  only  a 
rise  of  1,000  ft.,  but  the  track  was  in  so  bad  a  condition 
that  the  carts  had  to  be  taken  up  one  at  a  time  with  the 
aid  of  five  horses.  We  crossed  the  watershed, — character- 
ized by  a  broad,  open,  plateau-like  summit, — and  began 
immediately  to  descend  into  a  gorge  surrounded  by 
rough  hill-country  of  most  amazing  barrenness.  The 
whole  of  the  next  day  we  were  passing  through  a  winding 
gorge  between  naked  crags,  remarkable  for  their  tilted 
and  sometimes  even  perpendicular  strata.  Not  a 
tussock  of  grass,  not  a  vestige  of  growth  relieved  the 
blank  landscape,  which  was  composed  of  black  shale 
slopes,  sterile  ridges,  and  valleys  choked  with  denuded 
matter.  In  spite  of  the  thaw  we  found  only  one  tiny 
spring  of  water.  This  sudden  change  of  climate  and  of  the 
physical  conditions  was  emphasized  by  the  fact  that  w'e 
were  now  beyond  the  snow-zone  ;  quite  unexpectedly 
we  found  ourselves  surrounded  by  a  landscape  of  intense 
blackness  instead  of  glistening  white.  During  one  day's 
journey  we  passed  out  of  Dzungaria  into  Chinese  Turkestan, 
and  on  entering  the  latter  we  immediately  came  across 
an  example  of  its  most  important  characteristic,  namely, 
the  gradual  process  of  desiccation  to  which  it  is  subjected, 


468  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

and  which  stamps  the  entire  region  with  an  undeniable 
character  of  its  own. 

The  change  was  so  sudden,  so  complete,  that  we  did 
not  hesitate  in  forming  an  opinion  that  the  desiccation 
at  work  on  the  south  side  of  the  Tian  Shan  does  not 
extend  into  Dzungaria.  B}^  a  curious  chance  our 
route  at  first  led  us  into  a  small,  self-contained  basin,  a 
kind  of  miniature  Turkestan,  with  its  special  features  and 
peculiar  conditions  reproduced  for  us  on  a  miniature 
scale. 

This  isolated  basin,  which  I  will  call  after  the  guard- 
house and  inn  situated  in  its  centre — Chi-ku-ching,  lay 
immediately  below  us  as  we  left  the  gorge  in  the  moun- 
tains and  entered  the  plain.  It  is  a  small  basin ;  its  area 
could  be  covered  by  that  of  Middlesex.  On  the  north 
it  is  bordered  by  the  declivities  of  the  Tou-shui  plateau 
— where  a  small  amount  of  water  drains  into  the  basin 
at  certain  seasons  of  the  year ;  on  the  south  a  semicircle 
of  low  desert  hills  connect  up  with  the  northern  wall  and 
render  the  basin  complete.  The  road  from  Kumul  to 
Turfan  crosses  it  from  east  to  west,  Chi-ku-ching  forming 
the  junction  of  the  Guchen  road.  The  group  of  three 
or  four  houses  and  the  rather  brackish  water-supply 
found  at  a  depth  of  20  ft.  interested  us  little,  the  chief 
feature  of  the  basin  being  the  unmistakable  signs  of 
desiccation  in  actual  progress. 

The  centre  of  the  basin,  at  its  lowest  level,  was  covered 
with  tamarisk  mounds.  These  mounds  stood  as  high 
as  20-25  ^^■>  ^^d  were  perfect  t3^pes  of  aeolian  action — 
cut  away  underneath  by  persistent  winds,  and  increased 
above  by  the  deposition  of  blown  sand,  with  a  scanty 
growth  of  tamarisk  on  the  summit.  According  to  Pro- 
fessor Huntington's  theory  as  to  the  approximate  age  of 


u 

6 

^ 


X 


o 


■^*.1* 


• » I  •  ■  •       ■  / 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  469 

tamarisk  mounds,  these  should  fall  under  the  category 
of  mounds  of  from  500  to  1,000  years  old. 

In  addition  to  the  tamarisk  mounds  was  a  forest  of 
stunted,  unhealthy  poplars  with  the  dry  stumps  of  many 
dead  trees, — another  obvious  proof  of  a  deficient  rainfall. 
Many  trees  were  already  dead,  others  were  giving  up 
the  struggle,  for  the  stamp  of  decay  was  on  them,  and 
they  were  doomed  to  a  slow  and  lingering  death.  In 
comparison  with  the  desert  surroundings  the  forest 
seemed  out  of  place;  it  was  as  if  the  earth  had 
been  blasted,  and  some  of  the  vegetation  alone  had 
managed  to  survive.  Those  that  had  succumbed  stood 
hke  ghosts,  their  withered  stems  and  twisted  branches 
preserved  by  the  dry  atmosphere.  It  was  a  depressing 
scene,  and  we  gloomily  picked  our  way  in  and  out  amongst 
the  crooked,  white-trunked  giants  which  must  once 
have  given  welcome  shade  to  the  traveller. 

The  poplar  forest,  which  had  once  covered  the  greater 
part  of  the  basin,  was  now  restricted  to  the  northern 
edge,  where  there  was  still  a  small  number  of  living 
trees.  The  living  poplars  were  small,  of  about  30  ft.  in 
height,  with  a  meagre  growth  of  branches  at  the  summit 
of  a  bare  trunk;  the  dead  stumps,  however,  showed  an 
immense  girth,  far  surpassing  any  of  the  great  poplars 
of  Russian  Turkestan.  The  present  condition  of  the 
tamarisk  mounds  and  the  dead  and  dying  forests  of  the 
basin  of  Chi-ku-ching  made  us  realize  that  no  such  factors 
producing  such  devastating  results  were  at  work  in 
Dzungaria.  We  recalled  the  poplar  forests  near  Manas 
as  being  in  a  comparatively  healthy  condition ;  we  could 
not  remember  even  one  tamarisk  mound  ;  and  when, 
during  our  subsequent  journeys  in  the  following  summer, 
we  reached  the  central  plains  and  the  hmit  of  the  water- 


470  SOUTHERN   DZUNGARIA 

flow  from  the  mountain,  we  found  that  even  in  the 
locaUties  where  the  shghtest  variation  in  rainfall  would 
make  itself  first  felt,  there  were  no  indications  of  a 
changing  climate  such  as  existed  south  of  the  Tian 
Shan. 

Leaving  the  basin,  we  entered  a  black,  stony  desert, 
destitute  of  fodder  and  water,  this  sterility  continuing 
until  the  level  dropped  to  4,000  ft.  We  there  entered 
the  zone  of  grass  and  water,  villages  and  cultivation, 
a  pleasant  land  inhabited  by  Turki  Mohammedans,  or 
Chantos,  who  appealed  to  us  as  more  picturesque,  of 
greater  historical  interest,  and  certainly  more  enter- 
taining than  the  nondescript  population  of  Dzungaria. 
Chinese  Turkestan  is  a  continent  inside  a  continent ;  it 
is  secluded,  and  barriered  from  the  outside  world,  its 
inhabitants  having  been  moulded  into  a  peculiar  people 
by  their  unique  physical  surroundings. 

As  we  passed  eastwards  and  water  became  more 
abundant,  pretty  mud-built  villages  staged  our  route. 
These  were  surrounded  by  orchards  irrigated  by  rivulets 
of  clearest  water ;  there  were  picturesque  mosques 
standing  on  sacred  ground,  half  hidden  by  gigantic  elm- 
trees  ;  and  we  heard  once  again  the  mellow  voices  of 
the  Mullahs  calling  the  faithful  to  prayer.  All  this  was 
delightful  after  the  restless  atmosphere  of  Dzungaria. 
We  were  treated  here  as  honoured  guests,  and  the  dark- 
eyed  Chantos,  with  the  hospitality  for  which  they  are 
famed,  entertained  us  as  travellers  in  a  strange  land. 
Beyond  our  immediate  surroundings  our  view  was  en- 
hanced by  the  wide  panorama  of  the  Barkul  Range, 
which,  emerging  out  of  the  Tou-shui  plateau,  now  ran 
parallel  with  our  route  on  the  north,  the  snow-clad 
summits  and  forested  flanks  forming  a  pleasant  con- 


FROM   KULJA  TO   KUMUL  471 

trast  to  the  dusty  plains  across  which  our  carts  now 
plied  their  way,  and  giving  rest  to  the  eyes  from  the 
aching  yet  fascinating  deserts  which,  in  long,  flat  sweeps, 
broken  by  occasional  escarpments,  extend  southwards 
into  the  unknown. 

There  were  many,  indeed,  far  too  many,  matters  to 
occupy  our  thoughts,  and  to  stimulate  our  ambitions 
as  we  drew  near  to  our  goal.  In  a  wayside  village  we 
found  the  tomb  of  some  long-dead  Chanto,  decorated,  as 
is  the  custom,  with  the  horns  of  wild-game,  such  as  wapiti, 
ibex,  and  wild-sheep  ;  the  proportions  of  some  of  these 
horns  gave  Miller  hopes  of  finding  ampler  and  hitherto 
unknown  hunting-grounds  in  the  ranges  to  the  north.  A 
few  days  later,  too,  when  the  highest  summits  of  the 
Karlik  Tagh  hove  into  view,  and  I  drew  the  first  lines 
across  my  plane-table  on  to  its  virgin  peaks,  we  felt  a 
considerable  satisfaction  in  having  accomplished  the  long 
winter  journey  of  800  miles,  and  we  pressed  forward 
eagerly  towards  the  dark  line  of  vegetation  that  shim- 
mered in  the  dusty  desert  ahead  of  us  and  indicated  the 
position  of  Kumul. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

KAMI,    OR   KUMUL 

"  Camul  is  a  province  which  in  former  days  was  a  king- 
dom. It  contains  numerous  towns  and  villages,  but  the 
chief  city  bears  the  name  of  Camul.  The  province  lies 
between  the  two  deserts  ;  for  on  the  one  side  is  the  great 
desert  of  Lop,  and  on  the  other  side  is  a  small  desert  of 
three  days'  j ourney  in  extent.  The  people  are  all  idolaters, 
and  have  a  peculiar  language.  They  live  by  the  fruits 
of  the  earth,  which  they  have  in  plenty  and  dispose  of 
to  travellers.  They  are  a  people  who  take  things  very 
easily,  for  they  mind  nothing  but  playing  and  singing, 
and  dancing,  and  enjoying  themselves.  And  it  is  the 
truth  that,  if  a  foreigner  comes  to  the  house  of  one  of 
these  people  to  lodge,  the  host  is  delighted.  ..." 

Thus  Marco  Polo — the  great  Venetian  traveller — some 
600  years  ago,  briefly  described  Camul,  or  Kumul,*  the 
Hami  of  the  Chinese.  Although  it  is  certain  that  he 
himself  never  visited  the  locality  and  that  his  information 
was  gathered  from  hearsay,  or,  as  Yule  suggests,  from 
the  personal  experiences  of  his  father  and  uncle,  who 
may  have  passed  through  Kumul,  yet  our  descriptions 
will  show  the  accuracy  with  which  Marco  Polo's  account 
tallies  with  the  Kumul  of  the  present  day.     It  is  true 

^  Kumul  appears  in  a  variety  of  forms.  According  to  Yule  (Travels 
uj  Marco  Polo,  p.  211)  Kamul  is  the  Turki  form  of  the  Mongol  name 
]<hamil ;  it  is  also  spelt  Komul,  while  Khami,  or  Hami,  is  the  Chinese 
form  of  the  word.     The  inhabitants  are  called  Kumuliks. 

47a 


HAMI,    OR    KUMUL  473 

that  there  are  certain  marked  differences,  the  cause 
of  which  can  easily  be  traced  to  radical  changes  in  the 
lives  of  the  people,  but  on  the  whole  the  people  are 
the  same  ;  they  remain  as  an  interesting  proof  of  the 
stagnating  effect  of  living  in  the  far-away  and  secluded 
desert-basins  of  Central  Asia. 

Kumul  is  still  the  capital  of  this  same  little  Khanate 
*'  which  was  once  a  kingdom  "  and  which  is,  in  fact, 
an  independent  native  state — tributary  to  China,  under 
the  direct  rule  of  an  hereditary  Khan,  or  Prince.  Re- 
membering, therefore,  Marco  Polo's  remarks  about  the 
hospitality  of  the  inhabitants,  and  knowing  that  Kumul 
was  sufficiently  far  away  from  the  "  world  "  to  have 
avoided  contamination,  we  despatched  a  rider  ahead,  with 
orders  to  deliver  our  visiting-cards  to  the  Khan.  On 
approaching  the  first  trees  of  the  oasis  we  found  a  mes- 
senger awaiting  our  arrival  who  took  us  in  charge  and 
led  us  to  a  house  especially  prepared  for  our  recep- 
tion. These  quarters  were  situated  outside  the  walls 
of  the  town,  overlooking  the  oasis,  and  with  an  un- 
interrupted view  of  the  snow-miountains  to  the  north ; 
a  large  walled  fruit-garden  surrounding  the  house  added 
to  its  sense  of  comfort. 

On  arrival,  we  found  a  whole  retinue  of  men  await- 
ing our  orders  ;  these  unpacked  the  carts  as  we  sat  on  the 
carpeted  divan  at  the  end  of  a  cool  and  exquisitely 
clean  room,  drinking  green  tea  brought  by  the  head- 
servant  who  had  been  told  off  by  the  Khan  to  attend  to 
our  wants.  Other  retainers  ran  to  fetch  food,  fuel,  and 
water ;  but  before  these  returned  another  batch  of 
messengers  arrived,  bearing  the  cards  of  the  Khan  with 
inquiries  as  to  the  success  of  our  journey  and  to  our 
comfort  ;    these  messengers  brought  cart-loads  of  coal 


474  KAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

and  firewood,  food  for  the  horses,  and  two  sheep  for 
ourselves.  Obviously  Marco  Polo  had  not  exaggerated 
the  inborn  hospitality  of  the  people  of  Kumul  ;  and,  as 
will  be  noted  in  the  following  pages,  the  oasis,  though 
situated  on  the  main  road  between  North  China  and 
Western  Asia,  still  lives  up  to  its  former  reputation, 
and  remains  unspoilt  by  over-taxation  or  misuse  of  its 
good- will. 

In  these  delightful  surroundings  we  rested  a  week, 
making  the  acquaintance  of  the  feudal  chief  of  this 
curious  little  kingdom  on  the  edge  of  the  Gobi,  who 
showed  us  much  hospitality  and  courtesy ;  and  here  we 
prepared  a  plan  for  the  exploration  of  the  Karlik  Tagh 
Mountains,  which  comprise  in  themselves  the  greater 
portion  of  the  Khan's  territory. 

Marco  Polo  called  Kumul  "  a  city,"  and  gave  the  im- 
pression of  the  existence  of  many  other  towns  and  villages 
in  the  neighbourhood ;  but,  at  the  present  day,  Kumul 
is  the  only  town  that  remains,  and  the  capital  itself 
can  hardly  claim  to  rank  as  a  city.  Kumul  is  not  large, 
and  its  surrounding  oasis  covers  a  relatively  small  area  ; 
it  is  so  small,  indeed,  that  in  other  parts  of  Chinese 
Turkestan  Kumul  would  pass  unnoticed.  The  geo- 
graphical position  of  this  oasis  is  alone  responsible  for  its 
boasted  importance,  for  Kumul  owes  its  prosperity 
entirety  to  its  location  as  the  last  town  in  Chinese  Turke- 
stan for  desert-bound  caravans,  and  as  the  first  resting- 
place  for  travellers  and  for  traffic  coming  from  China. 
Beyond  Kumul  all  is  desert ;  whether  the  caravans  come 
or  whether  the  caravans  go,  this  town  is  to  them  of 
immense  importance ;  it  represents  either  a  goal  safely 
reached  after  a  hard  and  trying  journey  of  eighteen  days 
from  An-hsi-chow  on  the  southern  side  of  the  intervening 


THE    WALLS    OF    KUMUL. 


474] 


THE    KHAN'S    RESIDENCE. 


KAMI,    OR    KUMUL  475 

Gobi,  or  it  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  "  taking-off  " 
place  where  travellers  outfit  before  entering  on  this  same 
food-less  and  uninhabited  stage. 

When  weary  travellers  from  Cathay  sight  the  cool 
snows  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  they  know  their  toils  are  at  an 
end.  The  peaks  which  lift  themselves  from  the  central 
mass  and  are  the  culminating  points  of  this  insular 
mountain-group  are  also  a  landmark  to  wanderers 
on  the  plains  below,  and  towards  them  converge  the 
ancient  trade-routes  connecting  China  and  Mongolia  with 
Western  Asia.  Mongol  nomads  of  the  nameless  region 
to  the  east  and  north  "  pick  up  "  these  snowy  beacons 
from  across  the  plains,  and  recognize  that  they  form 
the  boundary-point  of  their  territory — the  end  of  the 
pasture-zone.  As  a  lighthouse  on  some  far-flung  pro- 
montory, guiding  ships  from  across  the  ocean,  so  the 
snows  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  shine  as  a  guide  to  the 
caravans  that  cross  the  Gobi ;  and  under  their  shadow 
lies  the  safe  port  of  Kumul. 

Those  who  have  come  hither  for  the  first  time  wonder 
at  the  native  inhabitants,  with  their  Aryan  features 
and  strange  garb  ;  at  the  quaint,  mud-built  town  and 
"  covered  "  bazaars.  Everywhere  are  new  impressions, 
sights,  sounds,  and  above  all  a  new  religion,  for  Kumul  is 
the  eastern  outpost  of  the  Turki-Mohammedan  world, — 
all  unite  to  prove  to  the  newly  arrived  traveller  from  China 
that  he  has  reached  a  foreign  land,  Chinese  only  in  name. 

Kumul  introduces  the  traveller  to  Turkestan ;  it  is 
the  first  Chanto  oasis  on  the  Nan-lu,  or  southern  high-road. 
Westwards  the  Mohammedans  hold  all  the  fertile  centres 
that  encircle  the  desert  heart  of  Turkestan,  but  in  any 
other  direction  beyond  the  territory  of  the  Khan  extend 
unsettled  steppes,  the  domain  of  Mongol  chieftains  and 


476  KAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

Kirghiz  shepherds.  Karlik  Tagh  might  be  described  as 
the  meeting-place  of  three  great  territorial  divisions, 
Mongolia,  Dzungaria,  and  Turkestan.  For,  in  point  of 
fact,  the  territory  of  the  Khan  actually  touches  on  all 
these  countries. 

This  unpretentious  oasis  has  taken  an  important  share 
in  the  affairs  of  Inner  Asia  owing  to  its  unrivalled  position, 
and  for  this  same  reason  it  has  experienced  a  long  and 
chequered  career. 

In  the  early  days,  between  the  ninth  and  twelfth 
centuries,  Kumul  formed  a  part  of  the  Uigur  dominion, 
and  it  is  probable  that  the  first  cultivators,  and,  indeed, 
the  actual  creators  of  the  oasis,  were  the  ancient  Uigurs, 
who,  coming  in  this  direction  when  driven  out  from 
Mongolia,  made  large  settlements  on  both  flanks  of  the 
Tian  Shan  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  present-day 
Urumchi  and  Turf  an.  In  the  Kumiuliks  we  may  see  the 
remnant  of  that  ancient  race  whose  migrations,  and  success 
as  agriculturists,  have  so  materially  altered  this  part  of  Asia. 

During  the  Mongol  supremacy  the  oasis  fell  to  the 
portion  left  by  Jenghis  Khan  to  his  son  Chagatai ;  but 
there  was  small  mention  of  Kumul  in  those  days,  for  it 
lay  to  the  south  of  the  pasture-zone  which  formed  the 
main  resort  of  the  Mongol  hosts.  Later,  during  the 
period  that  China  held  no  very  strong  hold  over  her 
far-western  dependencies,  Dzungaria  and  Turkestan  being 
in  constant  revolt,  Kumul  was  more  in  evidence,  for  she 
was  frequently  in  trouble  and  constantly  changing  her 
suzerain.  Kumul  formed  the  base  of  Chinese  military 
operations  not  only  during  the  crushing  of  the  Dzungar 
Empire  and  the  Dungan  insurrection,  but  during  the 
suppression  of  Yakub  Beg. 

Kumul  is  the  key  to  Dzungaria,  and  is  therefore  of 


KAMI,    OR   KUMUL  477 

immense  strategical  importance.  Its  resources  must 
have  been  taxed  to  the  utmost  when  vast  and  ponderous 
Chinese  armies,  after  crossing  the  foodless  Gobi,  suddenly 
poured  into  the  town.  The  oasis  itself  suffered  mucli 
during  the  Dungan  rebellions,  for  Turki  and  Chinese 
Mohammedans  fell  out  amongst  themselves  ;  Piassetsky, 
who  visited  Kumul  in  1875,  spoke  of  the  town  as  being 
in  ruins  and  used  only  as  an  encampment  for  Chinese 
soldiers.  It  is  surprising  to  find  this  same  town  in  such 
a  flourishing  condition  as  it  is  at  the  present  day. 

The  Khans  of  this  little  kingdom  have  been  wise 
enough  to  recognize  the  suzerainty  of  China,  and  for  the 
last  two  hundred  years,  by  careful  diplomac3^  the  ruling 
chiefs  have  steered  a  clear  course  through  the  intrigues 
and  entanglements  that  beset  the  heads  of  outlying 
native  states  in  Central  Asia ;  consequently  the  in- 
dividuality of  the  oasis  has  been  preserved  intact. 

The  most  interesting  side  of  Kumul  is  its  status  as 
a  convert  to  Islam  from  Buddhism.  In  the  days  of  the 
Uigurs  the  whole  of  this  region  belonged  to  the  Buddhist 
world ;  even  up  to  the  fourteenth  century,  when  Marco 
Polo  wrote  of  them,  the  Kumuliks  were  still  "  idolaters," 
or  Buddhists.  Signs  of  the  prevalence  of  Buddhism  are 
still  to  be  found  around  Kumul  in  the  presence  of  many 
shrines  and  temples  such  as  those  excavated  at  Togucha 
(to  the  west)  by  Prof.  Grunwedel,  and  such  as  the  remains 
of  images  and  colossal  seated  Buddhas  of  which  Stein 
was  the  first  to  record  the  existence  at  Ara-tam,  a  small 
oasis  to  the  north-east  of  Kumul,  which  has  always  been 
the  summer  resort  of  the  Khans. 

In  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  it  is  evident 
that  the  two  faiths  were  striving  for  the  mastery,  for 
there  is  record  of  a  mosque  and  a  great  Buddhist  temple 


478  KAMI.    OR    KUMUL 

standing  side  by  side.  Kumul  is  now,  however,  a  verit- 
able stronghold  of  Islam,  and  its  inhabitants  keep  more 
strictly  to  the  law  than  do  the  greater  number  of 
followers  of  the  Prophet. 

At  the  present  day  Kumul  consists  of  a  native  Chanto  * 
town,  surrounded  by  high  mud-walls  and  dominated  by 
a  great  mud-palace — the  residence  of  the  Khan ;  to 
the  north-east  is  a  walled  Chinese  town,  containing 
yamens,  quarters  for  the  garrison,  and  bazaars,  where 
most  of  the  business  is  transacted.  The  population 
of  the  capital  is  probably  about  ten  thousand,  the 
native  Kumuliks  being  in  a  slightly  greater  majority 
than  the  Chinese,  the  Dungans,  and  the  garrison  com- 
bined. It  is  probable  that  in  recent  years  the  Chinese 
element  has  increased,  represented,  as  it  is,  chiefly  by 
traders  and  small  shopkeepers  ;  but  the  Chanto  farmers 
cannot  have  increased  much,  owing  to  all  available  land 
being  already  under  cultivation.  Any  further  increase 
would  undoubtedly  cause  either  discontent  or  a  desire  to 
emigrate. 

Around  the  town  lies  the  oasis,  a  veritable  Garden 
of  Eden  in  the  midst  of  a  howling  wilderness.  The 
inhabited  zone  of  cultivation  is  very  small,  extending 
only  for  about  seven  miles  north  and  south,  and  five 
miles  east  and  west  ;  but  such  is  the  richness  of  the 
soil,  and  with  such  care  is  the  ground  terraced  and 
watered,  that  it  supports  a  considerable  population  in 
proportion  to  its  size.  Kumul  lies  in  the  midst  of  a 
salt-encrusted  plain,  and  its  existence  depends  upon 
the  drainage  from  the  highlands  of  the  Karlik  Tagh 
lying  some  fifty  miles  away.  The  water  which  drains 
southwards  from  these  ranges  is  for  the  most  part  lost 

^  See  footnote,  p.  397. 


478] 


A    STREET    SCENE    IN    THE    CHINESE    QUARTER. 


KAMI,    OR    KUMUL  479 

below  the  surface  of  the  ground  after  leaving  the  moun- 
tains. The  torrents  sink  below  the  surface  in  the  pied- 
mont gravel  slopes  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  but  appear 
again  twenty  miles  out  on  the  plain  in  the  form  of 
copious  springs,  which  ooze  up  and  form  the  irrigation- 
supply  of  the  oasis. 

No  existing  map  gives  a  true  idea  of  the  hydrography 
of  this  region.  Rivers,  intimated  by  continuous  blue 
lines,  flowing  out  into  the  waste  where  they  form  lakes 
(called  Kul),  are  common  errors  on  the  maps.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  water  which  escapes  being  used  for 
irrigating  purposes  generally  disappears  below  the  sur- 
face of  the  ground  ;  though  in  a  few  cases,  when  there 
is  a  sufficient  supply  from  the  mountains,  it  may  re- 
appear again  in  some  depression  far  out  in  the  desert 
in  the  form  of  small  saline  springs. 

The  Narin  River,  for  instance,  the  main  source  of  the 
water-supply  that  feeds  Kumul,  disappears  into  the 
ground  a  couple  of  miles  from  the  point  where  it  leaves 
the  rugged  sandstone  foot-hills  of  the  Karlik  Tagh ; 
eighteen  miles  farther  on,  five  large  springs  appear  in  what 
was  once  its  river-bed.  This  water  is  used  for  irrigating 
the  oasis  .^    Twenty  miles  below  the  town  the  water  is  too 

*  Although  these  springs  are  the  main  irrigation-supply,  they  are 
not  the  only  ones.  The  eastern  half  of  the  oasis  we  found  to  be  dependent 
upon  small  springs,  of  the  same  type,  which  originated  from  the  drainage 
of  the  Edira  Valley,  the  next  valley  eastwards  of  the  Narin.  Apart  from 
these,  all  the  cultivation  at  the  north-east  of  the  oasis,  which  extends 
for  some  four  or  five  miles,  rehes  upon  a  water-supply  obtained  from  melting 
snows  or  rain  in  the  mountains,  arriving  by  way  of  the  Edira  Valley,  or 
by  the  canal,  which  has  been  led  with  great  labour  for  some  twelve  miles 
across  the  plain,  from  close  below  Toruk,  where  it  catches  the  surplus 
of  the  spring  and  summer  floods.  FaiUng  this  supply,  the  crops  would  be 
ruined.  "  Kariz,"  or  subterranean  canals,  as  employed  in  other  parts 
of  Turkestan  and  Persia,  only  existed  in  a  ruined  state  to  the  west  of 
Togucha. 

II — II 


48o  HAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

salt  for  irrigation.  Beyond  this  point  there  is  no  continu- 
ous flow,  the  drainage  is  spasmodic,  regulated  by  the 
supply  from  the  mountains.  In  summer,  when  the  snows 
melt  in  the  highlands,  there  may  be  a  flow  of  water  above 
ground  to  the  lakes  of  Shona  Nor,  which  the  Russian 
maps  mark  as  forming  the  terminus  of  the  river  of  Kumul. 
This  would  be,  however,  for  a  very  short  period  only, 
and  I  think  it  probable  that  these  "lakes  "  are  in  reality 
only  marshy  ground  containing  a  few  stagnant  pools, 
formed  by  the  residue  of  the  drainage  oozing  up  at  this 
level, — which  is  the  "  water-table." 

These  imaginary  lakes  have  crept  into  the  maps  and 
are  religiously  copied  from  edition  to  edition,  no  one 
having  visited  them  since  the  time  of  the  early  Russian 
explorers  who  located  them,  in  most  cases,  by  hearsay. 
Thus,  the  illusive  problem  of  Lake  Toll, — that  mysterious 
patch  of  blue  in  the  desert  to  the  south  of  Kumul, — 
had  long  attracted  my  attention  and  made  me  desirous 
of  solving  its  mystery.  Lake  Toli  remains  unvisited, 
but  from  information  I  gathered  at  Kumul  I  am  in  a 
position  to  give  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  its  character  ; 
and  its  existence,  in  a  somewhat  modified  form,  may 
safely  be  accepted. 

The  Kumuliks  have  a  somewhat  unusual  rendering 
for  the  Turki  words  relating  to  water,  signifying 
springs,  lakes,  rivers,  etc.;  the  meaning  they  attach 
to  the  ordinary  Turki  words  for  these  being,  in  some 
degree,  responsible  for  the  supposition  that  Toli  was  a 
lake.  They  give  a  very  exact  interpretation  of  such 
words  as  "  daria,"  "  bulak,"  and  "  kul."  For  instance, 
a  river  is  only  a  "  daria  "  for  a  short  time  in  early 
summer,  when  the  channel  is  full ;  they  speak  only  of 
"  daria  "  when  the  melted  snows  from  the  mountains 


HAMI,    OR    KUMUL  481 

send  a  stream  in  high  flood  across  the  plains.  The 
remainder  of  the  year  the  water-supply  is  called  "  bulak," 
meaning  springs.  All  ordinary  watercourses  on  the 
plains  around  Karlik  Tagh,  even  good-sized  streams 
used  for  irrigation  purposes,  are  called  "  bulak,"  because 
they  originate  from  springs,  and  do  not  come  continuously 
from  the  snows.  Now,  a  large  group  of  strong  springs, 
such  as  is  often  found  issuing  out  of  old  river-beds  at 
a  distance  of  about  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  from  the 
mountains,  or  in  the  depressions  still  farther  away  on 
the  desert,  are  invariably  called  "  kul,"  a  word  like  the 
Mongol  "  nor,"  generally  used  to  denote  a  lake  or  large 
sheet  of  water,  but  here  used  to  describe  a  spring-head  or 
a  terminal  marsh  which  may,  or  may  not,  form  an  area 
of  standing  water.  Iti  Kul  near  Togucha,  Shona  Nor 
at  the  end  of  the  river  of  Kumul,  and  Toli  Kul  in  the 
desert  to  the  south,  are  examples  of  Kumulik  nomen- 
clature. 

All  these  are  localities  of  the  same  character,  namely, 
water-tables  where  the  land-surface  drops  to  the  level 
which  permits  water  to  appear  above  the  surface.  I 
believe  that  the  use  of  the  word  "  kul  "  caused  early 
explorers  to  locate  lakes,  by  hearsay,  in  a  region  where 
merely  springs  exist.  It  is  not  too  much  to  suppose 
that  Toli  Kul  is  in  reality  a  depression,  in  which,  if 
there  were  sufficient  water,  there  would  be  a  lake.  The 
water  is  never  sufficient  in  itself  to  form  a  lake,  as  only  a 
meagre  supply  issues  from  underground,  this  being  the 
residue  of  occasional  drainage  from  the  higher  land  to 
the  north  and  east  ;  nevertheless,  according  to  the 
Kumulik  idea,  it  is  a  "  kul."  No  doubt,  in  former  days, 
when  the  climate  was  damper,  a  lake  existed.  For 
the   same   reason  that  the  lake  has   disappeared,  the 


482  HAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

old  route  which  led  thence  from  Kumul,  across  what  is 
now  the  most  inhospitable  desert,  and  joined  the  great 
trade-route  that  ran  between  Su-chow  and  Lop  Nor, 
has  also  sunk  into  disuse. 

This  peculiar  subterranean  system  of  drainage  creates 
areas  of  luxuriant  cultivation  in  marked  contrast  to  the 
barren  stony  plains  surrounding  them.  The  fruits  of 
the  earth  are  so  abundant  that,  as  Marco  Polo  remarks, 
the  inhabitants  have  even  sufficient  to  dispose  of  to 
travellers.  The  fame  of  the  oasis  for  rice,  melons,  and 
grapes  has  already  spread  to  China.  The  melons  are 
a  speciality  of  the  Kumulik  cultivators,  the  preserved 
skin  being  exported  in  large  quantities,  and  actually 
forming  a  part  of  the  tribute  sent  to  the  Court  at  Pekin. 
Wheat,  barley,  and  oats  occupy  the  larger  area  and  form 
the  staple  supply ;  while  the  influence  of  the  Chinese  is 
shown  in  the  neat  little  vegetable  patches  close  to  the 
walls  of  the  town. 

The  chief  interest  lay,  however,  in  the  people  them- 
selves— both  the  townsfolk  and  the  cultivators — for  the 
strange  mixture  of  race  and  religion,  of  Turki  and  Chinese, 
of  Islam  and  Buddhism,  has  given  rise  to  many  pecu- 
liarities, and  laid  the  foundation  of  many  unusual 
characteristics.  The  position  the  oasis  holds  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  Moslem  world,  and  as  the  last  of  the 
Chanto  settlements  of  Turkestan,  renders  it  liable  to 
invasion  by  foreign  customs.  As  a  result  the  inhabitants, 
although  of  pure-blooded  Turki  descent,  have  been  so 
influenced  by  Chinese  elements  during  the  last  two 
hundred  years  as  to  make  them  adopt  the  same  dress, 
speak  the  same  language,  and  in  many  cases  even  eat 
the  same  food.  The  Kumuliks,  indeed,  are  a  people 
undergoing   a    rapid    process    of    assimilation    by    the 


A    KUMULIK   GIRL. 


482] 


KAMI,    OR    KUMUL  483 

Chinese,  and  were  it  not  for  the  determination  of  their 
Khan  to  preserve  their  "  nationality  "  (in  order,  no 
doubt,  to  preserve  his  chieftainship),  his  subjects  would 
already  have  lost  their  individuality,  and,  perhaps, 
have  broken  away  from  his  rule. 

In  a  great  many  cases  the  men  wore  a  strange  mixture 
of  Chinese  and  Chanto  dress,  replacing  the  Chanto 
"  khalat  "  by  a  Chinese  coat,  but  always  retaining  the 
typical  Turkish  skull-cap  as  head-gear,  this  being  worn 
in  winter  without,  and  in  summer  with,  a  turban.  Some- 
times complete  Chinese  costume  was  worn ;  this  was 
especially  noticed  at  the  Court  of  the  Khan,  in  defer- 
ence no  doubt  to  Chinese  officialdom ;  and  in  these 
cases  the  '*  get-up  "  was  duplicated  even  to  a  mock- 
pigtail.  The  women-folk  on  the  other  hand,  had  not 
taken  so  readily  to  Chinese  ways,  for,  although  they 
copied  the  Chinese  custom  of  painting  their  faces,  and 
occasionally  donned  coats  of  gaudily  coloured  Chinese 
silks  in  preference  to  their  own  more  picturesque 
"  chapans,"  this  was  chiefly  the  case  in  the  town  of 
Kumul  and  amongst  the  more  wealthy  class.  In  the 
mountains  and  outlying  oases  the  Chinese  influence  had 
not  affected  them. 

The  women  did  not  veil  their  faces,  but  guarded 
their  good  looks  from  strange  eyes  with  equal  success  by 
the  judicious  use  of  their  coat-tails.  The  excessive 
shyness  of  the  ladies  of  Kumul  appeared  strange  to  us 
after  the  easy  manners  of  the  Mongols  and  the  Kirghiz 
and  even  of  the  Chanto  emigrants  in  Dzungaria.  In 
Kumul  it  was  almost  impossible  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  a 
woman  in  the  streets.  They  were  as  shy  as  rabbits,  and 
dived  into  their  houses  when  they  saw  us  approaching, 
and  even  locked  the  doors  until  we  were  well  past  !     It 


484  KAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

was  obvious  that  the  reputation  which  Kumul  possessed 
in  the  days  of  Marco  Polo  had  been  entirely  changed  ; 
this  change  cannot  have  been  the  result  of  their  conversion 
to  Islam,  and  can  only  have  taken  place  in  recent  years, 
for  Prjevalsky,  who  visited  the  oasis  in  1879,  said  that 
"  the  women  were  free  and  easy  in  their  manners,  just 
as  they  were  in  Marco  Polo's  time."  Now,  however, 
morality  is  a  feature — a  strange  paradox  indeed,  a  moral 
town  in  Chinese  Turkestan  ;  a  profound  contrast  to  olden 
days,  in  order  to  produce  which  some  very  strong  cause 
must  have  been  at  work. 

As  Chinese  influence  is  responsible  for  the  mixture 

of  customs  which  the  Kumuliks  now  exhibit,  so  is  it 

indirectly  the  cause  of  their  morality  and  good  behaviour. 

Formerly  the  rapid  advance  of  the  Chinese  element  was 

viewed  by  the  Khan  with  apprehension ;  he  foresaw  the 

degeneration  of   his  people   into  a  mongrel  type — half 

Chinese,  half  Chanto,  and,  as  a  good  Mussulman,  fearing 

the  effects  that  might  follow,  he  determined  to  keep  his 

subjects  so  closely  to  their  religious  principles  that  they 

could  not  slip  away  from  Islam.     The  Khan,  no  doubt, 

also  suspected  the  possibility  of  discontent  amongst  his 

subjects,  and  perhaps  even  a  desire  for  freedom  from 

his  rule  ;   eager,  therefore,  to  keep  his  people  from  being 

contaminated  by  the  Chinese,  realizing  that  he  might 

lose  his  hold  over  them,  he  strictly  enforced  the  tenets 

of  the  Mussulman  faith.     The  fact  of  this  very  small 

but  extremely  strict  Mussulman  community  situated  at 

the  very  end  of  the  Islamic  world  and  completely  under 

Chinese   influence    is,    indeed,    a  paradox.     Herein  lies 

the  chief  peculiarity  of  Kumul.     It  is  cut  off  from  any 

other  strongholds  of  Islam,  and  lies  outside  their  sphere 

of  influence,  few  Mohammedans  pass  through  it,  and  its 


RAMI,    OR    KUMUL  485 

inhabitants  are  environed  by  Buddhists  and  Chinese 
possessing  no  definite  faith.  Moreover,  it  has  been  so 
greatly  influenced  by  Chinese  elements  during  the  last 
two  hundred  years  that  it  has  adopted  many  Chinese 
customs  and  even  Chinese  dress.  Yet,  in  spite  of 
this,  or  perhaps  because  of  this,  the  Kumuliks  represent 
a  type  of  Mohammedan  people  hard  to  beat  for  strict- 
ness of  conduct,  and  exact  upholding  of  the  letter  of 
the  law. 

The  position  which  Kumul  holds  in  this  respect  is 
entirely  due  to  the  strength  of  character  of  the  Khan 
and  his  ability  in  enforcing  a  form  of  narrow  Puritanism 
which  prevents  the  Kumuliks  from  breaking  away,  and 
makes  religious  principle  the  foundation  of  their  good 
behaviour.  The  Khan  sets  an  example,  which  is  followed 
by  his  retainers  and  copied  by  the  people.  Men  have 
to  pray  at  the  mosque,  whether  they  like  to  or  not,  and 
for  those  who  offend  large  whips  are  kept,  hung  up  in 
the  courtyard  of  the  castle,  and,  according  to  report,  are 
used  without  mercy.  The  drinking  of  spirits  is  forbidden, 
and  all  Moslem  laws  as  regards  the  seclusion  of  women 
are  carried  out  without  relaxation.  Such  are  the 
reasons  for  the  one  great  change  in  the  customs  of  the 
Kumuliks  which  has  taken  place  in  recent  years. 

This  tyranny  has  had  an  irritating  effect  on  the 
inhabitants,  who  seem  to  suffer  from  over-legislation. 
They  have  no  longer  time  or  opportunity  for  **  play- 
ing and  singing  and  dancing  and  enjoying  themselves," 
as  in  Marco  Polo's  day,  although,  no  doubt,  the  desire 
for  amusement  is  as  strong  as  it  is  amongst  other 
Chantos.  Their  status  is  that  of  serfs  under  a  feudal 
lord,  who  owns  the  best  lands,  the  largest  flocks  and 
herds,    who   employs  forced   labour,  levies   a  consider- 


486  KAMI.    OR    KUMUL 

able  tax,  and  even  takes  upon  himself  the  responsi- 
bility of  posing  as  their  spiritual  leader.  Even  in  this 
out-of-the-way  corner  of  the  world  there  existed  a  strong 
desire  for  freedom  from  an  autocratic  rule  ;  we  noticed 
a  general  feeling  of  discontent  amongst  the  Khan's 
subjects,  who  appeared  eager  to  come  directly  under 
Chinese  rule.  Up  to  the  present  the  KumuHks  have 
possessed  neither  the  initiative  nor  the  enterprise  to  take 
a  decided  step  in  any  direction  ;  the  man  who  has 
"  ideas  "  is  immediately  exiled,  we  met  many  such  in 
the  outlying  villages  of  the  far  corners  of  the  Khan's 
dominion.  We  found,  too,  that  the  hunters  had  been 
deprived  of  their  guns,  these  being  forfeited  on  account 
of  an  attempted  rebellion  the  year  before. 

The  discontents  endeavoured  to  emigrate ;  this  move 
had  to  be  carried  out  secretly  and  with  a  loss  of  their 
possessions,  for  it  was  considered  the  worst  of  all  crimes 
to  desire  to  leave  the  fatherly  rule  of  the  Moslem  Khan 
and  to  dwell  in  a  heathen  land.  If  Kumul  were  situated 
nearer  the  Russian  frontier,  she  would  no  doubt  seek 
Russian  protection  and  thereby  escape  from  the  harsh 
rule  of  the  Chief. 

In  addition  to  Kumul  there  are  several  small  oases 
on  the  plains, — Taranchi,  Togucha,  Astine,  Lapchuk, 
Toruk,  Ta-shar,  Khotun-tam,  Karmukchi,  Tashbulak, 
Bai,  Adak,  Nom, — besides  others  hamlets  composed  of  a 
few  farmsteads,  but  hardly  worthy  of  the  name  of  village. 
These  are  all  subject  to  the  Khan ;  but  the  main 
bulk  of  the  population  who  owe  allegiance  to  him, — 
outside  the  town  of  Kumul, — is  made  up  of  Taghliks, 
or  mountaineers,  who  live  in  small  villages  tucked  away 
amongst  the  rugged  valleys  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  ;  here 
they  are  left  in  greater  seclusion,  but  pay  their  taxes  in 


KUMULIK   MUSICIANS. 


A   TAGHLIK    OF   KARLIK   TAGH. 


486] 


KAMI,    OR    KUMU  487 

grain,  kine,  or  labour  to  their  overlord  at  Kumul.  We 
have  knowledge  of  no  less  than  thirty  villages  and 
groups  of  farm-houses  belonging  to  the  Khan,  twenty 
in  the  plain  and  ten  in  the  high  mountain  valleys, 
all  of  these  being  inhabited  by  agriculturists.  On  the 
northern  slopes  of  the  mountains  only,  where  grassy 
plateaux  replace  the  steep-sided,  rocky  ridges  of  the 
southern  side,  are  people  to  be  found  who  might  be 
described  as  nomadic  shepherds;  even  these  are  in 
reality  merely  Taghliks  who  live  a  semi-nomadic  exist- 
ence in  more  or  less  permanently  pitched  tents,  tending 
the  flocks  and  herds. 

Over  these  ruled  Mahsud  Shah,  hereditary  Prince  of 
the  Khanate  of  Kumul  and  eighth  of  his  line,  bearing  the 
complimentary  Chinese  title  of  Tsing  Wang,  or  Prince  of 
the  First  Rank.  Kumul  remained  as  an  example  of  that 
system  whereby  the  Chinese  were  enabled  to  leave  the 
affairs  of  the  western  dependencies  in  the  hands  of  local 
chiefs,  the  status  being  that  of  a  protected  native  state. 
The  Khan  had  absolute  power  over  his  subjects,  except 
in  the  exercise  of  the  death-penalty ;  in  such  a  case  the 
sentence  imposed  by  the  Khan  had  to  be  sanctioned  by 
the  Chinese  "  political  agent  "  in  residence  at  Kumul, 
who  managed  the  affairs  of  the  Chinese  colony,  and 
acted  as  adviser  to  the  Khan  in  matters  of  any  im- 
portance. 

The  Khan  treated  us  with  much  kindness  and  honour. 
The  British,  he  said,  were  friends  of  Islam,  and  he  was 
glad  to  meet  them.  He  knew  of  Hindustan,  and,  as  a 
Mussulman  under  Chinese  suzerainty,  he  appreciated 
foreign  rulers  who  showed  respect  for  the  religion  of  their 
subjects.  During  our  stay  in  Kumul  and  our  journeys 
throughout  his  dominions  we  experienced  such  whole- 


488  HAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

hearted  hospitality  and  such  genuine  good-will  from  this 
Eastern  Prince,  that  no  written  words  can  sufficiently 
convey  our  appreciation.  After  the  first  short  com- 
plimentary visits  which  he  paid  us,  and  which  we  returned, 
the  Khan  invited  us  to  dinner,  and  the  five  hours  spent 
in  his  company  in  his  palace  gave  us  a  real  insight  into 
the  life  of  a  Chanto  ruler. 

Overlooking  the  town  of  Kumul  was  the  group  of 
buildings  making  up  the  Khan's  residence,  picturesque 
in  the  possession  of  several  stories,  high  walls,  great 
gateways,  and  a  paved  road  leading  up  to  them. 
Sending  a  messenger  in  advance,  we  rode  first  through 
a  portion  of  the  Turki  town,  which,  with  narrow  alleys 
between  fiat-roofed  mud-houses,  street  corners  over- 
shadowed by  fine  old  trees, — under  which  groups  of 
gaudily  dressed  Kumuliks  lounged  and  talked, — with 
mosques  and  minarets,  presented  a  choice  of  rare  pictures 
to  the  eye  of  the  artist.  As  we  approached  the  palace 
and  passed  under  the  numerous  vaulted  gates  into 
the  inner  courtyard  we  felt  as  if  we  were  approaching 
the  stronghold  of  some  medieval  baron.  On  our 
arrival  servants  were  awaiting  us ;  some  seized  our 
horses,  while  others  led  us  on  through  the  last  gateway 
into  the  outer  hall  of  the  Khan's  abode.  Here  was 
drawn  up  a  double  line  of  armed  retainers, — a  body- 
guard of  Chinese  soldiers,  mercenaries  in  the  employ  of 
the  Khan.  The  Khan  himself  came  down  to  meet  us, 
and  led  us,  with  much  ceremony,  into  the  inner  chamber, 
where  we  sat  down  and  drank  tea. 

The  palace  was  a  quaint  structure,  a  composition 
of  both  Chinese  and  Turki  architecture,  the  interior 
being  well  furnished  in  Chinese  style.  Here  in  Eastern 
luxury  lived  the  Khan,  surrounded  by  his  retainers  and 


S5 
> 

o 

H 

O 

H 

r. 

5 


I— ( 

< 
I 


o 

u 


H 


HAMI,    OR    KUMUL  489 

courtiers  ;  he  kept  up  considerable  state,  which  befitted 
his  position  as  ruler,  but  tended  to  increase  the  strain  on 
the  resources  of  the  Kumuliks.  He  possessed  stables 
for  his  horses,  mews  for  his  falcons,  and  a  three-storied 
harem  for  his  womenfolk,  while  surrounding  the  palace 
was  spread  a  garden  of  extraordinary  luxuriance. 

Mahsud  Shah,  as  a  vassal  of  the  Emperor  of  China, 
visits  Pekin  every  sixth  year,  where  he  acts  as  personal 
servant  to  the  Emperor  for  forty  days,  in  proof  of  his 
allegiance.  These  visits  had  considerably  enlarged  his 
ideas,  and  were  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  many 
innovations,  quite  beyond  his  means,  into  the  ceremony 
of  his  Court.  Hence,  no  doubt,  the  growing  discontent 
amongst  his  subj  ects,  for  we  gathered  that  the  Prince  was 
more  feared  than  liked,  and  therefore  unpopular.  Treated 
with  respect  and  honour  by  the  Chinese,  who  upheld  his 
authority,  in  receipt  from  the  Government  of  2,000  tael 
a  year,  besides  twenty-five  bales  of  silk,  etc.,  with  his 
people  in  comparative  serfdom,  he  has  a  very  good 
time  and  is  presumably  very  wealthy.  He  certainly 
upheld  the  reputation  of  Kumul  for  liberal  hospitality. 

After  an  hour  spent  in  talking  and  drinking  tea,  the 
Khan  showed  us  his  garden.  Followed  by  an  escort 
of  attendants,  we  paraded  the  paved  walks  which  led 
in  and  out  amongst  orchards  and  flower-beds;  crossed 
little  bridges  built  in  Chinese  fashion  over  running  streams 
irrigating  the  land ;  passed  several  miniature  mosques, 
and  finally  reached  a  summer-house  which  lay  under  a 
group  of  giant  elm-trees.  Here  tea  was  again  served  and 
we  rested  a  little,  for  the  Khan  was  not  used  to  long 
walks.  Later  we  visited  the  shooting-range  where  the 
archers  practised,  and  then  continued  our  walk  to  the 
iris-beds.     Here  was  an  artificial  lake,  and  on  an  island 


490  KAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

in  the  midst  of  irises  and  overshadowed  by  a  ring  of  tall 
poplars  was  built  a  cool  pavilion  for  use  during  the 
midsummer  heat. 

On  our  return  to  the  palace  we  sat  down  to  the  real 
dinner  of  thirty-courses,  served  up  in  Chinese  style. 
We  had  eaten  Chinese  dinners  before,  so  the  entertain- 
ment was  no  novelty ;  but  the  peculiar  circumstances 
under  which  it  was  given  made  it  interesting.  For^ 
although  our  host  lived  in  a  Chinese  house,  entertained 
us  with  exact  Chinese  ceremonial,  gave  us  a  Chinese 
dinner,  was  dressed  himself,  as  were  all  his  servants, 
in  Chinese  costume  and  wore  mock  pigtails,  yet,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  was  much  in  the  Khan  that  was  not  at 
all  Chinese.  The  Prince  was  almost  European  in  features ; 
he  had  the  dignity,  the  ease,  and  the  charming  manners  of 
a  Mohammedan  gentleman  ;  he  talked  in  Turki  in  the 
most  friendly  way,  and  seemed  to  understand  the  aims 
and  objects  of  wandering  Englishmen  in  Central  Asia. 
His  real  character  showed  up  in  contradiction  to  all  that 
he  had  copied  from  China,  when,  for  example,  he  would 
only  touch  the  spirit  from  a  bottle  he  had  opened  in  our 
honour,  and  when  he  left  us  half-way  through  dinner 
in  order  to  pray  at  the  mosque  !  He  much  wanted  to 
make  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  but  was  doubtful  of  ob- 
taining the  necessary  permission  from  the  Emperor  of 
China,  perhaps  also  fearing  to  leave  his  people  under 
the  present  unsettled  conditions.  He  took  great  pride 
in  showing  us  the  extent  of  his  resources  and  the  variety 
of  his  belongings.  A  crowd  of  courtiers  were  on  duty  in 
the  adjoining  room,  and  at  the  expression  of  the  slightest 
wish  half  a  dozen  men  would  cry,  "  Khosh  !  "  and  hasten 
to  obey  his  commands.  We  chanced  to  ask  if  he  had 
any  falcons,  and  the  falconers  appeared  as  if  by  magic. 


KAMI,   OR    KUMUL  491 

one  with  a  peregrine,  another  a  goshawk,  and  a  third 
bearing  a  magnificent  golden-eagle.  His  guns  were 
brought  for  our  inspection — a  Mauser  and  a  Winchester 
rifle,  a  Browning  automatic-pistol  and  a  12-bore  shot- 
gun; he  showed  us  his  camera,  which  he  could  not 
work ;  while  his  gramophone  played  to  us  English, 
Russian,  and  Chinese  music. 

Besides  his  residence  in  the  capital,  the  Khan  had  two 
country-seats,  one  at  Ara-tam  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain, 
and  another  in  the  high  valley  of  Bardash  ;  both  of  these 
we  visited  in  the  course  of  our  journey  through  his 
territory.  As  a  landed  proprietor,  he  had  some  of  the 
finest  orchards  in  Central  Asia,  a  considerable  acreage 
of  corn-land,  and  large  flocks  and  herds,  these  latter 
being  tended  by  forced  labour,  for  the  Khan  exacted  a 
tax  of  five  days'  work  out  of  every  month,  or  two 
months  a  year,  from  all  his  subjects. 

We  asked  him  how  far  his  territory  extended,  and 
with  a  sweep  of  the  arm  he  said,  "  All  that  you  see  is 
mine,  and  more  that  you  cannot  see — behind  the  moun- 
tain." This  was  more  or  less  correct,  for  although  a 
portion  of  the  Barkul  Range  which  is  visible  to  the  north- 
west of  Kumul  does  not  actually  belong  to  him,  yet  it  is 
■an  uninhabited  country  and  not  of  much  consequence. 
All  that  is  of  value  within  view  of  the  capital  is  under 
the  Khan.  The  plains  are  dotted  with  occasional  oases — 
miniature  Kumuls,  which  are  situated  wherever  water 
-approaches  the  surface  and  allows  irrigation  ;  but  the 
Karlik  Tagh  Mountains  really  compose  the  greater  part, 
as  well  as  the  most  important  part,  of  the  Khan's  do- 
minion. About  7,500  square  miles  lie  under  his  rule,  and 
of  this  nearly  one-half  is  taken  up  by  the  rugged  ranges 
and  high  plateaux  which  provide  pasture  for  the  flocks  and 


492  KAMI,    OR    KUMUL 

herds,  small  areas  for  cultivators,  and — most  important 
of  all — the  entire  water-supply  on  which  depends  the 
existence  of  the  oases  on  the  plains  below. 

The  combination  of  physical  and  climatic  conditions 
comprised  within  the  dominions  of  the  Khanate  of  Kumul 
renders  it  a  complete,  self-supporting,  and  independent 
region.  There  exists  every  variety  of  scenery,  tempera- 
ture, fauna  and  flora.  There  are  dry  deserts  below, 
granite  ranges  above,  mountain  torrents,  pine  forests, 
alpine  pastures,  snow-fields  and  glaciers.  There  are  rice 
fields  and  vegetable  gardens  ;  luscious  fruits,  such  as 
melons,  grapes,  and  apricots  from  the  plains,  and  apples 
and  pears  from  the  hills  ;  there  are  corn-lands  and  fine 
sheep  pastures.  From  cool  glaciers  one  can  look  down 
on  to  dusty  plains  at  a  distance  of  only  a  long  day's 
march ;  and  the  haunts  of  such  mountain-loving  fauna 
as  ibex,  wild-sheep,  and  snow-cock  margin  closely  on 
those  of  gazelle  and  wild-horses  !  The  region  is  one  of 
peculiar  extremes  even  for  Central  Asia,  where,  as  Curzon 
has  remarked,  "nature  seems  to  revel  in  striking  the 
extreme  chords  upon  her  miraculous  and  inexhaustible 
gamut  of  sound." 

It  was  the  Karlik  Tagh  that  was  the  real  object  of 
our  visit,  for,  although  we  traversed  some  3,000  miles  of 
country  in  Dzungaria  both  by  plain  and  mountain,  this 
portion  alone  offered  the  chance  of  making  additions  to 
geographical  knowledge.  The  region  between  the  Altai 
and  Tian  Shan  had  been  fairly  well  mapped  ;  new  ground 
alone  remained  on  the  south-eastern  border-ranges — 
the  Bogdo-ola,  Barkul,  and  Karlik  Tagh.  To  speak  of 
this  region  as  being  a  part  of  Dzungaria  is  incorrect, 
for  the  watershed  of  these  ranges  forms  the  boundary 
between  that  country  and  Chinese  Turkestan;   but,  in 


KAMI,    OR    KUMUL  493 

this  case,  the  boundary  of  the  region  to  which  we  de- 
voted ourselves  was  of  necessity  a  pohtical  one,  the 
Karhk  Tagh  on  both  north  and  south  belonging  to  the 
Khan  of  Kumul.  This  was  the  only  point  where  our 
work  extended  outside  the  natural  boundaries  of  Dzun- 
garia. 

The  area  of  country  over  which  the  word  of  the 
Khan  is  law,  includes  the  entire  mountain-group  of 
Karlik  Tagh  and  the  plains  to  the  north,  south,  and  east, 
as  far  as  Karlik  Tagh  water  flows.  The  Tur  Kul  basin 
on  the  north  side  of  the  range,  and  the  eastern  half  of 
the  Metshin-ola,  an  offshoot  of  the  main  group,  is  in- 
cluded, as  is  also  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Barkul  basin, 
beyond  Kou-si.  The  Barkul  range,  as  far  north  as  the 
watershed,  is  the  Khan's,  while  the  western  boundary 
of  his  territory  is  determined  by  the  town  of  Lodun,  or 
Liao-tun,  three  stages  along  the  high-road  to  Turfan. 

The  fact  that  our  goal  lay  entirely  within  the  jurisdic- 
tion of  the  Khan  greatly  simplified  matters  for  us. 
When  we  informed  him  of  our  plans  he  answered  that 
he  and  all  his  belongings  were  at  our  disposal ;  we  could 
ask  all  we  needed,  and  should  lack  nothing  so  long  as 
we  were  within  his  territory.  Consequently,  orders 
were  given  to  enable  us  to  travel  at  our  pleasure  and 
view  the  whole  of  his  country;  whilst  letters  were 
sent  ahead  and  the  way  prepared,  we  had  time  to 
enjoy  the  beauties  of  the  mountains  which  it  had  for 
so  long  been  our  ambition  to  visit. 


CHAPTER    XVII 

THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

On  a  clear  day  the  view  from  Kumul  is  inspiring.  South- 
wards stretch  the  yellow  deserts  to  the  fabulous  Lake 
Toli,  and  still  farther  away  to  the  gates  of  China  Proper. 
Across  these  runs  the  track  connecting  Sin-Kiang  with 
the  home  provinces.  A  desert-stage  of  eighteen  days 
would  take  the  traveller  to  An-hsi-chow,  on  the  farther 
side  of  the  Gobi,  and  two  more  would  allow  him  to  rest 
his  eyes  on  the  Hoang  Ho — the  Yellow  River.  North- 
wards rise  the  snow-ridges  of  the  Barkul  range,  linking 
up  farther  east  with  the  Karlik  Tagh,  which  culminates 
in  several  fine  summits.  The  mountains  rise  abruptly, 
straight  from  the  plain,  superb  in  their  setting  of  far- 
flung  Gobi,  lifting  their  crests  in  triumph  above  the 
haze  and  the  dust  of  the  low-lying  deserts. 

It  was  early  spring  when  we  first  sighted  the  Karlik 
Tagh,  the  abundant  snows  that  lay  on  the  high,  flat 
summits  and  spread  themselves  out  in  smooth  fields  over 
the  plateaux  lending  an  enchantment  to  the  somewhat 
barren  plains  of  dust  and  stone  that  lay  around.  Here 
the  mountains  end  and  the  deserts  begin,  for  at  this 
point  the  great  Tian  Shan  mountain-system,  after  extend- 
ing from  west  to  east  for  close  on  sixteen  hundred  miles, 
finds  at  last  its  limit.  Dropping,  as  before  described, 
into  a  low,  rounded  plateau-country  at  the  eastern  end 

494 


THE   KARLIK   TAGH  495 

of  the  Bogdo-ola  section,  it  then  rises  again  in  one 
last  effort,  attains  a  worthy  altitude  of  over  14,000  ft., 
and  drops  sheer  into  utter  desert.  This  solitary  group 
of  snow  pinnacles  stands  as  a  sentinel  guarding  the 
marches  of  Mongolia,  of  Dzungaria,  and  of  Turkestan. 
Day  after  day,  during  our  tramps  around  the  range, 
those  peaks  were  our  land-mark,  and  for  weeks  during 
our  survey-work  our  "  sights"  rested  continually  on  them. 
Far  out  into  the  deserts  beyond,  they  guided  us  and  put 
aright  our  erring  calculations.  They  were  a  source 
of  wonder,  whether  sulphur-yellow  as  dawn  flushed  the 
sky,  or  caught  at  evening  by  the  rose-gleam  when  the 
flats  below  were  already  dusky;  scarcely  a  day  passed 
without  our  being  treated  to  some  new  impression  of  the 
Karlik  Tagh. 

A  word  as  to  our  forerunners  in  these  regions  and 
the  extent  of  their  discoveries. 

In  1872  we  received  the  first  accounts  of  the  way 
thither  from  Russian  territory,  through  the  means  of  a 
trading  expedition,  which  a  Russian  merchant  despatched 
into  Mongolia,  and  which  touched  at  Barkul  on  its 
wanderings.  It  was  not  until  1875,  however,  that  the 
first  true  explorers,  coming  across  the  Gobi  Desert  from 
China,  roughly  recorded  the  topography  of  Kumul, 
Barkul,  and  the  neighbouring  mountains.  These  were 
Russians  —  Sosnovski  and  Matussovski,  who  came 
through  to  Kumul  by  the  high-road  from  Western  China, 
and,  crossing  the  passes  to  Barkul,  visited  Guchen  on 
their  way  home  to  Siberia.  A  member  of  the  expedition, 
Piassetsky,  left  us  an  account  of  this  journey,  one  of  the 
few  records  of  Russian  travel  which  has  been  translated 
into  the  English  language. 

To  these  travellers  must  be  assigned  the  honour  of 
II — 12 


496  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

being  the  first  visitors,  but  the  following  year  more 
systematic  work  than  theirs  was  accomplished,  and 
finer  results  obtained,  by  the  expedition  under  the 
celebrated  Potanin,  who,  with  Rafailow  as  surveyor, 
came  down  to  Barkul  from  Kobdo  and  the  Eastern  Altai. 
The  expedition  crossed  the  Barkul  Range,  paid  a  short 
visit  to  Kumul,  and  returned  by  the  same  pass  {the 
Kosheti-dawan) ,  by  which  they  had  come.  The  travellers 
then  explored  the  northern  flanks  of  Karlik  Tagh  as  far 
as  Adak  and  Nom,  and  returned  to  Siberia  by  way  of 
Uliassutai.  The  maps  of  Potanin  and  Rafailow  stood 
for  many  years  as  the  standard  survey  of  those  regions, 
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  up  till  the  time  of  our  visit 
there  had  been  no  additions  to  their  original  survey  of 
the  northern  flanks  of  the  Karlik  Tagh.  Rafailow  de- 
termined the  astronomical  positions  of  Barkul,  Adak, 
and  Kumul ;  but,  although  his  observations  still  hold 
good  for  the  two  former  places,  more  recent  work  by 
Stein's  surveyor  and  Mr.  Clementi  has  placed  Kumul 
slightly  farther  to  the  west.  The  retention  on  the  maps 
of  the  work  of  these  early  explorers  shows  how  few  other 
travellers  have  visited  this  region  during  the  time  which 
has  elapsed  since  its  first  discovery. 

The  next  visitor  was  Prjevalsky,  who  seems  to  have 
included  visits  to  most  towns  in  Central  Asia  on  his 
itinerary  of  exploration.  This  experienced  traveller, 
on  his  third  scientific  journey  through  Middle  Asia, 
(1879-80),  passed  by  Barkul — without  entering  it,  and 
rested  for  a  short  time  at  Kumul  on  his  way  to  Tibet. 
He  gives  a  short  description  of  the  famous  oasis,  but 
has  nothing  to  say  about  the  Karlik  Tagh  or  neigh- 
bouring ranges. 

Although   Potanin   gave   us   the   first   ideas   of   the 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  497 

geography  of  the  Karhk  Tagh  Mountains  and  the  basin 
of  Barkul,  it  remained  for  two  other  explorers,  the 
brothers  Grum  Grjimailo  (1889-91),  to  show  the 
nature  of  the  country  between  the  Barkul  and  the  Bogdo- 
ola  groups  and  of  the  desert  region  to  the  south-east  of 
Kumul.  The  topography  of  these  regions,  as  represented 
on  the  maps  predating  their  explorations,  was  mere 
imagination.  These  travellers,  who  were  chiefly  interested 
in  natural  history,  were  the  first  to  put  forward  a  theory 
that  the  Karlik  Tagh  had  certain  affinities  with  the  Altai 
mountain-system,  instead  of,  as  expected,  with  the  Tian 
Shan.  They  were  the  first  to  explore  the  famous  Bogdo- 
ola  Mountains  and  the  Tou-shui  plateau,  which  they 
crossed  and  recrossed  in  several  different  directions.  They 
also  visited  Kumul  and  the  southern  flanks  of  the  Karlik 
Tagh,  before  striking  east-south-east  into  the  unknown 
Gobi. 

In  1887  the  first  Englishman  visited  Kumul ;  this 
was  Captain  (now  Sir  Francis)  Younghusband,  who,  in 
the  course  of  a  trans-continental  journey  from  Pekin  to 
India,  came  to  the  Karlik  Tagh  from  the  north-east, 
having  followed  the  northern  Gobi  trade-route  from 
Kalgan.  He  crossed  the  eastern  spurs  of  the  Karlik 
Tagh  from  Mogai  to  Kumul,  and,  staying  there  four 
days,  passed  on  to  Turfan  and  Kashgar.  In  the  same 
year  Colonel  Mark  Bell  reached  Kumul  from  the  south 
and  crossed  the  ranges  to  Barkul,  thus  being  the  only 
Englishman  in  advance  of  us  to  visit  this  town. 

The  map  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  region  remained  un- 
revised  until  Kozloff  arrived  in  Kumul,  at  the  termination 
of  extended  journeys  in  Chinese  Turkestan  and  Tibet, 
accomplished  between  the  years  1893-5.  In  those  days 
Kozloff  was  working  under  the  experienced  Roborovsky^,.^-^^t  ^ 

'-  c*  ■-  i,-     /^ 


498  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

but  he  was  entrusted  with  the  management  of  many- 
lateral  expeditions.  From  Kumul,  for  instance,  he  made 
an  excursion  into  the  Karlik  Tagh,  and  gave  us  the 
most  up-to-date  map  of  that  region  as  a  whole,  which 
still  stands  on  the  Russian  "  40-verst  "  sheets  as  the 
most  correct  survey.  Kozloff's  journey  was  the  most 
scientific,  and  gave  finer  results  than  any  other  traveller's 
in  those  regions.  He  visited  Narin,  Tur  Kul,  Adak,  Nom, 
and  Bai,  and  made  an  ascent  into  the  alpine  region^ 
describing  his  experiences  with  remarkable  ability. 

After  Kozloff's  visit  twelve  years  elapsed  before  the 
next  explorer  set  foot  in  these  regions.  This  was  Dr. 
(now  Sir  Aurel)  Stein,  who,  in  his  itinerary  of  archaeo- 
logical research,  made  the  complete  circuit  of  Chinese 
Turkestan.  Stein  arrived  in  Kumul  in  the  autumn 
of  1907,  and  spent  two  weeks  in  the  oasis  itself  and 
on  a  visit  to  Toruk  and  Ara-tam  ;  there  he  investi- 
gated the  ruins  of  certain  Buddhist  shrines,  while  Rai 
Lai  Singh,  his  Indian  surveyor,  explored  the  southern 
flanks  of  the  mountains  between  Khotun-tam  and  the 
Barkul  passes.  Stein's  work  considerably  altered  the 
configuration  of  this  portion  of  the  range  as  shown  on 
previous  maps,  and  a  certain  amount  of  material  from 
his  maps  is  embodied  in  that  published  at  the  end  of  this 
volume. 

During  Stein's  visit  to  Kumul  another  traveller,  Mr. 
Cecil  Clementi,  passed  through  on  his  way  across  China. 
Success  in  the  laborious  undertaking  of  making  a  com- 
plete series  of  astronomically  fixed  positions  right  across 
China  from  Kashgar  to  Hong-Kong  has  caused  the 
acceptance  of  his  position  for  Kumul,  in  preference  to 
those  of  others,  in  the  reproduction  of  my  plane-table 
survey ;  beyond  this  his  work  has  not  affected  mine.    The 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  499 

antiquities  of  this  region  have  been  investigated  by  Dr. 
von  Lecoq  and  Professor  Griinwedel,  who  explored  those 
they  considered  worthy  of  excavation,  near  Togucha,  to 
the  west  of  Kumul,  where  they  found  interesting  remains 
belonging  to  Buddhist  times. 

Many  other  travellers  have,  no  doubt,  passed  through 
Kumul  on  their  way  east  or  west,  but  none,  except 
those  here  enumerated,  have,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain, 
visited  Karlik  Tagh  or  Barkul.  The  object  of  our  visit 
was  to  complete  the  survey  of  the  region  and  to  bring 
out  a  detailed  map  of  the  whole  mountain-group,  as 
well  as  to  gain  some  idea  of  its  fauna,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
decide  the  exact  place  the  Karlik  Tagh  holds  in  the  life- 
zones  of  Central  Asia.  A  lateral  journey  to  the  far  east, 
which  should  have  included  a  visit  to  the  Ati  Bogdo, 
was  planned,  but  this  most  important  portion  of  the 
programme  had  to  be  given  up,  owing  primarily  to 
the  extreme  difficulty  of  finding  transport  or  guides  into 
a  region  to  which  men  never  go — from  this  quarter, 
as  well  as  to  lack  of  time.  By  making  a  complete 
circle  around  the  range,  however,  by  penetrating  to 
its  uppermost  valleys,  and  clambering  (with  no  small 
amount  of  difficulty)  over  its  rugged  sandstone  foot-hills, 
we  gained  a  reliable  idea  of  its  physical  features  and 
a  rare  insight  into  the  conditions  of  life  on  this  insular 
mountain-group. ' 

The  panorama  of  mountains  spread  out  to  the  north 
and  north-east  of  Kumul  was  instructive.  North  of  the 
oasis,  at  a  distance  of  about  twenty-five  miles,  lay  the 
Barkul  Range,  running  east  and  west,  in  a  narrow 
ridge.  The  western  part  of  this  range  presented  the 
appearance   of   a   fiat-topped   block-mountain,    but   in 

^  See  map  at  end  of  volume. 


500  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

the  neighbourhood  of  the  highest  peaks  the  ridge  became 
rough  and  serrated.  Farther  east  the  Barkul  Range 
dropped  in  altitude,  thus  allowing  free  intercourse 
between  Kumul  and  the  northern  steppes,  over  several 
cols  of  between  8,000  to  9,000  ft.  in  height.  At  this 
point  the  Karlik  Tagh  began, — a  long,  table-topped 
ridge  which  gradually  inclined  from  9,000  ft.  to  the 
summit  of  the  highest  peak  in  the  centre  of  the  range. 

The  western  Karlik  Tagh  showed   a  large  expanse 
of  deep-lying  snow-fields,  which  added  to  the  grandeur 
of  this  panoramic  view,  and  emphasized  the  peculiar, 
blocked-shaped  formation  of  the  range.     Its  plateau-like 
summit  was  seamed  by  deep-cut,  steep-sided  ravines, 
which  led  off  the  drainage.     Even  the  highest  peaks 
visible  from  Kumul  were  of  a  rounded  type,  and  did  not 
do  justice  to  their  height  ;   but  immediately  to  the  east 
of  the  culminating  point  the  formation  changed,   the 
plateau   broke   up   and  fell  off  into  excessively  rough 
country,    with    lofty,  tooth-like   pinnacles   and   jagged 
peaks,  well  worn,  razor-edged  ridges,  splintered  precipices, 
and  V-shaped  valleys.     The  snow-line  extended  for  over 
thirty  miles  in  length,  and  over  this  area,  even  in  summer, 
no  pass  or  track  is  known  by  which  man  can  cross  the 
range  from  north  to  south.     Barren,  stony  plains  led 
up  to  the  foot-hills,  which  rose  suddenly  in  the  form  of 
a  rough,  steep  ridge  of  sandstone.     This  the  desert  had 
waged  war  upon  and  successfully  overrun,  but  beyond 
these  outlying  foot-hills  the  higher  slopes  showed  welcome 
green  of  forest,  above  which  naked  rock  and  shale-slopes 
led  up  to  stainless,  untrodden  snow-fields. 

Whilst  waiting  for  our  transport  arrangements  to  be 
completed,  we  made  a  short  trip  to  the  foot  of  the 
mountains,  which  gave  us  a  good  impression  of  the  nature 


ROUGH    CLIMBING   IN    THE    KARLIK    TAGH. 


joo] 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  501 

of  the  ground  and  of  the  condition  of  the  Kumuhk  culti- 
vators in  those  parts.  Leaving  Kumul  on  March  12th 
with  one  man  as  guide,  we  rode  to  the  north-north-east. 
Immediately  on  leaving  the  cultivated  areas  we  found 
that  the  sandy  soil,  deprived  of  its  moisture  by  irrigation 
works,  was  threatening  to  overrun  the  oasis ;  the  land  had 
perished,  and  the  desert  was  encroaching  on  the  "  sown." 
Beyond  this,  a  bare  gravel  ''sai"  led  us,  for  twenty 
miles,  up  to  the  rocky  girdle  of  sandstone  which  forms 
the  first  foot-hills  of  the  range.  There  was  nothing  to 
note  during  this  long  ride  except  one  great  watch-tower 
which  stood  alone  in  the  plain,  about  half-way  between 
Kumul  and  the  mountains.  Being  massively  built,  it 
formed  a  landmark  for  a  great  distance,  and  was  evidently 
intended  as  a  place  of  refuge.  Stein  says  that  it  was 
reputed  to  be  of  great  age,  and  he  questions  from  what 
marauding  tribes  of  the  north  was  it  meant  to  offer 
shelter. 

On  approaching  the  foot-hills  we  found  a  small  river 
issuing  from  a  gorge  in  the  sandstone  range,  and 
forming  a  tiny  area  of  fertile  land  at  the  point  where 
it  entered  the  plain.  The  river  had  cut  a  deep  trench 
in  the  gravel  fan,  and  terraces  a  hundred  feet  high 
margined  the  little  valley,  in  which  were  ensconced  the 
fields  and  village  of  Toruk.  Toruk  was  apparently  a 
typical  village  of  Kumuliks,  whose  progress  is  limited 
by  the  amount  of  land  at  their  disposal  and  the  amount 
of  water  they  are  allowed  to  use  for  irrigation  purposes. 
This  locality  supported  only  some  twelve  or  fifteen  houses ; 
these  were  crowded  together  in  the  space  of  less  than 
half  an  acre,  and  formed  a  circle,  completely  walled 
in  but  for  one  wide  gateway.  Boulders  from  the  river- 
bed and  mud  formed  the  building  material.     Naturally 


502  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

the  houses  were  mere  hovels,  but  we  were  entertained 
by  the  friendly  Kumuliks  in  their  homely  way,  and 
given  the  best  that  the  village  could  offer. 

Their  land  scarcely  extended  for  a  mile  down  the 
valley,  which  was  half  a  mile  wide ;  but  even  this  small 
area  was  not  all  available  for  cultivation,  the  growing  of 
crops  depending  upon  the  amount  of  soil  left  amongst  the 
rocks  and  boulders.  Every  available  spot  was  used,  and 
I  strongly  suspect  the  artificial  making  of  fields  within 
range  of  the  irrigation  canals,  by  the  laborious  means  of 
bringing  soil  from  the  terraces  above.  This  example  shows 
how  closely  the  economic  possibilities  of  Karlik  Tagh 
are  put  to  the  test  by  the  Kumuliks  and  what  amount 
of  labour  is  expended  in  order  to  sustain  their  simple 
lives.  The  river,  the  main  source  of  the  water-supply  of 
Kumul,  must  bring  a  considerable  flood  at  times,  for  it 
was  spanned  by  a  good  bridge.  At  the  time  of  our  visit 
it  was  frozen  over,  but  water  was  flowing  under  the  two- 
foot  coating  of  ice.  Two  miles  below  the  village  it  dis- 
appeared altogether  below  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and 
three  miles  farther  even  the  high  river-terraces  spread 
out  and  lost  themselves  in  the  wide  fan  of  the  river-bed, 
which  farther  still  became  scarcely  discernible. 

Above  the  village  rose  the  sandstone  foot-hills  of  Karlik 
Tagh.  This  outlying  range  of  sandstone  was  perhaps 
the  most  peculiar  feature  of  this  side  of  the  mountains.^ 
It  extended  as  a  barrier  between  the  plain  and  the  high- 
lands all  the  way  from  Toruk  to  Khotun-tam,  and  con- 
fined the  Taghliks,  or  mountaineers,  and  their  villages  to 
the  secluded  upper  valleys  which  lay  behind.  Toruk, 
for  instance,  was  quite  cut  off  from  direct  communication 
with    those    numerous    settlements    of    Taghliks    which 

1  See  diagram,  p.  521. 


IS*' 


1— 


GORGE   IN   THE   SANDSTONE   FOOTHILLS    OF   KARLIK   TAGH. 
502] 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  503 

find  ample  room  for  cultivation  on  the  middle  course  of 
the  river,  between  the  sandstone  and  the  main  range. 
The  rivers  invariably  pass  through  this  sandstone  ridge 
in  deep-cut,  impassable  ravines,  the  lower  valle^-s  rarely 
giving  access  to  the  upper.  This  rendered  travelling  ex- 
ceedingly laborious,  it  being  necessary  to  make  big  detours 
in  order  to  reach  the  mountain  villages  situated  at  the 
back  of  the  foot-hills. 

We  returned  to  Kumul  by  the  way  we  had  come,  and 
set  about  making  the  final  arrangements  for  our  move 
eastwards.  By  command  of  the  Khan,  men  and  horses 
were  provided  for  us,  and  such  orders  were  given  as 
would  enable  us  to  travel  at  our  pleasure,  and  see  the 
whole  of  his  territory.  An  old  Kumulik  Beg,  a  gentleman 
of  most  courtly  manners,  was  especially  deputed  to 
accompany  us  and  to  arrange  all  our  affairs  whilst  travel- 
ling within  the  Khanate.  Relays  of  horses  were  to  take 
us  from  place  to  place,  wherever  our  work  led  us,  whilst 
our  heavy  baggage  could  go  by  cart  along  the  plain,  at 
the  foot  of  the  mountain.  Lodgings  were  to  be  prepared 
for  us  at  the  villages  and  food  supplied,  and  injunctions 
were  given  that,  as  we  were  travelling  under  the  Khan's 
orders,  no  remuneration  should  be  demanded  of  us.  It 
was  only  by  a  careful  and  secret  distribution  of  presents 
to  those  who  had  been  called  upon  to  supply  food, 
lodging,  or  transport,  that  we  were  able  to  accept,  with 
a  clear  conscience,  the  hospitality  of  the  mountaineers 
of  Karlik  Tagh.  In  this  manner  we  traversed  the  whole 
of  the  Karlik  Tagh  until  leaving  the  territor)^  of  the  Khan 
at  Barkul. 

We  finally  left  Kumul  on  March  15th,  and  travelled 
eastwards  to  Ta-shar,  a  village  which  proved  to  be  another 
example  of  the  admirable  use  the  Kumuliks  make  of  good 


504  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

soil,  Ij'ing  within  play  of  a  river  as  it  issues  from  the 
sandstone  range  and  before  it  sinks  into  the  ground.  Ta- 
shar  was  a  tiny  hamlet,  but  seemed  to  be  able  to  supply 
all  that  we  needed : — a  warm,  clean,  and  comfortable 
lodging,  excellent  Chanto  food,  and  pleasant  people  to  deal 
with.  The  following  day  we  sent  our  heav^^  baggage  on  to 
Khotun-tam  by  the  plain,  whilst  Miller  and  I,  escorted  by 
our  friend  and  guide — the  Beg,  made  a  detour  and  worked 
our  way  round  by  a  mountain-track.  Ta-shar  was 
situated  at  the  end  of  the  Bardash  River,  which  came 
out  from  a  sandstone  gorge  a  few  miles  above,  a  foaming, 
laughing,  racing  stream,  watering  on  its  way  the  famous 
orchards  and  gardens  which  surround  Ara-tam,  the  summer 
residence  of  the  Khan. 

From  Ta-shar  we  picked  our  way  over  a  boulder- 
strewn  fan,  where  the  hardy  cultivators  had  endeavoured 
to  make  their  fields,  and  presently  found  ourselves 
wandering  amongst  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the  Khan's 
gardens.  Gigantic  poplars  towered  above  the  groves  of 
walnut,  apple,  peach,  and  apricot -trees ;  under  these, 
running  brooks,  bordered  by  dense  scrub,  tumbled 
their  way  over  the  steep  descent  to  the  plain.  It  was 
an  approach  as  charming  as  if  laid  out  by  Nature  herself, 
our  chief  regret  being  that  the  trees  were  not  yet  in  leaf. 
The  Khan's  country-house  lay  close  under  the  sandstone 
ridge,  half  hidden  by  fine  old  trees.  Here  we  rested  and 
drank  tea  provided  by  the  caretakers,  before  exploring 
the  ruins  which,  although  in  a  much  dilapidated  con- 
dition, still  remain.  The  cellas,  the  remains  of  seated 
Buddhas  carved  out  of  the  rock,  and  the  frescoes  have 
been  described  by  Stein,  who  placed  them  as  belong- 
ing to  the  time  of  the  Uigur  dominion,  i.e.  between 
the  ninth  and  twelfth  centuries.     Great  destruction,  due 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  505 

to  fire  and  moisture,  had  robbed  the  excavator  of  what 
might  have  been  of  great  interest,  and  the  existence  of 
these  shrines  was  little  more  than  a  proof  of  the  former 
religion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Karlik  Tagh,  besides  show- 
ing that  this  locality  must  have  been  a  favourite 
summer-resort  of  the  old  Uigur  Khans.  Their  collapse  is 
a  sign  that  Karlik  Tagh  lies  on  the  edge  of  a  region  of 
greater  precipitation  than  is  the  Tarim  basin,  where, 
owing  to  lack  of  rainfall,  such  antiquities  have  remained 
intact. 

The  Bardash  Valley,  whose  waters  irrigate  Ara-tam, 
is  typical  of  the  whole  southern  side  of  Karlik  Tagh,  so  I 
may  as  well  give  my  impressions,  as  they  came  to  me,  of 
the  contrasting  features  of  the  entire  length  of  the  valley,, 
from  sandstone  barrier  to  glacier-snout.  Leaving  the 
plain,  we  faced  the  abrupt  wall  that  formed  the  first 
foot-hills.  The  river- valley  itself  was  not  negotiable, — 
the  stream  winding  its  way  through  a  steep-sided  ravine 
and  allowing  no  space  for  a  track, — so  for  some  hours 
we  toiled  painfully  over  barren  red  ridges,  destitute  of 
everything  but  thorn-scrub.  Occasionally  from  the  crest 
of  a  ridge  we  got  a  view  of  some  peaks  far  ahead  in  the 
heart  of  the  range,  and  of  the  immeasurable  desert  that 
lay  below  and  behind  us ;  but  later,  when  we  dropped 
down  out  of  the  sandstone  border-ridges  into  the  main 
Bardash  Valley,  our  views  were  impeded  by  the  sur- 
rounding hills.  Here,  beside  the  mountain-stream,  grew 
thickets  of  willow  and  rose,  and  we  passed  under  groups 
of  tall  poplars,  elms,  and  walnuts  which  in  summer 
would  grant  welcome  shade  to  these  hot,  shut-in  valleys. 
At  convenient  and  picturesque  places  our  friend,  the 
Beg,  would  produce  a  "  dastarkhan  "  of  bread,  dried 
apricots,   and  raisins,  and  persuade  us  to  rest  a  little. 


5o6  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

He  had  evidently  been  told  to  show  off  the  beauties  of 
his  master's  possessions,  having  already  led  us  around 
the  Khan's  old  country-seat  with  an  enthusiasm  that 
would  have  done  justice  to  any  professional  showman. 

For  the  twelve  miles  of  mountain  which  lay  between 
Ara-tam  and  the  settlements  on  the  middle  Bardash  there 
was  neither  room  nor  facility  for  human  occupation,  but 
later  in  the  day  we  came  to  a  place  where  the  hills 
receded,  the  valley-floor  widened,  and  men  had  space  to 
cultivate.  In  these  secluded  upper  valleys,  such  as  the 
Bardash,  the  Taghliks,  or  mountaineers,  lived  a  peaceful 
existence.  Their  settlements  were  scattered,  and  the 
villages  never  large,  their  size  depending  entirely  on  the 
amount  of  land  left  at  their  disposal  by  somewhat  harsh 
physical  conditions.  Most  valleys  supported  but  one 
village  ;  only  in  the  Narin  Valley,  where  two  rivers  united 
before  breaking  through  the  outer-range,  were  there 
several  villages  and  a  considerable  extent  of  cultivation. 
Often,  too,  we  came  across  isolated  groups  of  three  or  four 
farmsteads  located  in  a  place  where  the  nature  of  the 
country  afforded  only  such  an  area  of  cultivatable  land 
as  to  just  support  them.  Every  available  patch  of 
ground  was  made  use  of,  and  I  do  not  believe  there  are 
many  spare  acres  on  the  mountains.  With  an  increasing 
population,  the  land  available  for  cultivation  does  not 
increase,  and,  since  the  Khan  forbids  emigration,  there  is 
**  overcrowding  "  in  the  pleasant  valleys  of  the  "  snowy  " 
range. 

After  the  impoverished  aspect  of  the  plains  these  high 
valleys  seemed  pleasant  enough.  We  rode  through  fields 
which  had  been  cleared — with  infinite  labour — of  rocks, 
and  crossed  brooks  of  clearest  water  margined  by  dainty 
willows.     Chukar  and  brown  partridges  called  from  the 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  507 

hillsides,  and  small  boys  herding  the  flocks  of  goats  sang 
more  joyous  songs  in  their  mountain-home  than  did  their 
confreres  of  the  melancholy  plains.  Pleasantly  situated^ 
too,  were  their  houses  of  stone  and  mud,  which  were, 
in  many  cases,  perched  on  the  rocks  so  as  to  avoid  wasting 
land  capable  of  growing  crops.  In  no  less  a  degree  did 
the  people  attract  us.  They  were  essentially  mountain- 
folk  ;  their  environment  seemed  to  have  so  branded 
them  that  we  imagined  we  could  trace  a  likeness  between 
them  and  the  Tadjik  mountaineers  of  Bokhara  or  Hunza, 
rather  than  the  lethargic  Chantos  of  the  Turkestan 
plains.  The  lives  of  these  mountain-folk  were  certainly 
harder  than  those  of  the  Kumuliks  in  the  hot  oases  below. 
The  ground  had  to  be  cleared  of  rocks  before  ploughing 
was  possible,  and,  even  then,  there  was  not  overmuch 
land. 

Bardash  was  a  scattered  village  of  about  twenty  farm- 
steads, and  had  additional  importance  owing  to  the 
presence  of  a  disused  country-house  belonging  to  the 
Khan.  In  former  days  this  had  always  been  the  summer 
resort  of  the  ruling  chiefs,  but  the  present  Khan  was  too 
old  to  accomplish  the  journey  over  the  mountains,  and 
his  "  shooting-box  "  had  now  fallen  into  disrepair.  It 
was,  however,  a  "  show  place  "  to  visitors  like  ourselves, 
and  we  were  escorted  over  it  with  much  ceremony,  appar- 
ently by  the  orders  of  the  great  man  himself.  The  house 
was  charmingly  situated  in  an  orchard,  surrounded  by 
fine  walnut-trees ;  but,  being  built  largely  of  wood,  in 
Chinese  style,  it  had  fared  badly  from  wet  and  winter 
snow. 

The  chief  man  of  the  village  set  aside  for  us  a  room 
in  his  home,  killed  a  sheep,  and  made  a  real  Turkish 
"  pillof  "  in  our  honour.     They  were  a  gay,  happy  lot 


5o8  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

at  Bardash,  free  of  intercourse  and  outwardly  friendly 
with  us  non-Mussulmans,  owing  no  doubt  to  the 
distance  which  separated  Bardash  from  Kumul  and 
placed  them  beyond  the  influence  of  their  hard  task- 
master, the  Khan.  For  this  separation  the  sandstone 
range  must  be  accounted  largely  responsible.  The  men 
were  well-made,  clad  in  half- Chinese,  half-Chanto  cos- 
tumes, and  wore  moccasins  over  thick  felt  stockings.  The 
women,  too,  were  more  independent  than  their  friends 
"  in  town"  ;  they  made  no  attempt  to  hide  their  faces, 
and  behaved  with  a  freedom  and  natural  inquisitiveness 
which  was  denied  to  the  Kumulik  ladies.  Their  good- 
humoured  merriment  was  cheering  after  the  morosity 
and  stolid  indifference  to  amusement  to  which  we  had 
become  almost  accustomed  ;  their  hospitality  and  friend- 
liness were  a  real  pleasure  after  the  reticence  of  the 
surly  Chinamen  ;  and  their  neat  little  houses  gave  one 
some  impression  of  a  true  home  after  the  cold  welcome 
of  inns  and  the  draughty  abodes  of  wandering  nomads. 
The  Taghliks  much  impressed  us,  for  we  had  travelled 
for  close  on  a  year  without  coming  across  sedentary 
mountain-dwellers  ;  nomads  in  the  high  mountains  were 
common  enough,  but  only  in  the  Karlik  Tagh  did  we 
find  villages  inhabited  by  a  settled  race. 

Later  in  the  course  of  the  expedition  I  again  visited 
Bardash  and  explored  the  valley  up  to  its  source  under 
the  highest  peak  of  the  range.  Cultivation  and  farms  I 
found  extending  up  the  valley  for  several  miles, — as  far 
as  the  foot  of  an  immense  old  moraine,  which  reached 
for  a  distance  of  some  six  or  seven  miles  below  the 
existing  glaciers.  This  moraine  choked  the  valley,  the 
main  river  and  a  tributary  passing  through  deep  gorges 
on  either  side  of    it ;    yet   even  here  the  natives  had 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  509 

cunningly  led  irrigation-canals  from  the  streams  on  to  the 
top  of  the  ancient  moraine,  where  they  cultivated  small 
fields  of  barley. 

In  this  naked  land,  denuded  of  vegetation,  every  geo- 
graphical feature  was  demonstrated  with  diagrammatic 
clearness.  The  former  extent  of  glaciation  was  clearly 
shown.  I  travelled  for  two  hours  over  this  old  moraine 
before  coming  to  more  recent  ones,  typified  by  hollows 
filled  with  little  lakes  ;  and  after  toiling  several  hours 
through  deep  snow-drifts  arrived  at  impregnable  country 
close  to  the  glaciers  which  hung  below  the  highest  peaks. 
The  Bardash  River  had  three  heads ;  these  drained  the 
southern  side  of  the  highest  points,  all  of  them  having 
their  sources  in  glaciers.  The  largest  of  these  was  at 
the  source  of  the  tributary  which  rose  on  the  south- 
western side  of  Peak  No.  IL,  but  I  did  not  measure  it  ; 
the  glacier  on  the  south-eastern  side  was  about  a  mile 
in  length,  and  that  at  the  head  of  the  other  source 
half  a  mile  long.  All  the  glaciers  were  very  steep  ; 
and,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  were  in  a  state  of  retreat. 
Observations  on  the  northern  side  of  the  mountains, 
however,  seemed  to  point  to  a  recent  advance  in  the 
snouts  of  the  glaciers. 

The  uppermost  portion  of  the  valley  should  afford 
fine  summer  pastures,  and  is,  no  doubt,  made  use  of 
by  the  Taghliks,  but  at  the  time  of  my  visit  (April  8th) 
it  was  deep  in  snow,  which  lay  everywhere  above 
8,000  ft.  The  arid  nature  of  this  valley  was  proved 
by  the  fact  of  it  possessing  no  forest  ;  I  saw  only  one 
little  group  of  larch  trees.  This  is  strange,  because 
forests  of  considerable  extent  exist  on  the  southern 
flanks  of  the  far  eastern  end  of  the  range  and  on  the 
northern    flanks    at    the    north-western    end,    yet   the 


510  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

Bardash  Valley,  situated  close  under  the  culminating 
point  of  the  range,  should  possess  a  more  abundant 
rainfall,  and,  therefore,  heavier  vegetation. 

In  the  Upper  Bardash  I  found  myself  in  a  trench- 
like valley,  with  wide,  open  bottom  and  steep  sides, 
up  which  it  was  necessary  to  clamber  in  order  to 
obtain  a  view.  Climbing,  however,  was  no  easy  task, 
for  the  snow  was  soft  and  let  me  in  up  to  the  knees — and 
often  up  to  the  hips — at  every  step,  but  four  hours  of 
stiff  work  over  snow-covered  boulder-skrees  took  me 
up  on  to  that  table-topped  ridge,  so  distinctly  seen  from 
Kumul.  The  view  repaid  me  for  the  strenuous  climb, 
for,  at  a  fair  distance,  I  had  spread  out  before  me  a 
complete  panorama  of  the  highest  peaks  (from  No.  I 
to  VIP),  which  taught  me  the  topography  of  the  alpine 
regions  of  Karlik  Tagh  far  better  than  if  I  had  ascended 
the  highest  peak  itself,  which  at  this  season  was  impreg- 
nable. The  panoramic  view  I  obtained  is  reproduced 
on  page  496  ;  it  clearly  demonstrates  the  plateau-like 
summit  of  the  western  end  of  the  range,  and  the  deep- 
cut  gorges  of  which  I  spoke.  The  culminating  point  of 
the  range  shows  as  a  rounded  summit,  and  to  the  east  of 
it  are  the  serrated  ridges  and  pinnacles  of  the  eastern 
portion  of  the  Karlik  Tagh. 

The  excessive  roughness  of  the  country  made  travel- 
ling laterally  along  the  range  very  difficult.  The  valley 
of  Bardash  was  so  cut  off  that,  in  order  to  reach  another 
valley,  one  needed  to  toil  over  transverse  ridges  for  a  day's 
journey.  A  break  in  the  formation,  however,  allowed 
a  track  to  run  east  and  west  along  the  north  side  of 
the  sandstone  range,  between  it  and  the  higher  spurs. 
We  followed  this  route  from  Bardash,  and,  passing  the 
forested  valley  of  Karchamak,  arrived  at  Khotun-tam,  a 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  511 

village  situated  in  a  boulder-strewn  locality  at  the  foot 
of  the  mountains,  where  our  main  caravan  awaited  us. 
Khotun-tam  marked  the  end  of  the  sandstone  foot-hills 
and  the  limit  of  the  plateau-like  summit  of  the  main 
range.  Above  this  village  the  Karlik  Tagh  lifted  up  its 
knife-like  and  deeply  serrated  main  ridge,  and  deep-cut 
valleys  gave  a  direct  approach  to  the  highlands  from 
the  plain.  The  spurs  of  the  range  retreated,  the 
distance  between  the  desert  plain  and  the  alpine  region 
shortened,  and  the  marked  contrasts  of  the  scenery 
were  intensified. 

The  absence  of  the  border-range  and  the  shortness 
of  the  valleys  allowed  the  Taghliks  to  live  in  their 
villages  on  the  plains,  and  at  the  same  time  to  make 
what  use  they  could  of  the  highlands  to  which  the 
valleys  gave  easy  access.  Thus  the  eastern  Karlik  Tagh 
was  portioned  off  between  the  various  villages  lying  on 
the  high  smooth  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains. 
Khotun-tam,  for  instance,  monopolized  the  two  valleys 
to  its  north ;  Ulu-tai  had  its  own  valley ;  the  Koshmak 
valley  was  used  in  summer  by  the  Chinese  farmers  from 
Tashbulak — a  village  some  miles  away  to  the  south, 
while  the  Little  Koshmak  belonged  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Shopoli. 

Khotun-tam,  although  at  the  foot  of  the  real  hill- 
country,  had  an  altitude  of  over  5,500  ft.  Beyond  was 
a  high,  smooth  plain  which  swept  away  to  the  south- 
east, never  dropping  much  below  4,000  ft.,  and  finally 
merging  into  higher  country.  Much  water  rendered  a 
large  area  suitable  for  cultivation  ;  in  fact,  a  string  of 
farms  and  small  fields  extended  all  the  way  east  to  Tash- 
bulak. In  this  zone  the  population  concentrated,  and, 
consequently,  we  found  the  mountains  quite  deserted. 
II— 13 


512  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

Travelling  now  became  more  pleasant,  spring  being 
already  in  evidence  in  these  sheltered  localities.  Al- 
though the  Khotun-tam  River  was  frozen  over,  the 
poplars  were  bursting  their  buds  and  the  willow- stems 
were  red  ;  summer-birds  were  fast  arriving,  and  on 
April  i6th  the  first  butterflies  were  seen.  Up  the  valley, 
small  fields, — off  which  a  crop  would  be  taken  during 
the  summer  months, — extended  to  an  altitude  of  about 
8,000  ft.  Indications  of  the  summer-resorts  used  by 
the  Khotun-tamliks  were  not  lacking,  for  besides  the 
kraals  for  cattle  we  noticed  a  curious  kind  of  dw^elling 
which  seemed  to  be  a  reproduction  of  a  nomad's  yurt. 
This  consisted  of  a  circular  wall  of  stones,  on  the  top 
of  which  was  erected  a  roof  of  spruce-poles  in  the  form 
of  a  wigwam  or  tepee,  over  which,  during  the  summer, 
was  spread  a  covering  of  felt. 

The  valley  itself  was  a  good  example  of  the  great 
denudation  to  which  the  Karlik  Tagh  has  been  subject. 
The  lower  half  of  the  valley  was  a  V-shaped  gorge  ; 
higher  up  its  floor  was  choked  and  barriered  with  more 
matter  than  the  stream  could  carry  away;  the  ascent 
was  very  steep,  and  in  seven  miles  along  the  valley- 
bottom  we  passed  from  5,500  ft.  to  9,000  ft.  Grass 
grew  where  possible,  and  poplars  extended  along  the 
stream  up  to  8,000  ft. ;  above  this  altitude  scrub  filled 
the  bottoms,  and  spruce  forest  appeared  on  the  slopes 
facing  north  and  north-west.  The  ascent  of  a  ridge,  to 
an  altitude  of  12,800  ft.,  helped  me  to  place  a  large  area 
of  unknown  country  on  the  map,  which  now  grew  in  im- 
portance as  we  approached  the  quite  unsurveyed  eastern 
end  of  the  range.  This  ascent  proved  to  me  clearly  that 
all  previous  estimates  of  the  height  of  the  culminating 
points  were  at  fault. 


THE    KARLIK   TAGH  513 

From  Khotun-tam  the  survey  was  run  eastwards 
over  hill,  hollow,  and  plain  to  Shopoli,  a  small  village 
situated  in  a  region  possessing  many  interesting  char- 
acteristics. This  village  was  the  most  easterly  Taghlik 
settlement  on  the  southern  side  of  the  mountains,  and 
the  last  we  were  to  visit  for  some  time  to  come. 

The  impression  left  by  Shopoli  was  one  of  wind, 
dust,  and  rain.  We  had  imagined  that;  the  farther 
east  we  travelled,  and  the  nearer  we  approached  the 
Gobi,  the  greater  the  aridity  would  become  ;  yet,  for 
some  peculiar  reason,  we  found  this  particular  region  to 
be  rich  in  forests,  pasture,  and  wild-game,  all  of  which 
pointed  to  a  considerable  precipitation.  The  proximity 
of  the  Gobi  was  merely  brought  to  our  notice  by  the 
prevalence  of  dust-laden  winds  of  great  violence.  The 
winds  commenced  immediately  on  our  arrival,  and 
during  the  first  two  days  our  work  was  delayed  by  a 
strong  east  wind  which  filled  the  air  with  dust  and 
hid  all  distant  views.  The  inhabitants  took  it  as  a 
matter  of  course,  remarking  that  the  air  always  became 
thick  and  hazy  on  these  occasions.  Frequent  winds 
of  this  kind  would  be  exasperating  to  the  explorer, 
outdoor  work  being  rendered  impossible. 

That  this  region  had  a  phenomenal  rainfall  was  first 
suggested  to  me  by  the  sight  of  the  forested  slopes  to 
the  northward ;  this  was  confirmed  by  the  remarks 
of  the  natives,  who  being  asked  why  their  houses  were 
built  with  slanting  roofs,  in  Chinese  style,  replied  that 
it  was  on  account  of  the  heavy  rains. ^  The  Turki  in- 
habitants may  have  found  out  that  a  slanting  roof  has 

1  The  natives  of  Shopoli  said  that  there  was  an  ample  summer  rainfall, 
The  snowfall  must  also  be  great,  for  even  at  the  end  of  May  it  lay  a  foot 
deep  on  all  slopes  with  a  northern  aspect. 


514  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

the  advantage,  over  a  flat  one,  for  turning  rain;  but  I 
do  not  myself  think  it  was  the  rain  which  determined 
the  shape  of  the  roofs  so  much  as  the  fact  of  a  Chinese 
village  being  close  by,  and  that  Shopoli  had  once  been  in- 
habited by  Chinese.  Many  ruined  shrines  and  buildings 
showed  traces  of  former  Chinese  settlers,  now  restricted 
to  Tash-bulak ;  yet  the  Chinese  influence  remains  strong, 
and  the  kingdom  of  the  Khan  of  Kumul  is  in  as  much 
danger  of  being  assailed  by  the  foreigners  in  that  quarter 
as  it  is  in  the  capital  itself. 

The  natives  of  Shopoli  showed  that  love  of  amuse- 
ment which  old  writers  have  described  as  being  the 
chief  characteristic  of  the  Kumuliks.  They  treated  us 
to  some  of  their  local  songs,  sung  to  the  accompani- 
ment of  a  Chinese  violin  ;  but  we  cannot  refrain  from 
thinking  that,  since  these  people  have  given  up  their  own 
peculiar  musical  instrument,  such  as  the  Chanto  guitar, 
and  use  a  foreign  one,  they  show  signs  of  becoming 
denationalized.  Many  of  the  men  were  clothed  in  the 
Chinese  manner,  and  all  spoke  the  language,  yet  they 
kept  with  worthy  persistency  and  strictness  to  their 
Mussulman  exactitudes  of  food  and  cleanliness.  The 
Chinese  element  approaches  by  way  of  the  highlands 
which  stretch  south-eastwards  to  An-hsi-chow  and  Su- 
chow.  This  region  averages  over  5,000  ft,  in  altitude 
and  supports  Chinese  ranchers  in  small  numbers.  They 
come  up  to  the  very  borders  of  the  territory  of  the 
Khan,  and  at  one  place,  Tash-bulak,  have  actually  estab- 
lished themselves. 

The  region  lying  to  the  east  of  the  trans-Gobi  route, 
which  leads  from  Kumul  to  China,  is  very  little  known. 
A  couple  of  Russian  explorers  have  crossed  it,  and 
from  their  map  we  understand  the  country  to  be  one  of 


A    TAGHLIK    GIRL. 


514] 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  515 

desert  hills,  apparently  without  much  rainfall,  for  no 
drainage  is  marked;  small  springs  alone  showing  that 
it  is  capable  of  supporting  human  life.  Yet  this  region 
rises  in  some  places  to  as  much  as  7,400  ft,,  and  unless 
I  am  altogether  mistaken  as  to  the  character  of  such 
hill-country  in  this  particular  part  of  Inner  Asia,  I 
strongly  suspect  that  it  is  not  such  "  bad-land  "  as  the 
Russian  map  represents  it  to  be. 

By  making  a  wide  circle  over  the  hills  to  the  south 
of  Shopoli  I  obtained  a  definite  idea  of  this  region  as  a 
whole.  The  altitude  averaged  5,500  ft.,  with  summits 
rising  to  6,200  ft.  It  was  a  broken  hill-country,  some- 
what formless,  with  dry  wadis  winding  vaguely  in  and 
out  amongst  the  hills,  but  having  a  general  direction  of 
south  and  south-east.  In  the  wadis  grew  fine  dry  grass, 
tamarisk,  and  small  saxaul  trees,  showing  the  reason 
why  the  natives  rear  camels  in  preference  to  other 
beasts.  There  was  no  sign  of  a  permanent  water-supply, 
and  therefore  no  habitations,  yet,  according  to  re- 
port, it  was  used  by  herdsmen  who  wander  over  it 
feeding  their  flocks  so  long  as  the  frozen  snow  supplies 
them  with  water.  The  pasture  was  evidently  good, 
for  we  found  that  wild -sheep  inhabited  these  somewhat 
arid  ranges;  were  there  occasional  springs  coming  to 
the  surface,  the  country  to  the  south-east  of  Karlik 
Tagh  would  become  of  some  economic  value  to  herds- 
men acquainted  with  its  topography.  The  grazing  on 
the  outlying  spurs  around  Shopoli  was  responsible  for 
the  semi-nomadic  condition  of  the  inhabitants,  which 
was  emphasized  by  the  curious  appearance,  such  as 
Shopoli  boasted,  of  houses  built  on  to  yurts,  and  yurts 
pitched  in  the  courtyards  of  houses. 

North  of  the  village  were  several  charming  valleys. 


5i6  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

Our  first  expedition  was  to  the  Little  Koshmak  Valley, 
to  which  we  were  attracted  by  a  fine  rock-peak,  capped 
by  a  beautiful  snow-cornice,  that  stood  up  alone — the 
last  summit  of  the  range.  The  Little  Koshmak  intro- 
duced us  to  the  forests,  every  lateral  valley  with  a  north 
aspect  being  covered  with  spruce ;  higher  up  larch  ^  crept 
in,  and  finally  predominated. 

A  pleasant  and  unexpected  surprise  it  was  to  find 
forests  of  such  luxuriance  so  near  to  the  barren  Gobi. 
The  remarkable  beauty  of  these  south-eastern  spurs  of 
the  Karlik  Tagh,  with  their  grassy  tops,  forested  slopes, 
and  poplar-choked  valleys, — with  the  immense  views 
that  they  afforded  of  the  desert  ranges  beyond, — 
attracted  us  as  much  as  anything  we  had  seen.  The 
forest  extended  down  to  about  7,000  ft.  and  grew  as 
high  up  as  9,000  ft.  ;  it  was  much  influenced  by  aspect, 
showing  no  signs  of  life  on  slopes  that  did  not  face 
north.  Thus  it  was  that  the  Narin  Valley,  with  its 
bending  course,  held  an  exceptionally  large  area  of 
suitable  ground,  all  of  which  was  densely  forested, 
groups  of  larch  and  spruce  clinging  to  every  rock-girt 
summit,  and  thickly  crowding  the  more  easy  slopes. 
Here  we  found  traces  of  "  maral," — the  great  stag  of 

1  The  presence  of  the  larch  {Larix  sihirica)  gave  the  first  sure  sign  that 
the  conditions  of  the  Karhk  Tagh  are  not  entirely  those  of  the  Tian  Shan 
system.  Here  was  a  northern  tree,  the  southernmost  range  of  whicli 
we  had  already  determined  to  be  in  the  Barlik  group  and  in  the  Mongolian 
Altai ;  yet  this  larch  had  extended  its  range  southwards  to  the  Karlik 
Tagh  and  Barkul  Range.  Here  it  lived  and  thrived,  growing  to  a  height 
of  40  ft.  and  50  ft.  with  trunks  from  i  ft.  to  2  ft.  in  thickness.  There  was 
no  sign  of  degeneration  ;  the  forest  was  a  healthy  one.  The  pines,  on  the 
other  hand,  were  of  a  variety  peculiar  to  the  Tian  Shan  Mountains  [Abies 
schrenkiana)  ;  these  grew  to  a  height  of  between  30  and  40  ft.  Thus, 
the  forests  of  Karlik  Tagh  were  composed  of  two  varieties,  one  peculiar 
to  the  Tian  Shan  and  the  other  to  a  more  northern  zone  ;  this  proved 
that  the  flora  of  the  Karlik  Tagh  had  affinities  with  that  of  the  Altai. 


THE    KARLIK   TAGH  517 

the  Tian  Shan,  and  of  wild-pig,  while  the  grassy  slopes 
above  the  forests  supported  large  herds  of  ibex,  some 
of  which  carried  remarkably  fine  heads.* 

The  existence  of  these  forests  will  seem  the  more 
peculiar  when  the  distributions  of  other  forested  areas 
of  the  Karlik  Tagh  are  enumerated.  The  northern  side 
of  the  range,  where  one  would  most  expect  forests,  is 
bereft  of  trees  of  any  description.  The  nature  of  the 
ground — an  exposed  plateau — being  quite  unsuitable. 
On  the  southern  flanks,  the  Shopoli  forests  cover  by  far 
the  largest  area  :  occasional  groups  of  pine  or  larch  are 
found  in  most  valleys,  but  the  only  other  large  extent 
of  forest  is  in  the  upper  Edira  Valley.  Not  till  one 
reaches  the  Barkul  basin  are  forests  encountered  of  any 
considerable  extent.  The  whole  length  of  the  northern 
flanks  of  the  Barkul  Range  has  a  forest-belt,  especially 
at  its  eastern  end  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  cols  that 
lead  over  to  Kumul ;  the  rounded  hills  to  the  east  of 
Chagan-bulak  Pass  being  very  extensively  forested.  The 
Barkul  forest-belt  runs  westwards  for  some  seventy-five 
miles,  and  finally  disappears. 

To  return  to  our  exploration  of  the  valley  of  the 
Little  Koshmak.  From  a  camp  at  8,500  ft.  we  made  an 
ascent  to  the  head  of  the  valley,  mapping  its  course 
and  attempting  an  ascent  of  Peak  No.  IX., — the  pinnacle 
of  the  snow-cornice  which  had  shown  up  so  well  from 
Shopoli.  We  steadily  climbed  up  the  ridge  dividing  the 
two  sources  of  the  river,  until  an  altitude  of  12,988  ft. 

1  A  head,  picked  up  in  the  Little  Koshmak  Valley,  measured  47^  in. 
The  wild-sheep  of  the  Karhk  Tagh  must  also  run  large,  for  Miller  found 
some  horns  on  a  tomb  at  Togucha  which  measured  59  in.  in  length — with 
the  tips  broken  off, — while  Younghusband  picked  up  several  old  horns 
lying  on  the  eastern  spurs  of  Karlik  Tagh  which  measured  54  in.,  and 
one  gigantic  pair  of  62  in.  in  length. 


5i8  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

was  reached.  Finally,  the  extremely  broken  nature  of 
the  rock-country,  which  consisted  of  strata  of  flaky 
slate  flung  up  perpendicular  to  the  ridge,  and  which 
came  away  with  every  step,  stopped  us ;  but  not  before 
we  had  found  the  miniature — quarter-mile-long — glacier 
at  the  foot  of  No.  IX.,  and  traces  of  old  moraines  extend- 
ing as  far  as  a  mile  and  a  half  below.  We  failed  to  make 
the  ascent  of  the  pinnacle,  but  the  clinometer  readings 
were  sufficiently  consistent  to  made  up  for  the  loss  of 
a  boiling-point  reckoning,  and  we  were  not  out  to  climb 
untrodden  peaks  for  the  love  of  mountaineering.  Should 
a  member  of  the  Alpine  Club  ever  chance  to  come  this 
way  I  recommend  him  to  make  a  start  on  No.  IX.,  for, 
although  not  the  highest  point,  it  will  try  his  skill  and 
give  him  a  rare  view  of  snows  and  deserts. 

From  summits  of  12,000  ft.  and  13,000  ft.,  at  the 
eastern  end  of  the  Karlik  Tagh,  we  enjoyed  views 
that  fully  repaid  us  for  the  expenditure  of  time  and 
for  the  extraordinary  rough  climbing  entailed.  From 
these  points  of  vantage,  within  sight  of  herds  of  ibex 
and  within  call  of  the  snow-cock,  we  looked  out 
over  a  region  that  seemed  to  embrace  the  whole  of 
desert  Cathay,  and  it  was  easy  to  grasp  its  essential 
features.  Through  narrow,  deep-cut  valleys,  clothed 
with  larch  and  pine  forest,  opened  up  beautiful  vistas 
of  the  Gobi,  for  the  Karlik  Tagh  has  the  character 
of  an  island  set  in  a  wide  sea,  the  views  from  its 
summits  being  always  terminated  by  the  ocean-like 
plain  that  lies  around  and  washes  up  to  its  very  foot- 
hills. On  a  clear  day  in  winter  or  early  spring,  before 
the  summer  heat-haze  begins  to  hide  the  distance,  and 
when  no  south  wind,  with  its  complement  of  "loess," 
darkens  the  air,  one  can  stand  aloft  on  some  pinnacle 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  519 

or  spur,  and  gaze  till  the  eyes  ache,  over  infinite  space. 
One  can  search  the  southern  deserts,  where  yellow  flats 
indefinitely  extend  to  a  far  horizon,  broken  here  and 
there  by  pyramidal  hills  of  carmine  and  yellow  ochre. 
Eastward  one's  gaze  is  mystified  by  the  regions  of  colour, 
shown  by  the  succeeding  ranges  of  desert  hills  as  they 
pass  from  yellow  to  dun,  and  from  dun  to  purple,  till 
they  tone  to  the  softest  ultramarine,  and  fade  into  space 
at  a  hundred-mile  range.  Even  yet  one  has  surveyed 
but  half  the  panorama.  Northwards  the  horizon  is 
broken  by  distant  snow-ranges — the  Aji  Bogdo,  a 
southern  offshoot  of  the  Mongolian  Altai.  These  stand 
up  superbly,  their  height  being  intensified  by  the  desert 
gap  which  lies  between — "  the  small  desert  of  three  days' 
journey  in  extent,"  of  which  Marco  Polo  wrote. 

Within  our  vision  we  held  the  frontiers  of  four 
different  Asiatic  peoples,  different  worlds  altogether  to 
this  settled  region  of  Chanto  farm  and  Kumulik  hamlet. 
Far  to  the  north  we  could  just  discern  the  territories  of 
the  Kirei  Kirghiz  and  the  Mongol  hordes ;  eastward, 
across  the  intervening  zone  of  uninhabited  desert,  were 
the  haunts  of  Torgut  nomads,  while  from  the  south 
ceaselessly  advanced  the  plodding  bands  of  Chinese 
colonists. 

On  our  return  to  Shopoli  we  found  it  impossible  to 
continue  our  journey  to  the  Ati  Bogdo  Mountains.  Al- 
though this  range  lay  only  180  miles  to  the  east,  yet 
lack  of  guides  and  independent  transport  made  the  under- 
taking of  greater  difiiculty  than  we  expected.  It  seemed 
possible  that,  with  an  independent  caravan  and  water- 
supply,  an  attempt  might  be  made  to  travel  eastwards 
without  guides,  taking  as  landmarks  the  Emir  Tagh  and 
Mount   Jingis,  until   sighting   the  summits  of   the   Ati 


520  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

Bogdo  ;  failing  this,  the  traveller  must  needs  go  north- 
wards to  the  eastern  Altai  ranges,  where  he  might  fall 
in  with  Mongol  wanderers  who  would  perchance  be  able 
to  supply  transport  and  guides.  A  few  Khalka — or,  as 
they  called  themselves,  Mingyn  Mongols — who  had  come 
down  to  Shopoli  to  trade  skins,  knew  nothing  of  those 
regions,  yet  the  Ati  Bogdo  is  certain  to  be  in  com- 
munication with  Northern  Mongolia,  although  its  in- 
habitants are  Torguts, — summer  visitors  from  the  Edsin 
Gol  or  Gashiun  Nor,  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Gobi.  The 
Ati  Bogdo  had  so  far  been  approached  from  the  north 
alone,  this  being  the  reason  why  we  wished  to  attack 
it  from  the  west. 

Although  a  visit  would  have  been  of  great  help  to 
us    in   our   work   of   deciding  the   distribution   of  life- 
zones,^  and  in  tracing  the  lines  of  demarcation  between 
the  fauna  of  the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai,  yet  the  topography 
of  the  intervening  region  was  made  clear  to  us  with- 
out the  labour  of   a  desert  journey.     A   climb  to  the 
summit   of   the   pass   that   led   to   Tal  showed   us   the 
eastern  desert-spurs  of  Karlik  Tagh  and  the  configura- 
tion of   the  region  between  them  and  the  Ati  Bogdo. 
A   day's   journey    away   to    the    east    rose    into    sight 
the  red  sandstone  pyramid  of  Emir  Tagh,  which  sloped 
desertwards  in  a  long-backed  ridge  until  lost  to  view. 
There  seemed  to  be  no  connecting  range  between  the 
Karlik  Tagh  and  the  Ati  Bogdo,  but  rather  a  genuine 
break  consisting  of  hard  steppe  and   stray  sand-dunes. 
Occasional  isolated  hills  cropped  up,  such  as  the  Jingis 
and  Atis  peaks,   but  looking  eastwards  there  was  no 
suggestion  of  the  pleasant  highlands  where, — according 
to  Kozloff,  the  only  visitor, — there  are  meadows,  forests, 

*  See  Appendix,  Life-zones  of  Inner  Asia. 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  521 

and  running  streams,  with  herds  of  wild-game  such  as 
sheep  and  roe-deer. 

As  we  travelled  round  the  eastern  spurs  we  visited 
Tal,  the  summer  quarters  of  the  men  of  Mogoi,  whilst 
our  heavy  kit,  packed  on  camels,  followed  an  easier  track 
along  the  foot  of  the  hills  to  Uturuk,  on  the  northern  side 
of  the  Karlik  Tagh.  Settlements  of  Taghliks  were  few 
and  far  between,  after  leaving  Shopoli.  A  few,  such  as 
Mogoi,  Bai,  Uturuk,  Adak,  and  Nom,  existed  on  streams 
draining  northwards, — the  last  examples  of  sedentary 
life  on  the  edge  of  the  nomad's  land  of  Mongolia.  For 
the  most  part  we  had  left  settled  life  behind,  and,  upon 


4r«Tton         ScmOi  StRtnt«  XCe/l  North 

atOOFT  ?     .  '" 


A  SECTION  OF  THE  KARIJK  TAGH  FROM  NCF?TH  TO  SOUTH  THROUGH  THE  CEMTRAL  PORTIOM  OF  THE  RANGE 

reaching  the  northern  flanks  of  Karlik  Tagh,  found  large 
areas  either  entirely  uninhabited  or  partially  used  by 
nomads. 

The  different  formation  of  the  northern  side  of  the 
range  was  demonstrated  by  the  fact  of  its  being  a  fine 
pasture-land.  The  rugged,  barren,  desiccated  rock- 
region  of  the  southern  side  was  replaced  on  the  north 
by  a  smooth  plateau  of  rolling  downs,  which  occupied 
the  whole  area  between  8,000  ft.  and  11,000  ft.  In  con- 
sequence, we  were  enabled  to  travel  comfortably  along  the 
range  at  an  altitude  of  10,000  ft.  to  11,000  ft.  Above  us, 
rounded  spurs  and  shale  slopes  led  up  to  the  main  ridge. 


522  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

while  below,  the  plateau  swept  down  at  a  gentle  grade 
until  it  ended  in  a  low,  rough,  rocky  girdle  which,  in  some 
degree,  corresponded  to  the  sandstone  foot-hills  of  the 
southern  side.  In  this  plateau  the  rivers  had  carved  deep 
gorges,  and  in  travelling  westwards  we  found  it  necessary' 
to  keep  as  high  up  as  possible,  for  lower  down  the  gorges 
deepened  to  terrific  cafions. 

By  moving  slowly  along  the  plateau,  and  keeping 
close  below  the  shale  slopes,  we  were  able  to  map  the 
rivers  to  their  sources  and  to  overlook  the  countr^' 
below,  as  far  as  the  point  where  the  same  rivers  ran 
dry  in  the  desert.  The  principal  features  of  the  north 
side  were  the  gorges  which  intersected  the  plateau. 
We  crossed  seven  of  these,  which  drained  northwards 
to  Uturuk ;  there  all  united  and  formed  a  single 
channel,  leading  out  into  the  plain.  On  these  streams 
were  situated  the  only  settlements,  Urge,  Uturuk,  Adak, 
and  Nom, — all  larger  villages  than  those  on  the  south ; 
Uturuk  alone  was  said  to  possess  a  hundred  houses. 

The  topography  of  the  country  was  plain,  and  map- 
ping was  easy  work,  as  compared  with  the  riddles  of  the 
southern  side.  Ascents,  too,  were  more  easily  accom- 
plished, and  it  did  not  take  long  to  run  the  survey  west- 
wards to  Tur  Kul.  Of  special  interest  were  the  little  glaciers 
which  lay  at  the  head  of  nearly  every  valley.  They 
were  no  larger  than  those  on  the  south  of  the  range  ; 
even  the  wide  valleys  leading  from  the  highest  peaks 
did  not  hold  glaciers  exceeding  two  miles  in  length,  but 
they  showed  traces  of  old  moraines  five  miles  below  their 
present  position. 

The  plateau  was  uninhabited  at  that  season,  it  being 
still  subject  to  cold  winds  and  snow-storms ;  later  on, 
the  herdsmen  drive  their  flocks  up  and  tent  there  all 


A    TAGHLIK    FARMSTEAD. 
On  the  south  side  of  Karlik  Tagli. 


522] 


TAGHLIK    YURTS. 
On  the  northern  pastures  of  Karlik  Tagh. 


THE    KARLIK    TAGH  523 

the  summer.  Farther  west,  however,  where  the  plateau 
swept  down  to  the  lower  altitude  of  the  Tur  Kul  basin, 
we  found  a  permanent  population  of  shepherds.  Here 
the  Taghliks  had  adopted  a  semi-nomadic  existence, 
Ii\ing  chiefly  in  yurts  ;  even  the  movable  tents  presented 
a  half-fixed  appearance,  with  kraals  for  the  herds  built 
close  b}^  and  hedges  of  scrub  and  grass  for  protection 
from  the  wind.  Now  and  then  we  came  across  large 
flocks  of  sheep,  which  in  most  cases  belonged  to  the 
Khan.  The  grazing  was  exceptionally  rich,  and  the 
plateau  could  support  a  very  large  herd  of  horses  and 
sheep,  but  the  accessibility  of  the  region  hinders  it 
from  being  reserved  as  a  private  pasture  for  the  Khan 
and  his  subjects  ;  in  consequence,  Chinese  herdsmen 
from  Barkul  use  it  considerably. 

The  scenery  of  the  northern  side  was  varied  by  the 
lake  of  Tur  Kul,  a  small  upland  basin  situated  at  a 
height  of  6,301  ft.  Close  by  was  Tomdun,  a  settlement 
consisting  of  three  yurts  and  two  mud-houses,  where  we 
rested  for  a  few  days  owing  to  bad  weather.  Cold  winds 
and  driving  mists  made  us  glad  to  get  off  the  open  plateau 
into  the  warm  yurts  ;  snow  fell  heavily,  and  when  the 
weather  cleared  we  found  that  even  the  desert-spurs 
of  the  Metshin-ola  to  the  north  were  snow-clad.  Tur 
Kul  was  the  water-table  for  a  considerable  drainage 
from  the  ranges  to  the  north  and  south.  No  water 
from  the  mountains  entered  the  lake  above  ground,  but 
it  was  margined  by  a  wide  border  of  soft,  bogg}^  ground, 
where  much  water  oozed  up  and  formed  small  springs 
and  streams.  Large  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  cattle 
fed  on  the  excellent  pasturage  sustained  by  a  perennial 
watering,  and  many  shepherd  encampments  were  scat- 
tered along  the  shores  of  the  lake. 


524  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

Approaching  the  lake  after  a  four-mile  ride  from 
Tomdun,  we  discovered  that  it  was  surrounded  by  a 
treacherous  salt-bog,  and  the  water  was  the  most  saline 
we  had  ever  experienced.  An  analysis  of  this  water  from 
the  lagoons  at  the  eastern  end  of  Tur  Kul  showed  that 
it  contained  34  per  cent,  of  salt,  and  in  comparison 
I  may  mention  that  the  water  of  the  Dead  Sea, — ^the 
"  most  saline  of  all  the  world's  important  lakes," — 
contains  only  25  per  cent.  A  thermometer  boiled  in 
this  water  made  the  altitude  of  the  lake  at  sea-level ! 
and  it  was  not  until  we  found  fresh  water  some  miles 
to  the  east — ^where  it  first  appeared  above  ground,  that 
we  obtained  a  correct  boiling-point  reading  for  altitude. 
The  salinity,  however,  did  not  appear  to  affect  the  bird- 
life.  We  chanced  to  be  there,  on  the  first  occasion, 
during  a  spell  of  bad,  stormy  weather,  when  the  lake 
was  alive  with  myriads  of  wild-fowl,  which  had  sought 
refuge  there  from  the  more  exposed  water  of  Bar  Kul. 
Wild  swans,  geese,  sheldrake,  mallard,  teal,  and  pintail 
were  constantly  on  the  move  between  the  salt  lake  and 
the  fresh-water  marshes,  from  which  they  w^ere  continu- 
ally harried  b}^  native  hunters.  When  we  attempted  a 
serious  attack  on  the  wild-fowl,  a  few  days  later,  armed 
with  guns,  and  accompanied  by  beaters,  we  found  the 
lake  absolutely  deserted  !  The  natives  said  they  came 
but  rarely,  and  only  stayed  for  a  night  at  the  most, 
for  "  the}/  did  not  like  the  water."  I  think,  however, 
they  only  come  here  under  stress  of  bad  weather  and 
depart  again  at  the  earliest  moment,  owing  to  their 
cramped  surroundings. 

At  Tomdun  we  divided  forces,  Miller  travelling  witli 
the  main  caravan  direct  to  the  Barkul  basin,  whilst  I 
turned  south  in  order  to  finish  off  my  survey  of     the 


THE   KARLIK    TAGH  525 

southern  side  of  the  KarHk  Tagh.  Taking  only  two  men 
and  a  horse-load  of  necessaries,  with  a  paper  from  the 
Khan  which  enabled  me  to  get  a  change  of  horses  and 
guides  at  everj^  village,  I  made  a  rapid  survey  of  the 
country  between  the  Barkul  passes  and  the  sources  of 
the  Bardash  River. 

South-west  of  Tomdun  was  the  Belju  Pass,  the  only 
track  that  crosses  the  Karlik  Tagh,  and  this  at  a  con- 
siderable height ;  at  the  summit  of  close  on  11,000  ft., 
snow-storms  assailed  me,  hiding  the  views  and  hampering 
my  work.  This  pass  led  me  down  to  the  Koral  Valley, 
which,  with  its  fine  forests  and  open  areas  capable 
of  cultivation,  and,  consequently,  its  numerous  villages, 
formed  one  of  the  most  important  and  beautiful  valleys 
in  the  Karlik  Tagh.  Its  almost  continuous  line  of  culti- 
vation, its  hamlets,  and  the  three  villages  of  Temirty, 
Koral,  and  Narin,  gave  the  valley  an  appearance  of 
much  industry.  The  Taghliks  had  cultivated  almost 
impregnable  tracts  of  land  high  up  the  mountain-side, 
by  irrigating  them  with  canals,  the  building  of  which 
showed  considerable  ingenuity  and  labour.  The  hills 
were  subject  to  such  denudation  that  the  canals  had 
to  be  built  up  annually,  and  in  some  places  the 
water  was  carried  for  miles  by  aqueducts  of  hollowed 
poplar-trunks.  The  largest  centre  of  agriculture  was  at 
Narin,  the  junction  of  the  two  valleys  of  the  Koral  and 
Narin.  Beyond  Narin  the  sandstone  border-ridges  shut 
off  these  highland  villages  from  the  plain. 

From  Koral  a  climb  up  a  steep  face  of  3,000  ft.  took 
me  across  the  ridge  dividing  this  valley  from  the  next 
— the  Edira,  where  I  found  other  small  settlements  of 
Taghliks  farming  in  quiet  seclusion  the  small  patches 
of  land  nature  allowed  them,  and  keeping  a  few  cattle, 


526  THE    KARLIK    TAGH 

goats,  and  yaks.  This  upland  valley,  shut  in  com- 
pletely by  the  impassable  snow-fields  above  and  by 
the  sandstone  barrier  below,  was  typical  of  the  environ- 
ment which  has  forced  the  Taghliks  to  follow  an  isolated, 
hermit-like  existence.  Yet  there  was  no  feeling  of  sus- 
picion nor  exclusiveness  amongst  the  natives  when  I 
dropped  unexpectedly  into  their  villages  from  the  ranges 
above,  or  when  I  set  up  my  plane-table  on  the  roofs  of 
their  houses ;  they  were  merely  amused  and  inquisitive, 
and  showed  genuine  hospitality. 

A  long  ride  up  the  Edira  Valley  and  a  climb 
over  a  io,ooo-ft.  transverse  ridge  led  me  again  to  the 
Bardash,  which,  as  described  elsewhere,  I  explored  to 
its  source ;  then,  turning  back,  I  covered  a  wide  extent 
of  country  lying  between  my  former  track  and  the  foot 
of  the  range,  passing  from  Bardash  to  Kara-kapchin, 
Toruk,   and  Narin. 

Connecting  Kumul  and  Barkul  are  three  tracks, 
namely,  the  Kulluk,  the  Barkul,  or  Kosheti,  and  the 
Chagan-bulak.  Traffic  mostly  goes  by  way  of  the  Barkul 
Pass,  which,  according  to  Prjevalsky,  is  feasible  for 
wheeled  traffic,  but  from  Narin  the  nearest  route  is  over 
the  Chagan-bulak,  and  thither  my  guides  led  me  by  the 
worst  of  routes,  which  crossed  and  recrossed  the  Narin 
River  some  twenty  or  twenty-five  times,  obliging  us  to 
make  several  big  detours  up  and  along  the  hillsides  in 
order  to  avoid  bad  ground.  Tou-shi, — a  village  com- 
posed of  half-yurt,  half-house  habitations, — supplied  me 
with  a  change  of  men  and  horses,  and,  on  the  evening 
of  April  loth,  the  forests  and  deep  snow-fields  of  the 
Chagan-bulak  Pass  introduced  me  to  the  plateau-basin  of 
Barkul. 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

BARKUL,    THE   BOGDO-OLA,   AND   ACROSS   DZUNGARIA 

The  Barkul  ^  basin  is  a  topographical  feature  by  itself, 
having  nothing  to  do  with  Karlik  Tagh  or  Kumul.  It 
is  a  self-contained  world,  little  influenced  by  the  sur- 
rounding regions,  for  mountains  border  the  basin  on  the 
south  and  deserts  fringe  it  on  the  north  ;  it  lies,  moreover, 
on  the  road  to  nowhere  and  has  little  through- traffic. 
Barkul  is  neither  arid  Turkestan  nor  desert  Dzungaria, 
but  a  plateau-basin  of  such  equable  climate  that  men  can 
till  the  soil  without  the  laborious  construction  of  irri- 
gation-canals, and  can  pasture  their  flocks  without  fear 
of  drought.  It  is  not  only  the  unique  climatic  condition 
of  the  Barkul  basin  that  causes  us  to  consider  it  a  separ- 
ate district,  but  politically  and  ethnographically  it  is 
divided  from  the  Khanate  of  Kumul.  For  although  in 
the  eastern  portion  may  be  found  Taghlik  settlements 
subject  to  the  Khan,  the  basin  is  really  utilized  and  ruled 
by  the  Chinese. 

I  shall  not  forget  my  first  impression  of  the  Barkul 
uplands.  After  the  horses  had  struggled,  belly-deep, 
through  the  snow  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Chagan- 
bulak  Pass,  and  we  had  picked  our  way  through  the  deeper 
drifts  which  lay  in  the  forest-belt  down  to  the  grassy 
fiats  below,   I    eventually   reached  the  friendly  shelter 

^  I  use  the  form  Barkul  for  the  town  and  Bar  Kul  for  the  lake,  in 
accordance  with  the  Russian  system. 

II— 14  527 


528  BARKUL 

offered  me  by  some  Kumulik  herders.  It  was  evening, 
and  a  wild  sunset  hung  over  the  cloud-girt  Barkul  Moun- 
tains ;  beneath  the  mists  a  broad  belt  of  forest  showed, 
and  below  this,  a  prairie-steppe  swept  down  and  across 
the  central  basin  until  it  rose  again  northwards  into 
the  rough-sided,  flat-topped  ridge  of  Metshin-ola.  The 
prairies  were  dotted  with  cattle,  droves  of  horses, 
and  flocks  of  sheep ;  besides  the  black  yurts  of  the 
shepherds  there  were  many  small  farmsteads  which 
gave  an  air  of  settlement  to  the  pastoral  scene.  It  was 
an  unusually  animated  scene  for  Central  Asia  ;  for  we 
had  at  last  found  a  happy  valley  free  from  the  blight 
of  desiccation. 

The  next  morning  showed  in  clearer  detail  the  im- 
pressionist picture  of  the  pre\dous  evening.  The  upper 
edge  of  the  basin  was  good  pasture-land,  but  above 
the  contour-line  of  6,000  ft., — except  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  water, — the  ground  appeared  to  be 
unsuitable  for  cultivation ;  below  this  level,  however, 
abundant  water  oozed  up  in  all  directions.  The  drainage 
from  the  surrounding  mountains  was  chiefly  below  the 
surface,  the  Barkul  basin  boasting  only  one  river-bed, 
the  Irdi  Khe,  which  carried  a  stream  of  water  vary- 
ing according  to  the  season  of  the  year ;  the  course 
of  this  river-bed  could  be  easily  distinguished  on  account 
of  the  numerous  farms  situated  on  its  banks.  Signs  of 
sedentary  life  were  not  restricted  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  water,  rains  being  sufficiently  reliable  to  ensure  the 
raising  of  crops  elsewhere  ;  small  settlements  of  agri- 
culturists were  scattered  over  the  whole  floor  of  the 
basin  ;  in  fact,  it  seemed  probable  that  the  lands  which 
Chinese  colonists  were  taking  up  for  corn-growing  would 
eventually  curtail  the  pasture-zone. 


BARKUL  529 

In  strong  contrast  to  the  corn-lands  and  pastures 
was  an  isolated  group  of  high  sand-dunes,  lying  at 
the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  basin,  between  the  gaps 
which  lead  through  the  surrounding  mountain-wall  to 
Tur  Kul  and  Kumul.  This  is  the  most  remarkable 
physical  feature  of  the  Barkul  basin.  It  should  be 
understood  that  the  entire  flora  of  the  basin  is  more  or 
less  saturated  with  water,  being  a  mountain-girt  hollow 
into  which  flows  a  constant  drainage  from  the  snow- 
clad  ranges  on  the  south.  Nowhere  does  the  land 
present  any  sign  of  being  deprived  of  moisture,  and 
therefore  it  is  not  a  desiccated  area.  Yet  this  peculiar, 
miniature  sand-desert  suddenly  makes  its  appearance 
in  the  midst  of  fertility  and  pasture.  The  sand-dunes 
cover  only  a  small  area  of  six  or  seven  square  miles,  but 
attain  a  great  height  and  are  a  landmark  from  afar. 
Neither  in  the  sand-areas  of  Dzungaria,  nor  in  Chinese 
Turkestan,  nor  even  in  the  great  sand-belt  of  Trans- 
caspia  had  we  seen  dunes  of  a  similar  height.  Miller, 
who  spent  some  time  in  them,  reckoned  the  maximum 
height  to  be  400  ft.  The  dunes  were  very  curiously 
formed,  a  profile  of  their  summits  showing  a  sharp 
angle,  instead  of  the  long-backed  windward  and  steeply 
inclined  leeward  side.  In  the  centre  of  the  dunes  was 
a  typical  "  falj,"  or  circular  pit,  which  went  down  to 
the  floor  of  the  plateau  and  supported  vegetation  in  the 
form  of  grass  and  scrub.  Here,  according  to  native 
report,  was  a  sand-buried  Mongol  village ;  and,  at  night, 
could  be  heard  the  crowing  of  cocks  and  the  lowing  of 
cattle  ! 

As  I  travelled  westward,  the  panorama  of  the  Barkul 
Range  spread  itself  out  and  showed  a  long,  even  ridge, 
reaching  to  an  average  height  of  11,000  ft.     The  dis- 


530  BARKUL 

tribution  of  the  rainfall  was  emphasized  by  the  type 
of  forest  on  the  range  ;  in  the  east  it  was  spruce  and 
larch,  but  gradually  the  spruce  was  eliminated,  until  at 
a  point  south  of  Barkul  the  larch  alone  remained.  The 
maximum  rainfall,  judging  by  the  distribution  and  type 
of  the  forest,  would  be  on  the  easternmost  spurs  of  the 
Barkul  Range  and  around  the  head-waters  of  the  Irdi 
Khe  River. 

After  joining  Miller  and  the  main  caravan,  which  was 
still  in  charge  of  the  Beg,  the  transport  being  supplied 
by  subjects  of  the  Khan  from  Narin  Kur,  we  rode,  on 
April  13th,  into  the  town  of  Barkul.  From  here  we 
despatched  the  Beg  to  Kumul,  with  many  messages  to 
his  master  and  a  suitable  present  for  himself.  With 
the  help  supplied  by  the  Khan  of  Kumul,  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  inconvenience  and  worry  which  hinder 
real  work  on  a  journey  had  been  eliminated  ;  we  more 
than  appreciated  the  advantages  we  had  been  enjoying 
when  we  suddenly  found  ourselves  stranded  in  Barkul, 
a  town  which  boasted  an  imbecile  Governor  and  an 
exceptionally  surly  population.  It  was  with  real  regret 
that  we  parted  with  the  Beg  and  the  willing  Taghliks, 
who  had  shown  us  the  many  hidden  valleys  of  their 
mountain  home. 

In  connexion  with  the  adjacent  pastures  and  corn- 
lands  the  town  of  Barkul  itself  was  an  important  centre. 
Situated  close  under  the  mountains,  where  ample 
forests  gave  a  plentiful  supply  of  fuel  and  from  whence 
the  melting  snows,  or  frequent  rains,  perennially  satur- 
ated the  surrounding  country  and  kept  the  pastures 
fresh  and  green  throughout  the  heat  of  summer,  it  con- 
stituted the  centre  of  trade  for  the  whole  district.  Here 
came  the  Kumulik  shepherds  and  the  Chinese  farmers. 


BARKUL  '  531 

who  found  in  the  bazaars  all  they  needed  in  the  way 
of  foodstuffs  and  clothing.  Barkul  was  little  else  but  a 
distributing  centre  for  the  surrounding  district  ;  occa- 
sional Mongols  came  in  from  the  far  north,  especially 
from  the  Mingyn  Gobi, — between  Barkul  and  the  Altai, 
and  a  few  Chanto  merchants  from  the  great  oases  of  the 
Tarim  basin ;  but  the  ordinary  aspect  of  a  town  situated 
on  a  trade-route,  with  a  moving  population — entailing 
much  coming  and  going,  was  entirely  absent  from  Barkul. 
As  a  town  it  had  little  to  recommend  it,  while  its  inhabi- 
tants seemed  sunk  in  a  state  of  degeneracy  to  which  it 
would  be  hard  to  find  an  equal,  even  in  Inner  Asia.  Its 
complete  seclusion  may  be  responsible  for  this,  even  a 
degraded  Chinaman  being  influenced  by  popular  opinion 
and  publicity. 

Barkul  does  not  even  possess  a  fair  reputation  in 
spite  of  its  numerous  temples  and  shrines,  of  which 
there  are  said  to  be  from  eighty  to  a  hundred.  Its  bad 
reputation  has  probably  been  the  cause  for  its  having 
been  avoided  by  many  travellers,  this  being  a  significant 
fact  in  connexion  with  a  region  where  towns  and  bazaars 
are  rare.  Atkinson,  when  wandering  with  the  Kirei 
Kirghiz,  was  the  first  traveller  to  approach  Barkul ;  he 
actually  arrived  within  sight  of  the  town  and  then  turned 
back  into  the  desert.  The  Russian  trading  expedition 
of  1872  was  refused  admittance,  the  Chinese  Mandarins 
saying  that  Barkul  belonged  to  the  province  of  Kansu, 
whereas  Mongolia  alone  was  opened  to  Russian  traders. 
Potanin  and  his  followers  in  1876  camped  within  sight 
of  the  town,  but  did  not  enter  it.  He  sent  men  to 
procure  provisions,  but  even  his  envoy  was  not  received 
in  a  friendly  manner.  Prjevalsky,  the  next  traveller, 
passed   close   by   without    actually    visiting    the    town. 


532  BARKUL 

although  it  lay  right  on  his  road  to  Kumul.  In  those 
days,  the  disturbed  conditions,  owing  to  the  Dungan 
rebellion,  may  have  caused  travellers  to  pass  it  by ; 
but  even  now,  in  these  quiet  times,  one  risks  trouble  by 
entering  the  town. 

We  ourselves  found  Barkul  a  delightful  locality, 
with  its  altitude  and  fine  air  of  5,650  ft,,  the  pleasant 
temperature  warming  us  after  the  cold  of  the  bleak, 
northern  plateau.  After  a  rest,  we  inspected  several 
old  temples,  one  of  which,  according  to  Piassetsky, 
dates  back  three  thousand  years ;  in  the  precincts  of 
this  we  found  and  took  "squeezes  "  of  the  black  stone 
called  Tzin-Chen-Bei,  where  are  recorded  the  victories 
of  a  Chinese  (Mongol  ?)  general. 

We  then  attempted  to  get  transport  westward ;  but, 
in  spite  of  immense  droves  of  horses  running  half  wild 
over  the  prairies  and  very  large  camel-herds  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  town,  it  took  us  some  eight  days  before 
we  were  able  to  come  to  an  agreement,  and  even  then 
we  had  to  "  come  down  "  to  camels.  Barkul  is  famous 
for  its  horses ;  for  this  reason  we  never  imagmed  it 
possible  that  we  should  have  to  depend  on  camel- 
transport  in  this  land  of  horses.  The  reputation  of  the 
Barkul  broncos  had  been  in  no  manner  exaggerated ; 
they  were,  indeed,  the  special  characteristic  of  the 
basin.  We  had  been  puzzled  as  to  the  kind  of  animal 
which  had  given  the  name  to  "  Bar  Kul  "  or  "  wild- 
animal  lake."  The  neighbourhood  possessed,  it  was  true, 
abundant  animal  and  bird  life ;  we  saw  wild- fowl  in- 
numerable on  the  lake,  and  its  western  shore  was  the 
haunt  of  troops  of  gazelle  and  droves  of  wild-asses ;  but, 
we  now  believe  that  the  real  "wild  animals"  of  the 
Barkul  basin  signify  the  great  herds  of  unridable  horses 


BARKUL  533 

which  roam  untamed  over  the  steppes.  These  form 
an  Imperial  Stud,  and  are  said  to  number  fifteen 
thousand,  the  pick  of  which  are  transported  yearly  to 
Pekin. 

Barkul  was  eventually  left  behind  on  April  21st ;  we 
then  wandered  westward  with  seven  camels  and  a  few 
horses  and  camped  by  the  lake-side.  Bar  Kul  receives 
the  surplus  drainage  of  the  basin,  and  has  a  fine  sheet 
of  water  surrounded  by  luxuriant  meadows  bordering 
on  saline  marshes.  The  lake  itself  tasted  slightly  brack- 
ish, the  analysis  showing  only  3  per  cent,  of  salt :  con- 
trary to  the  highland  lake  of  Tur  Kul,  which  was  too 
salt  to  freeze,  this  lake,  in  spite  of  the  advanced  season, 
had  large  ice-floes  at  its  northern  end.  Old  strands  here 
showed  themselves  at  a  height  of  10  ft.  or  11  ft.  above 
the  present  level ;  there  appeared  to  be  but  one  level 
for  summer  and  winter, — ^unlike  Tur  Kul,  which  showed 
traces  of  much  variation  in  level  during  the  year. 

Westwards  the  floor  of  the  basin  rose  in  a  long,  gentle 
incline  until  it  merged  imperceptibly  into  the  rolling 
down-lands  of  the  Tou-shui  plateau,  and  thither  we 
hurried  as  fast  as  the  counter-attraction  of  gazelle  and 
"  kulon  "-hunting  alongside  the  track  allowed  us.  This 
westward  slope  of  the  basin  was  very  dry  and  waterless 
for  twenty  miles  at  a  stretch,  but,  at  this  date,  good 
grass  had  already  sprung  up  and  the  game  from  the 
deserts  of  Eastern  Dzungaria  had  sought  out  the  early 
grazing  on  these  high  plains  for  which  man  had  little 
use.  Between  Bar  Kul  and  the  Tou-shui  main  road  we 
saw  only  one  Chinese  guard-house  and  a  couple  of  farms  ; 
a  few  others  existed,  it  was  said,  nearer  the  main  range 
to  the  south,  but,  for  the  greater  part,  this  region  is 
given  over  to  wild-game  and  a  few  shepherds.      We, 


534  BARKUL 

finally,  reached  Ta-shih-tu  and  connected  up  our  route- 
survey  with  the  outgoing  track. 

In  retracing  our  steps  westwards  we  again  traversed 
the  whole  length  of  Southern  Dzungaria,  but,  being 
spring,  the  country  presented  a  very  different  appearance 
to  what  it  did  in  midwinter.  Grass  and  flowers  now 
carpeted  the  steppe  in  place  of  unbroken  snow-fields, 
and  the  country,  which  in  January  had  seemed  lifeless, 
now  appeared  as  the  home  of  thriving  colonists,  pos- 
sessing busy  towns  with  much  traffic. 

Our  journey  now  took  the  form  of  a  hurried  review 
of  the  remaining  portion  of  Dzungaria  rather  than  a 
detailed  survey  of  an}^  one  part.  We  visited  various 
localities  for  the  sole  purpose  of  investigating  the  fauna 
of  regions  little  known  from  a  zoological  point  of  view, 
the  results  of  these  studies  being  described  by  Miller  ; 
while  our  itinerary  included  the  traversing  of  those 
parts  of  Dzungaria  which  are  rarely  visited.  A  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  information  we  obtained  on  the 
return  journey,  after  concluding  the  exploration  of  the 
Karlik  Tagh  and  Barkul  regions,  has  been  already 
embodied  in  Chapter  XIII,  which  dealt  with  Dzungaria 
as  a  whole.  The  details  of  our  experiences  alone  remain 
to  be  described. 

After  Miller  had  successfully  hunted  that  strange 
animal — the  Saiga  antelope ;  and  a  small,  but  most  in- 
structive collection  of  mammals  had  been  formed  on  the 
plains  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  Dzungaria,  where 
the  lowlands  merge  into  higher  Gobi,  we  marched  again 
into  Guchen.  May  5th  saw  us  outfitting  for  a  lateral 
journey  into  the  Bogdo-ola  in  order  to  visit  its  sacred 
lake. 

A   description   of   Dzungaria,    without    reference   to 


THE   SACRED    MOUNTAIN  535 

the  Bogdo-ola,  would  be  incomplete,  for  besides  its  geo- 
graphical interest,  the  economic  value  of  the  lands  at 
its  base,  its  close  proximity  to  Urumchi — the  capital, 
and  the  incomparable  beauty  of  its  alpine  region,  the 
Bogdo-ola  is  also  the  sacred  mountain  of  the  natives. 

The   towering  summit   of    Bogdo-ola  is  the  feature 

of   Southern   Dzungaria.      Although  not   attaining   the 

altitude  of  some  peaks  in  the  Tian  Shan  to  the  south 

of  Manas,  it  shows  its  height  to  great  advantage,  as  it 

rises  abruptly  out  of  the  plain,  and  can  be  seen  for  an 

immense   distance   from   every   point   of    the   compass. 

Manas,  from  where  we  first  saw  the  peak,  is  a  hundred 

miles  away  ;  we  took  its  bearings  from  beyond  Ta-shih-tu 

at    the   western   end   of   the   Barkul    Range, — about   a 

hundred  and   twenty  miles  to   the  east  of   the  peak  ; 

while  Prjevalsky  has  mentioned  viewing   it    from  the 

banks  of  the  Urungu  River,  at  a  distance  of  one  hundred 

and  sixty  miles.    Such  a  pinnacle,  standing  alone  on  the 

edge  of  the   desert,  creates   wonder   and  astonishment 

in  the  minds  of  the  superstitious  natives,    who  deem 

it  sacred,  call  it  the  "  Ghost  Mountain,"  and  connect  it 

with  mythical  and  mystical  traditions.    Its  triple-crested 

summit  can  worthily  take  its  place  as  the  Olympus  of 

Dzungaria. 

The  Bogdo-ola  is  typical  of  the  southern  borderland 
of  Dzungaria,  and  compares  strongly  with  the  less 
inspiring  northern  border-ranges  that  we  visited  later 
in  the  season.  The  range  lies  midway  between  the 
Karlik  Tagh  group  and  the  main  Tian  Shan,  but  it 
belongs  wholly  to  the  latter  mountain-system.  Its 
altitude  is  nothing  unusual,  being  the  forerunner  of 
mightier  peaks  to  the  west ;  but  no  one  who  has  seen 
the   Bogdo-ola   can    deny  that   it   possesses   a   certain 


536  BOGDO-OLA 

character  of  its  own,  leaving  an  impression  rarely  given 
by  even  higher  summits. 

This  mountain  first  became  known  to  geographers  as 
a  volcano,  and  for  some  years  it  appeared  as  such  on 
the  maps  ;  this  report  was,  however,  soon  proved  to 
have  originated  from  the  Chinese  myth,  that  fire  and 
smoke  issued  from  it  when  the  gods  visited  it  once  a 
year !  There  is,  no  doubt,  an  uncanny  atmosphere 
about  the  Bogdo-ola,  for,  when  other  ranges  lie  basking 
in  the  sun,  the  summits  of  these  peaks  are  certain  to  be 
enveloped  in  mists  and  hidden  in  clouds. 

Dull  weather  is  very  common,  and  this  conserves 
the  snow  which  perpetually  covers  the  summits  of  the 
Bogdo  ranges.  Sudden  storms  of  great  violence  fre- 
quently occur,  rain  falls  at  intervals  throughout  the 
summer  months,  and  the  weather  is  far  more  changeable 
than  in  other  localities  in  Central  Asia.  Strong  winds, 
blowing  to  a  hurricane,  are  a  feature  of  the  region ;  the 
route  leading  southwards  to  Turfan  being  well  known 
for  the  violence  of  the  gales  which  blow  through  the  gap 
in  the  mountains.  Travelling  by  this  route  was  said 
to  be  dangerous,  even  carts  being  occasionally  blown 
over ;  our  Chinese  informer  added,  however,  that  it  was 
**  only  Treasury  carts  that  were  blown  over,"  one  of 
these,  carrying  bullion,  having  vanished  altogether,  the 
wheels  only  being  found ;  its  disappearance  was  attributed 
to  the  wind,  aptly  named  the  "  Ghost  Wind  "  ! 

The  uncertain  climate  is  caused,  it  is  said,  by  the 
position  of  the  high  peaks  towering  above  the  low,  hot 
depression  of  Turfan.  Whatever  the  reason  may  be, 
these  highlands  are  the  scene  of  violent  climatic  changes 
which  overawe  the  natives  and  cause  them  to  consider 
it    a   suitable  abode  for  "  spirits,"  and  therefore   holy. 


THE    SACRED    MOUNTAIN  537 

The  existence,  also,  of  a  romantic  alpine  lake,  at  an 
altitude  of  6,625  ft., — embosomed  in  the  highest  forests, 
close  under  the  silent  glaciers  and  snow-fields, — ^forms  a 
scene  of  such  beauty  as  to  make  it  an  object  of  worship 
by  a  myth-loving  race. 

The  Bogdo-ola  was  first  explored  by  the  brother- 
travellers,  Grum-Grjimailo,  in  1889-90,  who  mapped  the 
essential  features  of  the  range,  visited  its  sacred  lake 
and  the  glaciers  above,  but  did  not  penetrate  farther 
into  the  alpine  region.  The  maps  they  produced  were 
poor  in  detail,  and  are  now  proved  to  be  inaccurate ; 
but  they  stood  for  long  as  the  only  survey  of  the 
Bogdo-ola.  No  other  traveller  came  to  this  remark- 
able mountain-group  for  eighteen  years ;  then  Merz- 
bacher,  in  1908,  concluded  his  exhaustive  exploration 
of  the  Tian  Shan  by  a  visit  to  the  central  portion  of 
the  range.  He  thoroughly  explored  the  main  valley 
of  Bogdo-ola,  made  two  ascents  of  about  13,000  ft. 
on  the  northern  edge  of  the  central  mass  and  achieved 
a  still  higher  ascent  on  the  south ;  he  then  crossed  the 
central  part  of  the  range  from  north  to  south  by  the 
Miskan  Pass.  A  great  deal  of  scientific  interest  re- 
garding the  geological  formation  of  the  range  and  its 
excessive  glaciation  resulted  from  Merzbacher's  work, 
but  there  still  remains  much  detailed  survey-work  to 
be  accomplished.  East  of  Long.  89°  40'  the  higher 
portions  of  the  range  are  quite  unknown,  and  the 
upper  sources  of  the  rivers  on  north  and  south  have 
never  been  visited. 

The  second  week  of  May  showed  us,  as  we  rode  from 
Guchen  into  the  foot-hills  at  the  base  of  the  range,  what 
the  Bogdo-ola  can  supply  in  the  way  of  samples  of  climate. 
The  early  days  of  May  had  been  hot,   the  elms  and 


/ 


538  BOGDO-OLA 

poplars  were  practical!}-  in  leaf,  wheat  was  six  inches 
above  the  ground,  and  summer-birds  were  singing ; 
but  on  the  first  night  after  leaving  Guchen  rain  occurred, 
and  on  the  second  a  heavy  snow-fall.  Violent  winds 
got  up  at  a  few  minutes'  notice  ;  nature  seemed  to  be 
always  in  the  throes  of  some  great  cyclonic  disturb- 
ance. We  saw  valleys  which  gave  the  impression  of 
being  cleared  by  sudden  storm-bursts  ;  the  river-beds 
were  wide,  although,  at  this  season,  they  contained  little 
water  ;  but  dead  timber  lying  high  and  dry  above  the 
ordinary-  water-level,  and  great  log-jams  in  the  streams, 
were  suggestive  of  the  floods  that  occur  so  frequently. 

A  sparse  population  of  farmers  and  nomads  lived  on 
the  lower  slopes,  but  the  main  valle}^  which  drained 
from  the  sacred  lake, — although  a  smiling  land  of 
grass  and  flowers,  where  streamlets  ran  beneath  the 
chequered  shade  of  elm  and  willow  groves,— remained 
untenanted,  a  reserve  too  holy  for  the  use  of  man.  A 
day's  march  takes  the  pilgrim  up  the  length  of  this 
silent  valley,  and  through  a  frowning  gorge,  beyond 
which  he  will  find  himself  confronted  b\'  a  great  barrier 
entirely  blocking  the  valle}'.  This  wall  of  moraine  de- 
posits, which  has  dammed  the  valley  and  caused  the 
formation  of  the  Bogdo-ola  lake  above  it,  was  the  most 
perfect  I  had  ever  seen.  From  below  it  looked  almost 
artificial,  with  its  smooth,  unbroken  slope  and  level  top. 
Grass  and  forest  covered  it  in  part,  and  here  and  there 
water,  draining  through  from  the  lake  beyond,  burst 
out  and  formed  cascades  down  the  bank. 

On  reaching  the  top  of  the  barrier  w^e  came  suddenly 
into  \dew  of  the  long-hidden  lake  and  of  the  snow- 
peaks  which  form  its  background.  Small  wonder  that 
the    pious    natives    considered    this    region    sacred    and 


THE    SACRED    MOUNTAIN  539 

guarded  it  from  the  profanity  of  man  ;  it  was  a  pleasure 
we  keenly  appreciated  to  be  able  to  enjoy  its  beauty, 
undisturbed  by  the  presence  of  other  mortals,  with 
the  exception  of  the  aged  priests  who  dwelt  in  the 
temples  surrounding  the  lake.  Strangers  were  rarely 
permitted,  and  nomads  were  never  allowed  to  disturb 
the  peaceful  surroundings.  The  neighbouring  pastures 
grew  rank  and  wild  ;  and  the  wild-game  resorted  here 
in  numbers  from  the  hard-hunted  valleys  beyond  the 
sacred  precincts. 

A  previous  explorer  relates  that  he  found  a  notice 
put  up  near  the  lake,  saying  :  "  It  is  forbidden,  under 
penalty  of  instant  death,  to  violate  the  tranquillity  of 
this  holy  land.  There  must  be  not  only  no  shooting  and 
no  tree-cutting,  but  cattle  may  not  even  be  pastured 
here,  that  they  may  not  trample  underfoot  the  herbage 
belonging  to  God's  creatures." 

In  an  amphitheatre  of  steep-forested  slopes  lay  the 
lake,  tucked  in  close  under  the  highest  summits,  backed 
by  a  world  of  snow  and  ice.  Merzbacher  called  it  "the 
pearl  of  the  Eastern  Tian  Shan,"  and  I  think  it  would 
be  hard  to  find  an  alpine  lake  having  so  perfect  a 
setting  as  the  Bogdo-ola.  Turquoise-blue  lakes,  pine 
forests,  and  snow  backgrounds  are  not  uncommon,  but 
the  presence  of  quaint  Chinese  temples  picturesquely 
perched  on  the  steep  hill-sides  and  mirrored  in  the  lake 
added  greatly  to  the  effect ;  as  did,  also,  the  sound  of 
muffled  drums  and  deep-noted  horns  at  sunset. 

The  colony  of  priests  who  lived  up  there  in  isolated 
temples  spent  a  life  of  dull  monotony.  In  bare  cells, 
existing  on  bread  and  water,  cut  off  from  the  outside 
world,  and  never  returning  to  it,  they  might  well  be 
•described  as  ha\dng  to  "live  on  air  and  scener}^"     They 


540  BOGDO-OLA 

had  no  intercourse  with  their  fellow-men,  and  did  no 
work  ;  even  their  bread  was  made  in  the  next  valley 
and  brought  to  them  at  intervals.  One  temple  was 
built  in  such  a  position  as  to  be  unapproachable  from 
the  land  side ;  thus  giving  its  inmates  the  additional 
advantage  of  being  able  to  shut  themselves  off  even 
from  other  priests,  for  there  was  only  one  boat.  The 
priests  protected  animal  life,  and  were  greatly  con- 
cerned at  hearing  the  reports  of  my  collecting-gun  ;  but 
on  learning  that  I  was  shooting  only  small  birds,  and 
not  the  deer,  they  were  quite  satisfied. 

Turning  to  the  purely  topographical  side  of  the 
Bogdo-ola,  the  range  is  composed  of  a  single  main  ridge 
running,  on  the  whole,  due  east  and  west,  but  in  detail 
bending  and  varying  the  direction  from  east  to  south- 
east. The  main  ridge  has  a  uniform  altitude  averaging 
15,000  ft.,  which  drops  off  in  a  sharp  decline  towards  the 
Dzungarian  plains  on  the  north  and  the  Turfan  depression 
on  the  south.  The  main  ridge  is  very  steep  and  retains 
its  altitude  with  such  persistency  that  it  can  only  be 
crossed  in  a  few  places.  Out  of  this  15,000-ft.  wall  rises 
another  5,000-ft.  block,  formed  by  three  distinct  peaks, 
which  attain  a  maximum  altitude  of  over  20,000  ft. 
These  virgin  peaks  remain  unclimbed,  but  Merzbacher's 
clinometer  reckonings,  which  he  considers  fairly  accurate, 
make  the  east  peak  21,356  ft.,  the  central  peak  21,240  ft., 
and  the  west  peak  20,976  ft.  The  glaciation  of  this  so- 
called  "secondary  chain"  is  unusually  extensive,  and 
the  traces  of  the  diluvial  ice-age  are  remarkably  de- 
veloped. The  glaciers,  according  to  Merzbacher,  are 
more  numerous  on  the  northern  than  on  the  southern 
slopes  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  largest  glaciers  are  to 
be  found  on  the  south.     The  largest  glacier  he  measured 


ACROSS   DZUNGARIA  541 

on  the  north  is  three  or  four  miles,  and  that  on  the 
south  six  or  seven  miles  in  length.  All  are  in  a  state 
of  retreat,  more  especially  those  on  the  southern  side. 
This  glaciated  chain  extends  over  a  distance  of  145  miles. 

It  was  with  reluctance  that  we  left  the  beautiful 
Bogdo-ola  and  started  on  the  stage  of  our  journey  which 
led  us  across  the  hot,  monotonous  plains  of  Central  Dzun- 
garia.  Passing  again  through  Urumchi  and  on  to  Manas, 
we  could  well  have  continued  our  route  by  the  main  road 
which  crosses  the  plain  between  Shi-Kho  and  Chuguchak  ; 
but,  in  order  to  obtain  an  idea  of  the  heart  of  the  land, 
we  determined  to  follow  a  line  north  from  Manas.  The 
main  route  is  well  known ;  it  crosses  a  low-lying  desert - 
belt,  and  is  remarkable  at  this  season  onh^  for  heat  and 
mosquitoes ;  there  is  little  information  to  be  obtained 
and  few  physical  features  to  be  studied.  By  going 
north  from  Manas,  however,  and  following  the  Manas 
River,  we  hoped  to  arrive  at  our  goal,  the  Jair  and 
Barlik  Ranges,  by  a  less-known  and  more  interesting 
route. 

The  Manas  is  the  chief  river  of  Southern  Dzungaria ; 
this  river  alone,  of  the  countless  streams  which  descend 
into  the  plains  from  the  snow-clad  ranges,  forms  a  water- 
way of  sufficient  size  to  outlive  the  toll  that  is  taken  of  its 
water  in  the  irrigated  area,  and  to  continue  to  flow  on, — a. 
silent,  sluggish  stream,  destined  to  form  many  mires  and 
swamps  before  finally  evaporating.  The  course  of  the 
Manas  River  suggests  the  most  natural  route  northwards 
across  the  arid  plains  ;  and  in  time  to  come,  when  the 
region  is  more  fully  developed,  this  will  no  doubt  become 
a  highway  able  to  compete  with  the  present  Shi-Kho 
road ;  for  it  will  have  not  only  the  advantage  of  a  better 
water-supply,  but  will  also  tap  the  traffic  of  a  richer 


542  ACROSS    DZUNGARIA 

country.  At  present  both  the  Manas  River  and  the 
highway  afforded  by  its  banks  are  wasted. 

The  Manas  River  is  a  feature  of  immense  importance 
in  a  land  so  barren  ;  this  is  proved  by  the  fact  that 
no  other  practical  route  leads  across  Dzungaria  to  the 
east,  the  Chinese  having  taken  advantage  of  the  oppor- 
tunities it  offers  by  planning  a  route  which  should 
connect  their  capital  with  the  projected  new  city  of 
Sharasume,  or  Altai ;  it  also  represents  the  shortest  and 
most  direct  road  to  the  frontier  town  of  Chuguchak 
as  well  as  to  the  important  trade-centre  of  Zaisan.  The 
only  signs  we  found  of  the  existence  of  communication 
between  north  and  south  by  this  route  were  a  caravan 
of  a  hundred  bullock-carts,  laden  with  hides,  bound  for 
Chuguchak,  which  we  passed  on  the  road  a  few  days 
north  of  Manas ;  and  a  line  of  telegraph-poles  lying 
beside  the  track  in  readiness  for  the  line  to  be  carried 
northwards. 

Leaving  Manas  with  a  light  caravan,  we  travelled 
along  the  east  bank  of  the  river.  Although,  at  first, 
a  fast-flowing  river,  many  channels  running  in  over 
shingly  beds,  it  soon  degenerated  into  a  sluggish  stream 
winding  its  way  between  mud- banks  and  bordered  by 
jungle,  swamp,  or  rice-fields.  The  farther  north  the 
smaller  and  less  frequent  were  the  patches  of  culti- 
vation. Now  we  passed  through  the  fields  of  Chinese 
colonists,  and  now  through  sand-dunes  alternated  by 
marsh  or  forests  of  dwarf  oak  and  poplar,  which 
formed  the  haunt  of  stags,  pigs,  and  the  small  Central 
Asian  tiger.  There  were  many  varieties  of  scenery  and 
changes  of  weather ;  thunder-storms  broke  over  us, 
and  rain  fell  in  such  quantities  that  the  passage  of 
the  baggage-horses  across  the  quagmire,  into  which  the 


ACROSS   DZUNGARIA  543 

plain  was  transformed,  became  a  matter  of  difficulty  ; 
later  on,  the  great  heat  and  the  ferocity  of  the  mos- 
quitoes reminded  one  of  the  tropics.  On  the  third  day 
we  found  ourselves  wandering  amongst  the  sand-dunes 
which  not  only  surged  up  to  the  very  edge  of  the  river, 
but  even  changed  its  course,  when  the  winds  were 
sufficiently  violent  to  move  the  sands.  In  hollows 
amongst  the  dunes  were  lakes  teeming  with  bird-life, 
such  as  ducks,  waders,  terns,  and  gulls  ;  and  even  here 
small  patches  of  suitable  ground  were  utilized  for  corn- 
growing. 

The  scenery  of  the  central  plains,  although  monoton- 
ous and  featureless  in  itself,  was  always  relieved  by  the 
panorama  which  the  giant  Tian  Shan  offered  until  the 
northern  ranges  came  into  view.  From  this  outlying 
point  could  be  seen  the  Celestial  Mountains,  with  an 
unbroken  snow-line  of  about  two  hundred  miles  in 
length,  but  to  the  north  there  was  either  nothing,  or 
splendour  of  colour,  as  the  case  might  be,  whether  the 
day  were  hazy  with  loess-laden  winds  or  calm  and 
clear.  Mirages  often  shimmered  in  the  distance  with 
such  reality  and  persistency  that  one  could  easily 
forgive  the  mistakes,  made  on  even  recent  maps,  which 
placed  an  imaginary  Ayar  Nor  lake  in  a  desert  we 
actually  passed  across  and  an  extensive  Kizil-bashi  Nor 
to  the  north-east,  where  the  only  water-surface  is  the 
small  lake  of  Telli  Nor  with  a  few  salt  marshes. 

By  slow  and  tedious  marches,  often  losing  the  track, 
and  experiencing  long  delays  caused  by  guides  who  did 
not  appear  to  know  the  way  to  the  next  village,  we 
finally  arrived  at  an  easy  ford  and  crossed  over  to  the 
western  bank  of  the  Manas  River.  The  vagueness  of 
the  country  ahead  of  us,  and  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 

II— 15 


544  ACROSS  DZUNGARIA 

information,  obliged  us  to  trust  a  guide  to  conduct  us  to 
a  village  called  Sa-veen.  When,  after  a  long,  hot  trek, 
with  much  wandering  amongst  bogs,  jungles,  and  rice- 
fields,  we  eventually  arrived  there,  we  appeared  to  be 
in  altogether  the  wrong  direction.  We  found  travelling 
in  a  straight  line  to  be  impossible,  and  moving  without 
a  guide  in  such  a  country  to  be  folly,  so,  after  resting  the 
horses  for  a  day  and  bribing  a  native  of  Sa-veen, — who 
appeared  to  be  so  well  off,  owing  to  returns  from  rice- 
culture,  that  he  had  no  time  for  anything  else  but 
gambling, — we  moved  westwards,  hoping  some  day  to 
come  within  sight  of  the  Jair  Mountains. 

On  leaving  the  vegetation-zone  of  the  Manas  River 
barren,  open  steppe  surrounded  us ;  yet,  in  spite  of  the 
apparent  aridity  and  the  easy  nature  of  the  country, 
we  experienced  considerable  difficulty  in  our  attempt 
to  cross  these  plains.  The  nature  of  the  ground  was, 
over  large  areas,  an  expanse  of  salt-encrusted,  friable 
earth ;  at  every  step  the  outer  crust  broke  through,  and 
we  sank  deep  into  the  soft,  dusty  earth  beneath.  The 
fatigue  thus  occasioned  made  it  most  tedious  for  man 
and  beast  ;  whether  wet  or  dry  these  soft,  salty  plains 
formed  obstacles  of  no  small  difficulty.  Where  water 
approached  the  surface,  dangerously  soft  ground  bogged 
the  horses  and  made  progress  slow.  It  was  almost 
impossible  to  distinguish  between  the  dry,  saline  earth 
and  the  bog,  for  both  were  dry  on  the  top,  and  for  this 
reason  we  repeatedly  fell  foul  of  them.  The  horses 
went  down  like  ninepins  when  the  dry  crust  proved  to 
hide  treacherous  ground  ;  then  they  had  to  be  unloaded, 
pulled  out  of  the  soft,  sticky  bog,  and  loaded  again  ; 
then  the  bog  would  be  tried  in  another  direction, — 
with  the  same  result  of  muddy  horses  and  wet  baggage. 


-B-ftiir^(Ail!ill!i^ 


5^  1— .V 


'*'4»*j  Ml — 

THE    SALT-ENCRUSTED    PLAINS    OF    CENTRAL    DZUNGARIA 


DEEP-CUT    RAVINES    IN    THE    DZUNGARIAN    PLAINS. 


544] 


ACROSS  DZUNGARIA  545 

On  one  occasion  we  actually  had  to  unload  and  un- 
saddle the  horses,  to  spread  all  the  felts  we  possessed  on 
the  soft  bog,  and  to  lead  the  animals  and  carry  the 
baggage  over  them  to  firmer  ground. 

Travelling  transversely  to  the  water-courses,  as  we 
were  now  doing,  entailed  heart-breaking  detours  in  order 
to  cross  the  deep-cut  gorges  which  had  been  carved 
out  by  the  streams,  when  once  a  year — in  spring — the 
melting  snows  sent  down  from  the  lofty  border-ranges 
a  flood  of  useless  water.  The  plain,  as  a  whole,  looked 
easy-going  and  level,  but  was  in  reality  seamed  with 
sheer-sided  trenches,  the  high,  earthy  banks  of  which 
were  difficult  obstacles  to  negotiate.  Their  existence 
was  not  realized  until  the  lip  of  a  nullah  was  reached; 
then  a  way  had  to  be  found  for  the  baggage-horses  to 
descend  into  a  bottom  choked  with  a  jungle  of  scrub, 
tall  reeds,  poplar,  and  wild  olive;  tearing  our  way 
through  the  jungle  we  were  involved  in  another  climb 
up  the  opposite  cliff.  The  baggage,  as  often  as  not, 
came  off  on  the  descent,  and,  being  once  more  loaded 
up,  slipped  again  on  the  ascent — that  is  to  say,  when 
we  succeeded  in  finding  a  possible  crossing ;  more  often 
we  were  compelled  to  follow  the  brink  of  the  ravines 
for  a  long  way  and  lead  the  caravan  by  an  easier  road. 

In  spite  of  the  jungle-choked  ravines  and  bogs,  we 
sometimes  incurred  the  risk  of  a  shortage  of  water.  The 
xavines  were  often  dry,  although  they  had  an  inviting 
appearance  of  luxuriant  growth  ;  while  the  bogs  were 
merely  formed  by  the  percolating  up  of  brackish  water. 
The  dry  plain  drank  up  the  drainage  from  the  mountains 
and  quickly  swallowed  all  rain  that  fell,  yet  at  this  season 
chance  pools  of  rain-water  might  be  found,  as  we  were 
once  fortunate  enough  to  discover,  when,  at  the  end  of  a 


546  ACROSS  DZUNGARIA 

long  daj^'s  trek,  the  line  of  vegetation  for  which  we  had 
aimed  was  found  to  be  dried  up  and  we  were  in  danger 
of  a  waterless  camp.  On  that  occasion  the  dogs  drew 
our  attention  to  a  pool  of  rain-water  lying  some  way  off 
the  track,  and  we  camped  close  by.  Water  did  not 
necessarily  mean  grazing,  for  the  following  morning 
we  found  that  all  the  horses  had  strayed  far  and  wide 
in  search  of  grass ;  we  thus  found  ourselves  in  the 
predicament  of  being  seven  men  and  eight  horse-loads 
of  baggage  dumped  in  mid-desert,  with  a  small  and 
rapidly  drying  pool  of  rain-water  to  depend  upon !  All 
that  day  and  the  following  night  the  men  scouted  the 
country  for  the  missing  animals — no  easy  matter  in  a 
flat  plain  covered  with  lo-ft.-high  saxaul  and  tamarisk 
scrub.  Eventually  eleven  were  secured  out  of  sixteen, 
and,  giving  up  the  others  as  lost,  we  moved  on,  just 
as  our  now  very  muddy  and  much  diminished  rain-pool 
was  drying  up. 

After  some  eight  days  in  the  desert,  although  endea- 
vouring to  keep  a  line  towards  the  north-west,  one  obstacle 
after  another  turned  us  unwillingly  towards  the  west 
and  south-west,  until  we  actually  reached  the  outer 
fringe  of  the  cultivation  along  the  Kutun  River  which 
waters  Shi-Kho.  Even  then  we  should  have  struck 
northwards  along  a  track  which  led  in  that  direction 
had  not  our  guide  decamped,  tempted  by  our  proximity 
to  the  Shi-Kho  bazaars ;  we  had  therefore  to  follow  suit. 

These  two  weeks  spent  in  wandering  over  the  plain, 
although  trying  and  disappointing  in  that  we  had  been 
thwarted  in  carrying  out  our  plan,  were  not  wasted. 
We  had  learnt  much  of  the  complex  character  of  Central 
Dzungaria,  which  otherwise  would  have  remained  a 
blank  to  us. 


ACROSS   DZUNGARIA  547 

From  Shi-Kho,  with  a  fresh  caravan,  we  journeyed 
northwards  by  the  main  road  which  leads  to  Chuguchak, 
and,  by  doing  so,  experienced  much  we  had  escaped 
during  the  winter's  trek  along  the  high-road,  namely,  the 
plunging  through  acres  of  mud  caused  by  over-flowing 
canals,  the  crossing  of  countless  unbridged  dykes,  and 
the  putting  up  at  night  in  places  which  were  literally 
cesspools  of  filth  ;  all  of  which  had  been  too  hard  frozen 
in  the  winter  to  be  either  a  hindrance  or  an  offence.  A 
few  marches  took  us  out  of  the  low,  hot  basin  to  rising 
ground  ;  once  off  the  floor  of  the  plain  we  approached 
happier  and  pleasanter  lands  and  at  length  reached 
the  excellent  pastures  of  the  Maili  highlands,  the  first 
spurs  of  the  northern  border-range. 


CHAPTER    XIX 

SPORT    IN    THE    HIGHLANDS    OF    DZUNGARIA 
By  J.  H.  Miller 

The  middle  of  June  found  us  once  more  among  the 
mountains,  revelling  in  the  balmy  breezes  that  ruffled 
the  flower-studded  grass  of  the  Barlik-Maili  Range.  Life 
was  again  made  enjoyable,  and  we  had  a  further  proof 
of  the  complex  nature  of  Central  Asia,  in  that,  in  two 
short  marches  we  had  risen  from  the  enervating,  furnace- 
like heat  of  the  insect-infested  plains,  to  a  restful,  green 
land  of  bubbling  brooks  and  matchless  pasture.  Wisps 
of  smoke  hanging  lazily  in  the  air,  and  the  presence  of 
numerous  flocks  and  herds  added  to  the  peacefulness 
of  the  surroundings,  and  proclaimed  the  presence  of 
large  Kirei  encampments.  The  Turki  words  maili  (fat) 
and  barlik  (everything)  give  the  best  idea  of  how  this 
region  appeals  to  the  nomads,  for  it  is  indeed  a  **  fat  " 
land,  possessing  everything  which  the  heart  of  a  herds- 
man could  desire. 

The  chance  of  procuring  specimens  of  that  rare  sheep 
— Ovis  sairensis — lured  us  to  this  region,  but  our  quest 
was  tantalizing  and  unsuccessful.  The  range  of  this 
sheep,  which  was  first  discovered  by  Mr.  St.  George 
Littledale  in  the  Sair,  or  Jair,  Mountains  at  the  eastern 
end  of  the  Tarbagatai,  and  south-east  of  Lake  Zaisan, 

extends  southwards  through  the  Urkashar  and  other 

548 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  549 

small  ranges  as  far  as  the  Maili-Barlik  group.  This  is 
also  its  eastern  limit.  How  far  its  range  extends  west- 
wards along  the  Tarbagatai  seems  to  be  imperfectly 
known.  Wild-sheep  exist  in  the  low  mountains  to  the 
north  of  Balkash,  but  whether  they  are  Ovis  sairensis 
or  Ovis  nigrimontana  is  a  question  which  requires  in- 
vestigating. 

The  head  of  the  river  Kosho,  which  divides  the 
Barlik  from  the  Maili,  runs  through  a  broad,  grassy  upland, 
thickly  dotted  with  ancient  burial-mounds.  It  is  here 
that  the  Chief  of  the  Western  Kirei  had  his  headquarters. 

Early  one  afternoon,  under  the  guidance  of  a  herds- 
man, we  reached  his  residence,  and  lost  no  time  in  paying 
our  respects. 

Instead  of  the  usual  picturesque  group  of  yurts  we 
found  ourselves  confronted  by  a  high,  mud-built  en- 
closure, which  had  a  formidable  iron  door.  Inside  the 
walls  was  a  low  building  of  Russian  type,  containing 
the  living  rooms  and  a  store-room.  Most  of  the  re- 
maining space  was  occupied  by  two  large  yurts,  used 
for  the  kitchen  and  servants'  quarters. 

The  great  man  and  his  family  received  us  at  the 
entrance  to  his  house.  It  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
that  we  maintained  a  dignified  demeanour,  for  the  great- 
ness of  his  position  had  spread  to  his  person  in  an  alarming 
degree.  He  must  have  weighed  a  clear  twenty  stone, 
and  his  corpulency  was  accentuated  by  a  voluminous 
Kirghiz  costume.  His  first  wife  ran  him  pretty  close, 
and  his  sons  and  daughters  showed  great  promise. 

Tea  and  sweetmeats  were  placed  before  us  in  a  room 
gaudily  decorated  with  carpets, — some  of  them  old  and 
good, — many-hued  tin  boxes,  and  trashy  goods  from  the 
Chuguchak  bazaar.     Somehow  the  whitewashed  room 


550  DZUNGARIA 

did  not  suit  either  the  occupants  or  their  belongings. 
The  smoky  interior  of  a  yurt  would  have  been  much 
more  appropriate.  The  old  Chief  was  decidedly  sus- 
picious of  us  at  first,  and  laughed  at  the  idea  that  we 
wanted  to  shoot  wild-sheep  ;  he  undoubtedly  put  us 
down  as  spies.  But  when  we  had  produced  our  Chinese 
passports,  and  had  proved  to  him  our  acquaintance  with 
the  Russian  Consuls  of  both  Chuguchak  and  Kulja,  he 
began  to  look  at  us  in  a  more  friendly  light. 

Like  so  many  of  these  frontier  nomad  chiefs,  though 
a  Chinese  subject,  he  was  thoroughly  in  with  the  Rus- 
sians, so  as  to  be  on  the  safe  side  whichever  way  the 
cat  jumped. 

It  was  hard  to  believe  that  this  man  had,  in  spite  of 
his  proportions,  made  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  three 
years  previously,  accompanied  by  his  wife.  They  had 
travelled  by  horse  and  boat  to  Omsk,  and  from  there  by 
train  to  Odessa.  He  dwelt  on  the  overcrowding  of  the 
boats,  saying  that  "  they  were  packed  like  sheep  at  a 
shearing."  While  undergoing  a  lengthy  quarantine  at 
Tebuk,  on  the  Mecca  railway,  fifteen  out  of  their  party 
of  forty  had  died,  probably  from  cholera.  How  foreign 
to  the  heart  of  the  lazy,  space-loving  Central  Asian 
nomad  must  have  been  the  crowding,  hurry,  and 
bustle  of  train  and  boat  travelling  !  But  it  was  all 
looked  upon  as  martyrdom  for  the  cause,  and  submitted 
to  without  a  murmur — a  striking  proof  of  the  hold 
Mohammedanism  has  over  its  most  outlying  believers. 

Before  we  left  we  had  quite  made  friends  with  our 
host,  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  hearing  him  order  men 
and  horses  for  our  use. 

From  our  camp  we  looked  up  to  the  jagged  crest  of 
the   Barlik,  only   a  day's   march   to  the  north.     It  is 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  551 

the  one  well-defined  ridge  in  this  area  of  mountains. 
Both  the  north  and  the  south    slopes   are  exceedingly- 
steep,  especially  the  former,  where  precipitous  cliffs  drop 
into  extensive  forests.     The  grazing  is  of  the  best,  and 
large  numbers  of  yurts  scattered  over  the  lower  slopes 
account,  in  no  small  degree,  for  the  scarcity  of  game. 
I  shall  not  weary  the  reader  with  an  account  of  the 
strenuous  days  spent  in  searching  for  those  scarce  and 
elusive  sheep  ;  only  one  small  band  of  ewes  and  three 
yearling  rams  were  sighted.     A  few  ibex  live  a  nervous 
existence  among  the  crags,  and  wapiti,  roe,  and  bear 
are  said  to  frequent  the  forests.     In  spite  of  the  absence 
of  sport,  however,  we  spent  an  enjoyable  time  camping 
in  those  emerald  valleys  of  knee-high  grass,  or  scrambling 
among    the   higher   slopes,    carpeted    with   that    short, 
tufty  variety  of  grass  so  beloved  by  mountain   game. 
On  the  boggy  patches  below  the  snow-drifts  yellow  and 
purple    pansies,    gentians,    poppies,    and    other   flowers 
grew  in  profusion.     Marmots  and  numerous  varieties  of 
smaller  rodents  were  almost  everywhere  in  great  numbers, 
enabling  Carruthers  to  add  considerably  to  his  collection. 
Before  moving  into  the  Borotala  we  spent  two  days 
in  hunting  on  the  Western  Maih  plateau,  almost  over- 
looking the  Dzungarian  Gate.     This  plateau  is  formed  of 
innumerable  small  hills  and  hollows,  the  latter  being  of 
a  very  uniform  height, — something  like  a  sheet  of  corru- 
gated iron,  except  that,  instead  of  being  parallel,  they 
were  jumbled  up  in  hopeless  confusion.     There  were  no 
commanding  positions  for  spying  ;    so  all  we  could  do 
was  to  ride  along  on  the  chance  of  coming  upon  game. 
One  morning,  while  turning  a  corner  in  this  tantalizing 
country,  I  came  face  to  face  with  the  only  "  respectable  " 
ram  we  saw  the  whole  time,  but  he  was  out  of  sight 


552  DZUNGARIA 

before  the  rifle  could  be  brought  to  bear.  Several  more 
sheep  were  sighted  in  this  way,  but  all  were  ewes  or  very 
young  rams.  We  each  killed  one  of  the  latter  for  its 
skin,  so  as  to  have  something  to  show  for  our  labour. 
I  cannot  recommend  any  sportsman,  desirous  of  securing 
a  specimen  of  this  sheep,  to  visit  this  southern  limit  of 
their  range  ;  farther  north  they  may  be  more  plentiful. 

A  long  reach  down  through  waterless,  barren  gorges, 
took  us  to  a  small  spring  on  the  edge  of  the  plain, 
which  was  crossed  five  miles  north  of  Ebi  Nor.  This 
huge  expanse  of  water,  lying  only  700  ft.  above  sea- 
level,  shimmered  like  a  sheet  of  silver  in  the  clear 
atmosphere.  We  sighted  large  numbers  of  gazelle, 
and  three  saiga  here ;  but  hunting  on  the  march  is  un- 
satisfactory, and  we  did  no  good  with  them. 

Reaching  the  Kizil  Tagh  (red  mountains),  we  once 
again  struck  the  road  which  we  had  trodden  nine 
months  before  on  our  way  from  Chuguchak  to  Kulja. 
Now  that  we  were  marching  by  day,  our  two  dogs  felt 
the  heat  terribly  ;  being  so  close  to  the  ground,  they 
received  the  reflected  heat  from  the  parched  earth  in 
addition  to  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun.  It  was  pitiful 
to  see  them  rushing  to  every  little  bush  we  passed  to  dig 
madly  at  the  ground  in  search  of  shade,  or  walking  in 
the  shadow  cast  by  the  horses.  We  often  gave  them 
water  out  of  the  rims  of  our  felt  hats,  but  that  was  only 
effective  for  a  short  time.  In  the  cool  of  the  evening 
they  were  quite  happy  again,  playing  about  and  hunting 
desert-rats. 

For  two  days  we  rested  on  the  banks  of  the  Borotala 
close  to  a  small  Chanto  village,  which  possessed  a  small 
bazaar,  where  we  could  replenish  stores  with  all  necessi- 
ties.    A  group  of  gnarled  poplars  afforded  ample  pro- 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  553 

tection  from  the  fierce  rays  of  the  sun,  and  a  shady 
backwater  enabled  us,  by  bathing,  to  rid  ourselves  of 
the  dust  of  the  desert. 

We  were  now  on  the  threshold  of  a  country  which, 
from  the  sporting  point  of  view,  was  completely  un- 
explored, and  our  hopes  ran  high  as  to  what  might  be 
ahead.  Not  much  could  be  learnt  from  the  industrious, 
stay-at-home  Chantos,  but  we  hoped  to  get  all  the  infor- 
mation we  wanted  as  to  the  sporting  possibilities  from  the 
Charkhar  Mongols,  who  inhabited  the  region  to  the 
west,  so  we  decided  to  make  for  the  headquarters  of  the 
tribe.  On  the  first  day's  march  up  the  river  we  must 
have  passed  quite  three  hundred  yurts,  with  their  atten- 
dant flocks  and  herds  grazing  on  the  lush  grass  that 
grew  among  the  timber  that  fringed  the  river.  This 
fringe  of  trees  and  scrub,  though  narrow,  is  so  thick  and 
interlaced  as  to  be  almost  impenetrable  in  places  ;  it 
is  largely  composed  of  a  thorny  bush,  which  in  winter  is 
covered  with  golden  clusters  of  small  berries,  the  favourite 
food  of  the  pheasants  which  abound  in  these  jungles. 
When  we  crossed  the  Lower  Borotala,  in  November,  on 
our  way  to  Kulja,  we  shot  several,  but  during  the 
summer  they  are  rarely  seen  amongst  the  dense  vegetation. 

Allowing  our  caravan  to  pass  the  aoul  ^  of  the  Amban 
of  the  Lower  Borotala  without  halting,  we  paid  a  flying 
visit  to  his  wife,  who  was  in  charge,  the  Amban  himself 
being  away  in  Sweeting  on  business. 

His  spouse  received  us  with  true  nomadic  hospitality. 
In  the  cool  of  her  gorgeous  snow-white  yurt  we  were 
refreshed  with  tea  and  delicious  cream  made  into  the 
shape  and  consistency  of  a  pancake,  which  rivalled 
in  excellence  the  best  Devonshire. 

^  Village  of  yurts. 


554  DZUNGARIA 

The  costume  of  a  well-to-do  Kalmuk  ^  woman  is  very- 
striking.  A  long  blue  and  red  gown,  generally  un- 
girded  at  the  waist,  reaches  almost  to  her  feet,  and 
above  this  she  wears  a  short,  zouave-shaped  jacket,  of 
the  same  colours,  heavily  embroidered.  Ample  sleeves 
cover  her  hands,  and  have  to  be  continually  hitched 
back,  as  they  impede  her  in  her  household  occupations. 
Long  and  heavy  plaits  hang  down  over  each  breast, 
generally  encased  in  cloth  covers,  to  protect  the  clothing 
from  the  mutton-fat  with  which  the  hair  is  covered. 
Their  usual  headdress  is  dark  blue,  with  an  upturned 
brim,  very  Chinese  in  appearance.  Underneath  this  is 
often  worn  a  coral-covered  skull-cap.  Their  ears,  fingers, 
and  hair  are  always  decorated  with  heavy  silver  and 
coral  rings,  and  their  brooches  are  often  of  beautiful 
workmanship. 

On  the  second  night  from  leaving  the  village,  after 
a  long,  gradual  ascent  from  the  river,  we  reached,  at 
dark,  the  camp  of  the  Amban  of  the  Upper  Borotala 
tucked  away  under  the  very  foot  of  the  Ala-tau,  which 
loomed  mysteriously  above  us.  Much  barking  heralded 
our  arrival,  while  flashes  of  light  showed  us  the  men 
hurrying  out  to  assist  us  in  unpacking  the  loads  and 
pitching  camp. 

On  the  following  morning  a  brightly  clad  group 
with  the  Amban  at  its  head,  was  drawn  up  to  receive  us 
outside  the  ceremonial  yurt.  We  were  ushered  in  with 
much  hand-shaking  and  bowing,  and  had  bowls  of  that 
most  abominable  of  drinks,  arak,  placed  before  us.  This 
spirit,  distilled  from  milk,  is,  when  kept,  exceedingly 
intoxicating.    The  bowls  in  which  it  was  served  were 

^  Used  as  a  general  term  for  all  western  Mongols. 
*  The  Kho-ching  section  of  the  Charkhars. 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  555 

much  more  pleasing  than  the  drink  itself,  being  carved 
from  knots  of  walnut-wood,  and  lined  with  Chinese 
"  shoe "  silver.  When  darkened  with  age,  they  are 
exceedingly  handsome.  They  were  said  to  have  been 
brought  all  the  way  from  Lhasa  by  pilgrims,  who  pre- 
sented them  to  their  Chiefs.  The  Chieftain  of  the  Charkhars 
was  remarkably  impressive  in  appearance,  with  a  hard, 
strong,  imperturbable  countenance.  He  was  the  sort 
of  man  one  would  picture  as  one  of  the  generals  of 
Jenghis  Khan. 

The  view  from  this  camp  on  the  slopes  of  the  Ala-tau 
was  one  of  remarkable  extent  and  impressiveness  ;  the 
clearness  of  the  atmosphere  was  such  as  is  only  met 
with  in  these  dry,  elevated  regions.  At  our  feet  the 
ground  dropped  gradually  to  the  Borotala  River,  which 
ran  like  a  narrow  green  band  through  the  khaki-coloured 
plain,  losing  itself  in  a  broad  belt  of  scrub  and  cultivation 
in  the  direction  of  Ebi  Nor.  Far  beyond,  filling  up 
the  whole  of  the  southern  horizon,  stretched  the  great 
mass  of  the  Tian  Shan,  from  the  Talki  Pass  to  the  colossal 
peaks  above  Manas.  At  that  distance  it  seemed  to 
rise  perpendicularly  from  the  plains,  a  line  of  glittering 
peaks  above  a  dark  base.  But  it  was  to  the  west,  up 
Borotala,  that  we  looked  with  greatest  interest,  for 
there  lay  the  unknown. 

On  leaving  this  camp  we  experienced  one  of  those 
exasperating  "  starts  "  that  are  the  curse  of  caravan- 
travelling  ;  there  are  few  things  more  trying  to  the 
temper  and  patience  than  the  first  day  with  a  new 
caravan.  It  was  not  till  midday  that  the  horses  began 
to  dribble  in  by  ones  and  twos,  and  then  the  saddles 
and  gear  were  found  to  be  deficient.  Lastly,  the  men 
who  were  going  with  us  thought  fit  to  celebrate  the 


556  DZUNGARIA 

occasion  with  a  final  carouse,  so  that,  when  they  did 
at  last  turn  up,  they  were  mostly  incapable. 

The  replies  to  our  questions  as  to  the  sporting  possi- 
bilities of  our  venture  were,  on  the  whole,  satisfactory; 
but  long  experience  had  taught  us  not  to  put  too  much 
trust  in  native  report.  The  natives  always  say  what 
they  think  will  please.  "  Gayeek  tolla  "  (plenty  of  game) 
is  the  invariable  reply,  whatever  the  true  facts  may  be, 
from  Stamboul  to  the  Altai. 

Two  marches  along  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  crossing 
numerous  boulder-strewn  water-courses,  and  dodging 
protruding  buttresses,  brought  us  to  the  Karaul,  which 
guards  one  of  the  few  passes  over  the  Ala-tau.  In 
1908  I  had  crossed  this  very  pass  on  my  way  from  the 
Altai  to  Kulja,  via  Lepsinsk.  The  appearance  of  the 
country  had  then  struck  me  favourably,  but  a  lengthy 
programme  and  a  short  season  had  prevented  investi- 
gation. 

With  the  exception  of  a  small  post  of  three  men 
farther  up  the  valley,  we  had  now  left  the  last  habitation 
behind ;  so  we  decided  to  move  along  slowly,  hunting  as 
we  went. 

Carruthers  and  I  agreed  that  he  should  have  the 
monopoly  of  ibex,  since  he  had  never  yet  secured  a 
specimen,  whilst  I  had  shot  several  good  ones  in  the 
Tian  Shan ;  and  that  the  sheep  were  to  be  my  portion, 
he  having  shot  them  on  the  Aksai  plateau. 

The  southern  slopes  of  the  Ala-tau  drop  very  abruptly 
into  the  valley  ;  they  are  steep  shale  and  grassy  slopes, 
with  protruding  buttresses  ;  there  are  no  foot-hills  in 
the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  The  spruce-forest  which 
darkens  the  northern  declivities  is  entirely  absent  here, 
though   the   torrents  that  leap   down   from   the  snowy 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  557 

crests  are  fringed  by  thickets  of  willow,  poplar,  and  much 
rich  grass. 

We  called  a  two  days'  halt  in  one  of  these  delightful 
spots,  while  we  made  a  thorough  exploration  of  the 
surroundings.  Carruthers  ransacked  the  higher  nullahs 
for  ibex,  while  I  scoured  the  lower  slopes  in  search  of 
rams.  A  female  ibex  and  a  ewe  were  shot  for  food, 
also  five  wolves.  In  those  two  days  J  must  have  seen 
not  less  than  three  hundred  ewes  and  young,  but  not 
a  single  ram. 

Carruthers  saw  a  few  female  ibex,  and  a  stag  with 
fine  horns,  though,  of  course,  still  in  velvet.  Ibex  ground 
without  any  tree  in  sight  is  a  curious  place  to  see  a  stag  ; 
it  had  probably  fled  there  for  protection  from  the  native 
hunters,  who  at  this  season  would  be  busy  among  the 
northern  forests. 

All  the  wolves  in  the  neighbourhood  seemed  to  have 
collected  in  the  vicinity  of  this  abundant  meat-supply, 
for  I  saw  no  less  than  fourteen  in  the  two  days.  On 
the  first  evening  we  surprised  an  old  wolf  and  six  well- 
grown  cubs  on  the  prowl ;  after  watching  them  for  some 
time  sniffing  at  marmot-holes,  and  playing  on  the  hill- 
side, I  shot  two  of  the  cubs,  whose  fur,  though  short, 
was  in  beautiful  condition. 

On  the  next  morning,  having  crawled  to  the  top  of 
a  ridge  quite  close  to  our  camp,  I  saw  an  enormous  wolf 
coming  straight  towards  us  up  the  opposite  slope,  evi- 
dently hurrying  home  after  a  nocturnal  foray.  He 
did  not  see  us,  so,  allowing  him  to  come  within  forty 
yards,  I  bowled  him  over  as  he  stopped  for  a  moment  to 
look  back  over  his  shoulder.  Not  long  after  this,  while 
riding  high  up  on  the  hillside,  our  attention  was  directed 
by  loud  yaps  and  snarls  to  the  valley  below.     It  was  a 


558  DZUNG/.RIA 

pretty  sight  upon  which  we  looked  down.  Two  old 
grey  wolves  were  lying  on  the  soft  turf,  enjoying  the 
sun,  while  round  and  over  them  romped  five  jolly  young- 
sters, looking  just  like  a  lot  of  large  collie  pups.  It 
seemed  rather  heartless  to  break  up  this  happy  family 
party,  but,  though  wolves  are  frequently  seen  while 
sheep  hunting,  one  generally  refrains  from  firing  at 
them  for  fear  of  disturbing  nobler  game,  so  that  this  was 
a  chance  not  to  be  missed.  To  approach  them  was  easy, 
a  friendly  ridge  covering  my  descent ;  but  something 
had  frightened  them,  perhaps  the  Kalmuk  had  shown 
himself  on  the  slope  above,  for,  on  reaching  a  point 
fifty  yards  from  where  they  had  been  lying,  I  saw  the 
whole  family  slinking  off  at  a  good  pace.  Three  shots, 
however,  accounted  for  one  of  the  old  ones  and  a 
youngster. 

Our  horses  showed  the  greatest  fear  of  these  wolf- 
skins, and  commenced  to  squeal  and  buck  when  they 
were  tied  on  to  the  saddles.  One,  which  was  ridden  by 
my  Kalmuk,  broke  away  with  a  half-tied-on  skin  flapping 
round  its  legs  ;  luckily  it  kicked  the  obnoxious  thing 
clear  after  going  a  mile  or  so,  or  I  doubt  if  we  should 
have  seen  it  again. 

We  decided  to  make  a  long  march  up  the  valley 
without  stopping  to  hunt  ;  by  so  doing  we  hoped  to 
get  beyond  the  ladies'  quarters  into  the  domain  of  their 
lords  and  masters,  for  such  large  numbers  of  ewes  meant 
fine  heads  somewhere  not  far  off. 

At  this  time  frequent  severe  thunderstorms  swept 
over  us  ;  though  unpleasant  while  they  lasted,  the  cool, 
clear  atmosphere  which  they  produced  was  an  ample 
compensation. 

As  we  moved  up  the  ever-narrowing  valley,  a  few 


SPORT  IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  559 

gazelle  were  sighted,  but  in  absolutely  unstalkable 
positions.  Here  and  there  bleached  sheep-heads  lay 
about  ;  they  were  very  uniform  in  shape,  unlike  the 
mixed  types  met  with  on  the  Yulduz,  and  in  appear- 
ance intermediate  between  ammon  and  poll.  I  shall 
return  to  this  subject  later.  Five  days  after  leaving 
the  Kalmuk  camp  we  pitched  our  tents  close  to  the 
river,  where  the  valley  narrows  to  such  an  extent  that 
the  mountains  rise  almost  directly  from  the  river-bank. 
In  its  western  portion  the  Ala-tau  is  an  imposing  moun- 
tain-mass, some  of  the  jagged  peaks  that  frowned  down 
upon  us  being  a  good  15,000  ft.  in  height.  The  view 
to  the  south  was  blocked  by  the  less  imposing,  round- 
headed,  shale-ridge  which  divides  the  Borotala  from  its 
large  tributary,  the  Urta  Saryk.  From  each  dark  crest 
grassy  slopes  with  out-crops  of  rock  and  patches  of  shale, 
deeply  seamed  with  numerous  small  water-courses, 
dropped  towards  our  camp. 

Just  as  the  horses  were  about  to  be  unloaded,  a  bear 
with  two  cubs  was  sighted  on  a  terrace  across  the  river  ; 
they  were  only  about  four  hundred  yards  away,  and  in 
full  view  of  the  caravan.  Thinking  that  we  should  be 
sighted  any  moment,  and  forgetting  what  poor  sight  a 
bear  possesses,  we  hurriedly  forded  the  river,  and  made 
towards  where  we  thought  her  to  be,  without  stopping 
to  take  our  bearings.  We  were  peering  about,  expecting 
to  come  face  to  face  with  them  every  minute,  when 
suddenly  a  dark  head  and  shoulders  appeared  for  a 
moment  above  a  rise  a  hundred  yards  to  our  left.  We 
had  hopelessly  misjudged  their  position.  Even  now 
we  should  probably  have  got  her  if  the  ground  had 
been  favourable,  but  a  hollow  hid  her  from  our  view, 
till  they  appeared  again  a  good  five  hundred  yards  away. 
II— 16 


56o  DZUNGARIA 

I  should  be  ashamed  to  say  how  many  cartridges  were 
expended  in  the  next  minute  or  two.  Even  a  musketry 
instructor  at  Hythe  would  have  marvelled  at  the  rapidity 
with  which  our  bolts  worked  !  But,  though  dust  was 
spurting  up  all  round  that  hurrying,  shaggy  figure,  the 
distance  was  too  great,  and  she  showed  no  signs  of  being 
touched  ;  the  last  we  saw  of  that  trio  was  the  old  bear 
looking  defiantly  back  at  us  from  a  hill-top,  waiting 
for  those  two  precious  balls  of  fur  which  she  had  out- 
paced in  her  flight.  I  should  feel  inclined  to  omit  this 
regrettable  incident,  were  it  not  an  excellent  example  of 
what  not  to  do  under  similar  conditions.  This  bear  was 
unusually  dark  ;  most  of  the  skins  we  have  seen  in  the 
bazaars  are  of  a  browny  yellow  colour  ;  but  she  was 
nearly  black,  and  of  large  size. 

Large  piles  of  tezek  and  stone  kraals  proved  that 
herdsmen  must  visit  this  region  in  winter.  During  the 
summer  not  a  single  Kalmuk  dare  venture  into  the 
upper  Borotala  or  Urta  Saryk  ;  this  is  owing  to  their 
fear  of  the  Russian  Kasaks  from  the  north.  These 
freebooters  from  over  the  border  lose  no  opportunity  of 
swooping  down  upon  any  outlying  herds  and  shooting 
down  with  impunity  any  Kalmuk  who  interferes.  At  any 
rate,  this  was  the  tale  we  were  told,  and  it  is  doubtless 
true,  though  we  gathered  that  the  Kalmuks  return  the 
compliment  whenever  a  thoroughly  safe  opportunity 
presents  itself. 

In  the  winter,  when  the  northern  passes  are  closed, 
Kalmuk  herdsmen  overrun  the  upper  Borotala  and 
Urta  Saryk.  In  addition,  considerable  numbers  of 
Chinese  Kasaks,  who  summer  on  the  eastern  side  of 
Sairam  Nor,  move  into  these  more  sheltered  regions, 
paying  a  considerable  sum  to  the  Ambans  for  the  right 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  561 

to  graze  in  their  domains  ;  these  Kasaks  are  of  a  very 
low,  degenerate  stamp.  This  intermixing  of  the  races 
accounts  for  the  fact  that  nearly  all  the  Kalmuks  can 
talk  Turki.  On  this  first  day  in  this  new  locality, 
Carruthers  took  the  ground  across  the  river,  while  I 
scoured  the  slopes  to  the  north,  and,  as  luck  would  have 
it,  he  came  upon  numbers  of  rams,  while  I  found  a 
large  herd  of  ibex. 

Leaving  camp  when  the  last  of  the  stars  were  still 
struggling  against  the  first  streaks  of  dawn,  my  hunter 
and  I  zig-zagged  up  to  a  lofty,  commanding  position.  I 
dignify  my  companion  with  the  title  of  "  hunter  "  ;  but 
he  and  all  our  other  Kalmuk  followers  were  quite  useless 
in  this  respect,  though  they  were  thoroughly  willing, 
and  helpful  in  their  knowledge  of  the  country.  A  herd 
of  a  dozen  buck-ibex  were  feeding  on  a  crest  some  way 
above  us,  showing  up  well  against  the  sky.  There 
seemed  to  be  one  or  two  fair  heads  among  them,  so,  after 
ascertaining  that  they  were  thoroughly  settled  in  their 
present  position,  we  left  them  undisturbed,  and  con- 
tinued our  search  for   rams. 

A  short  way  farther  on  we  found  nine  rams. 
Only  one  carried  respectable  horns,  and  I  estimated  them 
to  be  short  of  fifty  inches,  but  I  determined  to  try  for 
him,  as  the  meat  would  be  acceptable  any  way,  our 
hungry  crowd  having  already  demolished  the  two  beasts 
so  recently  killed.  While  making  this  stalk,  the  rattle 
of  stones  drew  my  attention  to  another  lot  of  ten  rams, 
all  strung  out  on  a  narrow  sheep-track,  crossing  a  steep 
shale-slope  above  us.  There  was  no  mistaking  the  size 
of  one  or  two  of  those  heads,  but  it  was  useless  to  attempt 
to  follow  them  up,  as  they  were  evidently  thoroughly 
alarmed  ;   led  by  a  grizzled  old  fellow  with  fine  curling 


562  DZUNGARIA 

horns,  they  plunged  along  over  the  shale,  stopping 
frequently  to  gaze  down  upon  us.  It  was  not  till  the 
afternoon  that  we  got  on  terms  with  the  original  herd, 
and  then  bad  shooting  necessitated  a  stern  chase  before 
the  best  ram  was  brought  to  bay  ;  it  proved  to  be 
only  a  small  head  of  forty-seven  inches,  but  the  prospects 
of  soon  getting  better  ones  were  very  bright. 

Carruthers  had  failed  to  find  any  ibex,  but  had  come 
across  three  bands  of  rams  ;  so  the  next  day  we  ex- 
changed ground,  he  going  for  my  ibex,  and  I  for  his 
sheep. 

At  the  top  of  an  outlying  bluff,  overlooking  a  likely 
little  valley,  we  settled  down  for  a  thorough  "  spying." 
At  our  feet  ran  a  small  stream  carrying  the  melting  snow 
from  the  drifts  far  above  down  to  the  Borotala  ;  from 
each  side  of  this  short  valley  rose  steep  slopes,  broken 
into  numerous  small  arms  and  hollows.  Right  at  its 
head,  and  just  below  the  shale,  two  herds  of  rams 
were  to  be  seen  feeding  among  some  ancient  grass- 
covered  moraines  ;  there  were  six  in  one  lot,  and  eleven 
in  the  other.  We  were  too  far  off  to  tell  their  size,  but 
they  were  certainly  worth  a  close  inspection.  Leading 
our  horses,  we  "  screed  "  down  to  the  valley  bottom, 
and  were  then  disgusted  to  find  that  the  wind  (what 
there  was  of  it)  was  blowing  straight  up  the  hill.  How- 
ever, as  there  was  no  other  approach,  I  decided  to  go 
boldly  on,  trusting  to  local  eddies  favouring  me  higher  up. 

After  riding  only  a  short  way,  while  still  half  a  mile 
from  my  objective,  I  left  the  man  and  horses,  and  pro- 
ceeded on  foot.  Provided  that  the  sheep  were  on  the 
right  side  of  the  valley,  where  I  had  last  seen  them,  there 
was  just  a  chance  that,  by  ascending  the  left,  I  might 
yet  approach  unwinded.     It   was  a  very  slow  advance. 


FLOWER-STREWN    MEADOWS. 


562 


WILD-PIG,    SHOT   IN    THE   UPPER   BOROTALA   VALLEY. 
Sus  scrola  nigripes. 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  563 

since,  as  it  had  been  so  long  out  of  sight,  there  was  no 
knowing  where  the  quarry  might  have  moved  to.  Every 
little  vantage-point  had  to  be  crawled  up  to  and  cautiously 
peered  over.  At  last,  the  farther  side  of  one  small  knoll 
was  all  the  dead  ground  that  remained.  It  seemed 
impossible  that  all  those  sheep  could  be  concealed  behind 
that  slight  cover;  but  nothing  must  be  left  to  chance 
in  this  sort  of  hunting,  and  I  continued  to  move  slowly 
forward.  The  wind  was  gently  fanning  my  right  cheek, 
so  all  was  safe  in  that  direction.  Suddenly  the  top  of 
a  horn  appeared  ahead.  Raising  myself  inch  by  inch,  I 
gazed  down  upon  the  six  rams,  which  were  lying 
down  and  facing  every  direction  but  mine.  Alas ! 
though  they  were  only  fifty  yards  off,  not  one  carried 
a  head  worth  shooting  ;  they  were  all  four  or  five  year 
olds.  There  was  still  just  one  portion  of  the  slope 
hidden  from  view,  where  the  other  lot  must  be,  if  they 
had  not  cleared  out  ;  so,  wriggling  back,  I  approached 
this  also  from  above.  This  time  I  was  not  so  successful, 
or  perhaps  the  wind  was  less  friendly,  for  that  well- 
known  alarm- signal,  a  mixture  of  a  grunt  and  a  sneeze, 
sounded  before  a  single  beast  was  visible.  Hastily 
swinging  round  into  a  sitting  position,  I  saw  the  twelve 
rams  bunched  together,  and  every  head  turned  in 
my  direction. 

Four  legs  kicking  in  the  air  answered  the  first  shot. 
Another  whack,  as  they  bolted,  proclaimed  that  the 
second  bullet  had  found  its  billet ;  luckily,  the  second 
ram  made  straight  down-hill,  enabling  me  to  finish 
it  off  close  to  the  horses,  much  to  the  gratification  of  the 
voracious  old  Kalmuk. 

One  of  these  heads  measured  well,  being  51 J  in.  in 
length  ;   the  other  was  a  massive  49  in.,  but,  one  of  its 


564  DZUNGARIA 

horns  being  very  badly  broken,  it  was  useless  as  a  trophy. 
After  assisting  my  companion  to  skin  and  cut  up  one 
beast,  and  leaving  him  to  deal  with  the  other,  I  climbed 
up  to  a  spur  which  overlooked  a  fresh  stretch  of  country. 
This  district  was  alive  with  game,  a  large  herd  of  female 
ibex  and  their  young,  and  some  small  rams  being 
visible  to  the  naked  eye. 

As  we  left  the  scene  of  our  success,  with  the  heads 
slung  over  the  Kalmuk's  saddle,  the  vultures  began  to 
assemble,  for  no  meat  is  ever  left  to  rot  in  a  country 
possessing  such  keen-eyed  scavengers  as  these. 

This  was  to  prove  one  of  those  red-letter  days  when 
everything  goes  right,  and  big-game  hunting  seems  to 
be  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world.  After  such  a  day 
one  is  apt  to  push  into  the  background  and  forget  the 
days  of  fruitless  search  or  unsuccessful  endeavour,  when, 
sometimes  through  faults  of  one's  own,  and  sometimes 
owing  to  sheer  bad  luck,  one  returns  to  camp,  night  after 
night,  with  fatigue  accentuated  by  failure. 

It  was  still  early  in  the  afternoon,  when,  while  riding 
carelessly  down  a  stony  water-course,  with  thoughts  of 
camp  and  one  of  Pereira's  savoury  stews  foremost  in  my 
mind,  a  guttural  "Tocta"  from  my  companion  banished 
all  such  thoughts  from  me.  The  old  fellow  had  already 
dismounted  and  was  pointing  over  the  back  of  his  horse 
up  a  side- nullah  we  were  passing  at  the  time.  "  Tash, 
gulja,  bilmaida  "  (Rocks  or  rams,  I  don't  know),  was 
his  next  remark.  Spotting  the  grey  smudges  which  had 
caught  his  eye,  soon  seventeen  rams  were  focussed 
in  the  field  of  the  telescope.  They  had  evidently  just 
risen  from  their  siesta,  and  were  standing  aimlessly  about 
while  their  leader  decided  in  which  direction  they  should 
start  grazing  ;    when  he  had  made  up  his  mind,  he  led 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  565 

them  at  a  trot  down-hill  till  they  were  lost  in  a  fold  of 
the  ground.  The  commencement  of  the  evening  meal 
is  quite  one  of  the  best  times  to  approach  sheep,  as 
they  are  then  so  engrossed  with  the  early  courses 
that  their  usual  precautions  for  safety  are  somewhat 
relaxed. 

I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  details  of  this  stalk, 
for  to  any  one  but  a  participator  the  account  of  one  is 
very  much  like  the  account  of  another.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that,  half  an  hour  later,  I  was  doing  an  uncomfortable 
caterpillar-like  slither  on  my  back  down  a  steep  hill- 
side towards  a  V-shaped  hollow,  into  which  the  sheep 
had  disappeared. 

Descending  a  smooth  slope  in  this  manner  is  an  un- 
satisfactory way  of  approaching  game,  because  its  slightly 
convex  formation  alone  conceals  the  hunter,  and,  when 
the  quarry  does  at  last  come  into  view,  the  recognition 
is  liable  to  be  mutual.  So  it  was  in  this  case.  A  mass 
of  grey  backs  and  curling  horns  suddenly  appeared  almost 
straight  below.  At  the  same  moment  a  head  was  turned 
in  my  direction,  and  at  the  next  the  opposite  hillside 
seemed  to  be  alive  with  flying  sheep.  There  was 
no  time  to  waste  deciding  which  was  the  best  head, 
though  none  of  them  were  very  small ;  so,  following  that 
sound  hunter's  motto,  "  When  in  doubt,  shoot  the  leader," 
I  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  him  pitch  forward  on  to 
his  head,  to  the  shot.  A  very  similar  reply  answered 
the  next,  and,  as  they  stood  for  a  second  on  the  crest, 
yet  another  received  his  death-blow,  and  came  galloping 
straight  down  the  hill,  falling  dead  on  the  very  spot 
which  they  had  just  left.  The  two  best  of  these  heads 
measured  53  and  48  J  in.  respectively — very  fair  heads  for 
karelini,  which  I  fancy  do  not  average  so  big  as  the 


566  DZUNGARIA 

Uttledalei  of  the  Tian  Shan,  though  they  occasionally 
reach  60  in.,  as  proved  by  a  head  picked  up  later. 

While  we  were  busy  with  our  knives  a  terrific  thunder- 
storm, which  had  been  brewing  for  hours,  burst  over  us  ; 
the  rain  came  down  in  torrents,  and  the  thunder  crashed 
right  over  our  heads. 

With  two  heads  slung  over  each  of  our  saddles,  and 
the  fifth  held  by  my  companion  in  front  of  him,  not  to 
mention  several  dangling  legs  of  mutton,  we  slowly  made 
our  way  towards  camp. 

The  Borotala  is  never  an  easy  river  to  cross  late  in 
the  day,  being  very  rapid  and  full  of  boulders.  Weighed 
down  as  our  horses  were,  we  nearly  came  to  grief  several 
times  ;  but  these  mountain-bred  ponies  never  lose  their 
heads,  and  have  a  wonderful  aptitude  for  recovering 
themselves  from  a  stumble,  so  they  brought  us  through 
safely.  We  were  a  tired  and  sodden,  but  contented 
couple  as  we  came  in  sight  of  the  camp-fire  gleaming 
in  the  dusk. 

I  was  ver}^  disappointed  to  find  that  Carruthers, 
though  he  had  killed  what  he  considered  the  best,  had 
only  secured  a  43-in.  head  out  of  the  herd  of  ibex,  because 
I  had  estimated  several  to  be  decidedly  better  than  that. 
If  only  they  had  been  really  big  bucks,  what  a  day  it 
would  have  been  ! 

Our  highest  camp  was  at  the  juncture  of  the  two 
heads  of  the  river,  and  only  a  few  miles  from  the  frontier. 
A  few  roe-deer  find  shelter  here  among  the  patches 
of  low  juniper  on  the  hillsides  and  the  dwarf  willows 
that  fringe  the  stream-beds.  Carruthers  shot  a  very 
pretty  head  with  long,  thin  horns,  while  I  secured  two 
wild  boars,  a  few  of  which  had  also  taken  up  their  quarters 
among  the  willows. 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  567 

We  had  hopes  of  this  wild  boar  proving  to  be  unde- 
scribed,  since  no  specimen  has  ever  found  its  way  to  the 
South  Kensington  Museum,  although  several  have  been 
shot  by  sportsmen  in  the  Tian  Shan.  On  consulting 
Mr.  Oldfield  Thomas  on  the  subject,  however,  I  learnt 
that  it  had  been  described  by  Blandford  from  two  speci- 
mens procured  during  the  Second  Yarkand  Mission.  He 
named  it  as  a  variety  of  the  European  wild  boar,  calling 
it  Sus  scrofa  nigripes,  on  account  of  its  black  legs 
and  feet. 

While  in  this  camp  we  received  a  visit  from  a  Russian 
Cossack  of  the  frontier  guard,  accompanied  by  six 
rascally-looking  Kasaks,  all  armed  with  "  Berdan " 
rifles  and  belts  of  cartridges.  There  is  little  doubt  that 
he  had  received  orders  from  his  superiors,  who  were  sure 
to  have  heard  about  us,  to  look  us  up,  and  see  what  we 
were  doing  so  close  to  the  frontier. 

Our  Kalmuks  told  us  afterwards  that,  if  thev  had  been 
hy  themselves,  they  would  have  been  robbed,  and  prob- 
ably severely  beaten.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these 
frontier  police  do  nothing  to  check  the  border  raiding, 
and  in  many  cases  are  hand  in  glove  with  the  Kasaks. 
While  refreshing  our  unbidden  guests  with  tea,  we  did 
our  best  to  pump  them  as  to  the  sporting  possibilities  of 
the  northern  slopes  of  the  Ala-tau.  The  Russian  in- 
formed us  that  big  ibex  and  rams,  besides  large  numbers 
of  wapiti  and  bear,  could  all  be  obtained  round  his 
hut,  only  a  day's  march  over  the  divide,  and  extended 
to  us  a  cordial  invitation,  dwelling,  as  an  extra  induce- 
ment, upon  the  excellent  "Fransuski  khleba"  (French 
bread)  which  his  wife  would  bake  for  us.  We  thanked 
him  profusely,  though  we  had  not  the  slightest  intention 
of  risking  arrest  by  moving  a  yard  over  the  frontier. 


568  DZUNGARIA 

As  the  Borotala  had  proved  most  unproductive  of 
big  ibex,  Carruthers  decided  to  move  on  ahead  into  the 
Urta  Saryk,  where  they  were  said  to  be  much  more 
plentiful,  while  I  retraced  my  steps  and  hunted  the 
ground  below  the  spot  where  the  five  rams  had  been 
killed. 

I  spent  a  restful  day  in  riding  down-stream  with  the 
caravan,  through  country  already  well  hunted  over, 
little  thinking  what  disheartening  days  lay  ahead  of  me. 
Leaving  orders  with  Pereira  to  move  along  the  foot  of  the 
hills  and  to  camp  in  the  first  large,  lateral  valley,  I  started 
off  with  the  same  trust}^  old  Kalmuk  to  hunt  my  way 
thither  by  a  higher  route.  The  first  little  valley  we  en- 
tered was  full  of  rams.  Three  were  lying  down  high  up 
to  my  right,  eight  more  were  feeding  low  down  to  the  left 
of  the  stream,  while  a  large  herd  of  some  fifteen  small 
rams,  were  to  be  seen  far  up  under  the  shale .  Among  the 
eight  was  one  that  stood  out  from  all  the  others.  It  took 
much  careful  manoeuvring  to  dodge  those  three  pairs  of 
watchful  ej^es  on  the  right,  but,  after  a  wet  scramble  up 
the  stream-bed,  a  spur  hid  them.  Only  three  hundred 
yards  of  easy  ground  now  lay  between  me  and  that 
"  head  of  heads,"  which  I  already  looked  upon  as  mine, 
when,  happening  to  glance  back  in  the  direction  of  the 
man  and  the  horses,  I  was  horrified  to  see  hundreds  of 
cattle  driven  by  several  horsemen  streaming  out  from 
a  side-nullah,  and  this  in  a  country  which  I  had  con- 
sidered to  be  absolutely  free  from  such  disturbances. 

Of  course,  the  rams  had  seen  them  before  I  had, 
for,  when  they  next  appeared,  they  were  a  good  four 
hundred  yards  off,  and  going  strong.  Two  impossible 
shots  only  hastened  their  flight,  those  6o-in.  horns  looking 
larger  the  farther  they  retreated  from  me,  and  making 


ROE-DEER   AND    KALMUK    HUNTER. 


568] 


OVIS    AMMON    KARELINI. 
In  winter  coat. 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  569 

me  inclined  to  empty  the  remainder  of  the  magazine  in 
the  direction  of  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble.  I  learnt 
later  that  these  cattle  had  been  purchased  by  a  Russian 
merchant  in  Hi  Valle}',  and  that  he  was  driving  them 
by  this  short  cut  to  some  place  on  the  northern  side  of 
the  Ala-tau. 

Great  numbers  of  derelict  horns  were  seen  that  day. 
They  were  all  of  a  ver\'  uniform  type,  quite  as  much 
so,  in  fact,  as  are  the  ammon  horns  one  sees  in  the  Altai. 
This  is  a  great  contrast  to  the  various  twists  and  thick- 
nesses that  are  so  noticeable  in  the  Central  Tian  Shan, 
particularly  on  the  Yulduz  plateau.  The  finest  pair  of 
horns  measured  in  the  Borotala — and  I  taped  a  great 
many — were:  length  60J  in.,  girth  16J  in.,  and  spread 
38  in.     My  three  best  (shot)  heads  measured,  in  inches  : 

Length.  Girth.  Spread. 

53  i6i  33| 

51^  i5i  29 

49  i6i  — 

The  distribution  of  Ovis  ammon  karelini  *  stretches 
from  the  north-east  end  of  the  Ala-tau  Mountains,  which 
is  their  northern  limit,  westwards  along  the  range  to  the 
head  of  the  Borotala,  and  from  there  eastwards  along  the 
whole  length  of  the  northern  declivities  of  the  Tian  Shan, 
from  Sairam  Nor  to  the  Karlik  Tagh,  which  forms  the 
most  easterly  extremity  of  the  range.  They  are  found 
throughout  the  Central  and  South-western  Tian  Shan 
from  the  Eastern  Yulduz  as  far  as  the  Aksay  and  Atbashi 
plateaux,  for  in  the  latter  locality  they  were  observed 
by  Carruthers  during  his  visit  to  that  region  in  1908. 
Throughout   the   whole   of   their   northern   and  eastern 

^  I  am  adhering  to  the  nomenclature  adopted  by  -Mr.  Lydekker.     See 
Field,  January  i6th,  1909. 


570  DZUNGARIA 

distribution,  which  includes  the  Ala-tau,  Borotala, 
Northern  and  Eastern  Tian  Shan,  only  karelini  are  met 
with.  For  instance,  the  horns  seen  in  the  Karlik  Tagh, 
right  on  the  edge  of  the  Gobi,  were  in  every  respect 
similar  to  those  of  the  Borotala.  It  is  in  the  region  of 
the  Manas- Yulduz  divide  that  the  puzzle  commences, 
for  on  the  Yulduz  littledalei  are  to  be  found  on  the 
same  ground  with  karelini  and  in  almost  equal  num- 
bers. I  have  been  informed  by  an  observant  sportsman. 
Colonel  H.  M.  Biddulph,  who  recently  visited  that  re- 
gion, that  in  all  probability  a  third,  unnamed  variet}/, 
will  be  proved  to  exist.  I  will  briefly  describe  these 
three  varieties  in  the  hope  that  it  may  be  of  assistance 
to  sportsmen  who  contemplate  visiting  the  Tian  Shan, 
besides  being  of  interest  to  naturalists. 

The  first  and  most  common  variety  is  karelini,  in 
which  the  horns  are  more  rounded  in  section  than  is 
the  case  with  poll,  but  only  slightly  more  massive. 
The  twist  of  the  horn  is  intermediate  between  typica 
and  the  open  type  of  poli,  there  being  rarely  any  sign 
of  the  great  nip-in  of  the  former  and  never  any  of  the 
openness  of  the  latter.  The  average  horn  measurements 
of  a  fully  adult  karelini  are :  length,  52  to  55in. ;  girth, 
15  to  16  in, ;  and  spread,  32  to  36  in.  Colonel  Biddulph 
picked  up  a  colossal  karelini  head  close  to  the  Narat 
Pass  on  the  Yulduz,  in  1911.  It  measures  :  length,  yof  ; 
girth,  i6J- ;  and  spread,  46J  in.  Judging  by  the  appear- 
ance of  this  remarkable  head,  which  rivals  the  largest 
recorded  head  of  poli,  the  sheep  that  carried  it  cannot 
have  died  more  than  three  years  previously. 

As  a  rule,  sportsmen  who  visit  the  Tian  Shan  can  only 
spare  a  ver}/  limited  time  for  going  after  sheep,  owing  to 
the  other  species  of  game  that  claim   their  attention, 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  571 

and  so  visit  only  the  most  accessible  localities.  I  am 
convinced,  however,  that  a  systematic  search  among  the 
more  inaccessible  regions  would  reveal  small  lofty  valleys, 
tucked  away  among  the  peaks  and  glaciers,  which  no 
native  ever  visits.  Here  would  be  found  rams  carrying 
considerably  larger  heads  than  those  recorded  in  Row- 
land Ward's  Records  of  Big  Game  (sixth  edition)  under 
the  heading  of  "littledalei."  The  jumble  of  mountains 
round  about  the  head-waters  of  the  Manas  River  I  con- 
sider one  of  the  most  likely  localities  in  this  respect. 

The  other  variety,  littledalei,  resembles  the  open 
poli  type  in  the  twist  of  the  horn,  but  is  considerably 
shorter  in  length,  although  exceeding  it  in  girth.  Average 
length  of  fully  adult  ram  50  to  54  in.,  girth  16  to  17  in., 
and  spread  44  to  48  in. 

The  third  variety,  which  is  as  yet  imperfectly  known, 
is  apparently  considerably  rarer  than  the  other  two.  It 
approximates  to  the  0.  a.  hodgsoni,  its  chief  character- 
istics being  great  massiveness,  short  length,  and  narrow 
spread.  There  is  practically  no  second  twist  to  the 
horn.  Colonel  Biddulph,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for 
information  respecting  this  third  variety,  measured 
several  heads  in  the  Western  Yulduz  and  found  them  to 
average,  length  40  to  50  in.,  girth  16  to  18  in.,  and  spread 
17  to  20  in.  As  this  type  of  horn  appears  to  differ  just 
as  much  from  the  other  two  as  they  do  from  one  another, 
it  has  every  right  to  be  considered  a  distinct  variety ; 
however,  adult  heads  will  have  to  be  brought  to  England 
for  examination,  before  a  definite  decision  can  be  arrived 
at. 

As  to  the  question  of  body-measurements  and  colour- 
variation,  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  karelini  and 
littledalei  do  not   differ   in   any  important   respect,  but 


572  DZUNGARIA 

that  any  slight  variations  are  merely  due  to  age  and 
seasonal  changes. 

I  venture  to  suggest  that  if,  at  the  next  big-game 
trophy  exliil)ilion  that  is  held  in  England,  every  one  who 
possesses  sheep-heads  from  the  Tian  Shan  and  adjacent 
ranges,  would  make  an  effort  to  lend  them,  they  could 
be  groui)ed  together  and  their  respective  characteristics 
clearly  shown. 

I  cannot,  here,  go  as  deeply  as  I  should  like  into 
the  interesting  but  complex  question  of  the  wild-sheep  of 
Central  Asia,  but,  having  just  touched  upon  the  subject, 
I  must  now  return  to  the  narrative. 

While  riding  along  disconsolately,  early  in  the  after- 
noon, still  smarting  under  our  defeat  of  the  morning, 
we  came  upon  a  pair  of  sixty-inch  horns  lying  in  a  shel- 
tered hollow  which  was  a  perfect  "  Golgotha,"  where  the 
remains  of  dozens  of  mighty  rams  strewed  the  ground. 
As  this  pair  of  horns  was  in  almost  perfect  condition,  I 
decided  to  keep  it.  Soon  afterwards,  while  continuing 
our  careless  way  towards  camp,  our  attention  was  directed 
sinmltaneously  to  a  movement  far  up  on  the  shale  of  the 
divide. 

There  was  no  mistaking  those  graceful,  sweeping 
liorns,  which  looked  many  sizes  too  big  for  their  owner. 
It  was  our  old  friend  of  the  morning,  with  his  companions. 
Though  knowing  full  well  that  they  were  in  an  unapproach- 
able position,  the  temptation  to  make  one  more  effort  to 
secure  that  coveted  trophy  was  irresistible.  Telling  my 
companion  to  throw  away  the  picked-up  head,  so  as  to 
quicken  our  progress,  we  made  a  rapid  detour,  in  the 
hope  of  getting  round  and  above  them. 

When  our  panting,  steaming  ponies  had  carried  us 
as  far  as  it  was  advisable  to  take  theui,  1  dismounted 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  573 

and  continued  on  foot  up  that  most  heart-breaking  of 
obstacles,  a  steep  shale-slope.  I  was  plodding  along 
very  much  in  the  same  condition  as  the  ponies  when  a 
shout  from  my  man  made  me  look  back.  Following  the 
direction  of  his  outstretched  arm,  I  realized  what  a 
fool  I  had  been  to  attempt  to  approach  a  herd  of  sheep 
already  thoroughly  alarmed,  for  there  on  the  snowdrift, 
silhouetted  against  the  sky,  at  the  very  top  of  the  divide, 
were  those  mobile  gulja. 

I  had  had  enough  of  sheep-hunting  for  that  day. 

Without  bothering  to  recover  the  discarded  horns, 
which  had  no  interest  for  me  now  that  the  equally  fine 
pair  on  a  living  specimen  had  for  the  second  time  given 
me  the  slip,  we  hurried  down  to  the  camp.  A  good 
meal,  followed  by  a  pipe,  and  warm  blankets,  soon  put 
a  very  different  complexion  on  affairs,  and  I  regretted 
not  having  at  least  a  photograph  to  show  of  that  fine 
pair  of  horns. 

As  before,  my  trusty  follower  and  the  caravan  bashi, 
who  alone  knew  the  country  thoroughly,  arranged  between 
themselves  the  ground  to  which  the  camp  should  be 
moved.  As  we  started  off  once  more  in  the  crisp  early 
morning,  the  despondency  of  the  previous  evening  had 
given  place  to  that  thoroughly  optimistic  frame  of  mind 
which  is  one  of  the  chief  requirements  of  a  big-game 
hunter,  and  alone  enables  the  hardships  and  disappoint- 
ments of  this  most  fascinating  of  pursuits  to  be  cheerfully 
surmounted.  Five  herds  of  rams  were  seen  that  day, 
numbering  something  like  seventy  beasts,  but  they  had 
all  been  thoroughly  disturbed  by  the  slowly  moving  herd 
of  cattle  and  noisy  herdsmen,  who  had  passed  through 
the  very  middle  of  this  narrow  strip  of  sheep  ground, 
causing  them  to  retreat  to  their  stronghold  in  the  shale. 


574  DZUNGARIA 

Many  hours  were  wasted  in  attempting  to  approach  a 
herd  with  some  good  heads  in  it,  for  when,  after  much 
patient  restraint,  I  had  got  them  into  a  suitable  position, 
three  insignificant  beasts  which  had  been  lying  hidden 
gave  the  alarm  and  stampeded  their  betters. 

As  evening  advanced,  my  old  guide  led  the  way 
down  to  where  he  expected  to  find  the  camp  ;  but, 
though  we  scoured  the  surrounding  country  and  hunted 
for  tracks,  not  a  trace  could  be  found.  Returning  to 
the  high  ground,  two  small  tarns  were  visited,  but  with 
the  same  result.  It  was  by  that  time  nearly  dark,  so, 
discovering  several  large  piles  of  tezek  stacked  like  peat, 
we  decided  to  spend  the  night  where  we  were.  Judge 
of  our  disgust  when,  after  congratulating  ourselves  on 
the  prospect  of  a  large  fire,  my  match-box  was  found  to 
be  empty,  and  my  companion  to  be  without  the  usual 
flint  and  steel !  I  am  afraid  that  on  this  occasion  I  was 
far  from  carrying  out  the  theory  of  always  being  pre- 
pared for  a  night  out  ;  a  lump  of  doughy  bread,  the 
remains  of  lunch,  alone  constituted  our  food-supply. 
The  old  Kalmuk,  to  whom  such  little  inconveniencies  as 
this  were  of  frequent  occurrence,  was  quite  content  with 
his  morsel  of  bread,  augmented  with  copious  pinches  of 
nahs}  I  made  myself  as  comfortable  as  I  could  on  the 
lee  side  of  a  pile  of  tezek,  and,  lying  on  a  saddle-cloth  with 
a  thick  coat  over  me,  I  slept  soundly  till  wakened  by 
the  frost  in  the  small  hours  of  the  morning. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  commencement  of  that  day, 
perched  up  as  I  was  in  those  lonely  surroundings  without 
a  sound  breaking  the  stillness  ;    even  the  munching  of 

^  Nahs  is  a  form  of  snuff,  made  from  a  mixture  of  powdered  tobacco 
and  the  ash  collected  after  burning  a  certain  plant.  It  is  not  adminis- 
tered through  the  nose,  but  scooped  up  on  to  the  tongue  from  the  palm 
of  the  hand,  and  allowed  to  rest  there  while  it  slowly  dissolves. 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  575 

the  horses  had  ceased,  and  they  stood  with  hanging 
heads,  satiated  with  a  night's  grazing  on  the  short,  rich 
grass.  A  faint  grey  hght  began  to  creep  into  the  east  ; 
the  stars  disappeared  slowly  before  its  ever-increasing 
strength  ;  the  snowy  summits  turned  from  grey  to  a 
delicate  pink,  and  then  hardened  as  that  longed-for  sun- 
line  crept  down  towards  us  ;  and  then,  with  a  leap, 
the  great  fiery  ball  rose  clear  of  the  hills  and  bathed  us 
in  its  welcome  rays.  Snow-cock  began  to  chuckle  round 
us,  and  chats  and  snow-finches  to  flit  from  rock  to  rock. 
Black  specks  far  away  on  a  skyline  indicated  a  hungry 
herd  of  sheep.  Of  all  this  wild  life,  the  lazy,  over-eaten 
marmot  alone  remained  curled  up  at  the  bottom  of  his 
snug  burrow,  waiting  for  the  sun  to  gain  in  power  before 
he  ventured  out.  But  the  beauties  of  nature  do  not 
compensate  for  the  absence  of  breakfast,  and  we  lost  no 
time  in  searching  the  surrounding  country  from  a  neigh- 
bouring eminence.  As  no  human  being  was  within  sight, 
we  decided  to  make  straight  for  the  Urta  Saryk,  since, 
even  if  Carruthers'  camp  were  difiicult  to  find,  there 
was  a  small  Kalmuk  post  at  which  we  could  get  food. 
Four  hours'  riding  took  us  off  the  plateau,  down  the  well- 
timbered  valley  to  the  main  stream. 

Here  we  fell  in  with  some  herdsmen,  one  of  whom 
we  "  pressed  "  as  a  guide.  At  four  in  the  afternoon, 
after  fording  the  river,  we  came  upon  that  welcome  green 
tent  pitched  among  some  pines,  and  lost  no  time  in 
putting  ourselves  outside  a  kettle  of  tea  and  pounds  of 
bread  and  meat. 

A  man  was  at  once  despatched  to  find  our  caravan  ; 

it  turned  up  next  day  with  a  very  anxious  Pereira  at  its 

head.     We  were  never  able  to  find  out  exactly  who  was 

to  blame  in  this  matter,  since  each  of  the  Kalmuks  noisily 

II — 17 


576  DZUNGARIA 

maintained  that  the  other  was  at  fault.  However,  Pereira 
was  not  going  to  risk  the  culprit  escaping,  so  he  gave  both 
a  mild  beating. 

We  now  moved  slowly  up  the  Urta  Saryk  in  search 
of  ibex.  In  its  central  portion,  this  valley  is  a  rough, 
precipitous  gorge,  with  a  roaring  torrent,  full  of  boulders 
and  deep  holes,  rushing  down  it.  On  the  south  side  a 
heavy  forest  and  on  the  north  bare  cliffs  rise  from  the 
very  edge  of  the  water.  Here  and  there  on  the  left 
bank,  between  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  and  the  river,  are 
narrow  fiats,  covered  with  timber  and  grass,  which  make 
ideal  camping-grounds.  Leaving  Carruthers  encamped 
in  one  of  these  places,  with  several  likely  ibex-nullahs 
round  it,  I  proceeded  up-stream  with  two  men  and  a  pack- 
horse  to  explore  the  valley  to  its  head.  Sometimes  we 
were  scrambling  along  the  hillside,  and  at  others  pushing 
our  way  through  the  tangled  growth  by  the  river.  We 
"  jumped  "  several  roe-deer,  and  crossed  some  bear  and 
wapiti  tracks.  After  we  had  passed  a  delightful  little 
waterfall,  which  hurled  itself  from  the  cliffs  200  ft. 
above,  straight  into  the  river  beneath,  we  found  the 
timber  thinning,  till  only  juniper  and  a  club-shaped, 
cactus-like  plant  covered  the  slopes. 

Towards  its  head  the  valley  widened  considerably, 
and  formed  a  grassy  fiat.  Here  we  spent  a  night  at  a 
native  winter  camping-ground  ;  which  must  be  a  cold, 
bleak  spot  at  that  season  ;  and  for  this  very  reason  the 
snow  would  not  lie  deep,  thus  enabling  the  flocks  to  get 
at  the  abundant  grass. 

The  actual  head  of  the  valley  is  composed  of  small 
glaciers  and  moraines.  Among  this  wilderness  we  came 
upon  five  ibex,  none  with  horns  of  great  size.  To  keep 
the  men  in  good  cheer  I  killed  one  for  its  meat.     During 


SPORT   IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  577 

the  late  summer  buck- ibex  carry  great  quantities  of  fat, 
which  is  highly  prized  by  all  the  natives.  All  through 
this  hunting- trip  our  followers  dried  and  salted  great  slabs 
of  both  ibex  and  sheep  meat  to  take  home  withthem. 

Our  return  journey  was  made  on  the  north  side  of 
the  valley,  along  a  broad,  grassy  shelf  below  the  main 
ridge  and  above  the  cliffs  that  drop  to  the  river.     Several 
herds  of  ibex  were  seen  here,  some  of  females  and  others 
of  bucks,  feeding  on  the  smooth,  grassy  ledge  above  the 
cliffs,  like  rabbits  outside  a  cover  at  home.       One  of 
these  herds  was  among  the  largest  I  have  ever  seen  ;   it 
was  composed  of  over  a  hundred  bucks.     Most  of  them 
were  small,  but  several  carried  horns  which  appeared  to 
me  to  measure  not  less  than  50  in.,  though  I  got  only 
a  hurried  glance  at  them.     A  rough  descent  brought  us 
down  to  the  river  and  camp.      The  welcome  sight  of 
several  pairs  of  ibex-horns  in  front  of  the  tents  proved 
that  Carruthers'  spell  of  bad  luck  had  at  last  broken  ;  the 
best  of  them  was  a  heavy,  symmetrical  head  of  49  in. 

The  question  now  arose  whether  we  should  remain 
in  this  region — Carruthers  to  continue  his  search  for  big 
ibex,  and  I  to  recross  the  ridge  and  continue  my  inter- 
rupted sheep-hunt ;  or  should  march  at  once  for 
Kulja,  and  from  thence  hurry  up  into  Kok-su  for  a 
few  weeks'  hunting  before  we  started  on  our  long 
journey  to  India. 

The  expedition  to  the  Kok-su  was  at  last  decided 
on,  but  we  bitterly  regretted  our  decision  later,  when, 
owing  to  a  lengthy  delay  in  Kulja  waiting  for  our  heavy 
baggage  to  arrive  from  Urumchi,  it  had  to  be  abandoned. 

A  long  march  brought  us  to  the  north  end  of  Sairam 
Nor,  where  several  families  of  Kalmuks  had  pitched  their 
summer  camps.     What  a  different  aspect  the  lake  pre- 


578  DZUNGARIA 

sented  now  to  when  we  last  saw  it  in  January  !  Bordering 
its  dark  blue  waters  were  slopes  of  waving  grass  which 
ran  up  to  patches  of  dark  pine-forest  on  the  surrounding 
hills. 

The  courteous  old  Amban  had  sent  one  of  his  men 
all  the  way  to  the  lake  to  inquire  after  us  and  bid  us 
good-bye.  Having  paid  off  our  men,  who  had  really 
worked  very  well,  though  they  were  annoying  at  times, 
we  continued  on  our  way  to  Kulja  with  a  scratch 
caravan  collected  from  the  surrounding  yurts. 

The  Upper  Borotala  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  finest 
sheep  countries  in  Central  Asia ;  nowhere  have  I 
seen  sheep  so  numerous  as  there.  But  the  locality  fre- 
quented by  the  rams  during  summer  is  comparatively 
small,  and  can  be  hunted  out  by  one  gun  in  about  six 
days,  so  that  it  is  important  to  hunt  very  slowly,  and 
not  to  disturb  large  areas  every  day.  As  to  the  ibex, 
they  are  certainly  fairly  numerous  in  the  Urta  Saryk,  and 
good  heads  are  to  be  obtained  ;  but  whether  their  horns 
reach  the  enormous  dimensions  of  those  which  inhabit 
the  tributaries  of  the  Tekes  River,  remains  to  be  proved 
by  future  hunters. 

Any  one  intending  to  visit  this  new  hunting-ground, 
which  can  be  reached  in  four  days  from  Kulja,  should 
employ  a  Chanto  caravan,  so  as  to  be  as  independent  as 
possible  of  the  Kalmuks.  It  is,  however,  essential  to  have 
two  or  three  of  these  people  with  the  party  to  act  as 
guides  and  messengers,  and  to  accompany  one  out 
hunting.  For  this  reason  it  is  advisable  to  call  on  the 
"Tzian  Tziun"  at  Sweeting,  who  will  authorize  the 
Kalmuks  to  comply  with  one's  wishes.  He  has  entire 
control  over  the  nomads,  and  the  very  mention  of  his 
name  strikes  terror  into  their  hearts. 


■^ 


r^*'% 


:M 


SPORT   IN  THE   HIGHLANDS  579 

I  should  advise  any  one  who  does  not  fancy  doing  all 
the  hunting  himself,  to  engage  one  of  the  well-known 
shikaris  from  the  Tekes,  the  Kalmuks  of  the  Borotala 
being  quite  useless  in  this  respect. 

With  the  return  to  Kulja,  although  we  were  still 
many  thousands  of  miles  from  home,  we  considered 
our  programme  of  work  accomplished.  This  narrative 
was  intended  to  deal  with  the  undescribed  regions  of 
Upper  Asia,  and,  although  we  had  yet  to  traverse  a  wide 
area  of  country  before  reaching  the  coast,  our  route 
led  us  across  well-known  and  much- visited  lands. 
From  Kulja  we  crossed  the  Central  Tian  Shan,  and, 
travelling  by  way  of  the  great  oases  of  Chinese  Turkestan, 
such  as  Aksu,  Kashgar,  and  Yarkand,  we  passed 
through  a  region  whose  physical  features,  history,  social 
and  economic  conditions,  have  all  been  exhaustively 
dealt  with  by  such  illustrious  explorers  as  Hedin,  Stein, 
and  Huntington.  Even  the  great  Karakorum,  the 
highest  and  perhaps  the  most  awe-inspiring  trade-route 
in  the  world,  is  now  a  hackneyed  journey,  granting,  no 
doubt,  an  experience  not  to  be  missed,  and  offering 
unique  lessons  to  the  student  of  Central  Asian  geography, 
but  to  which  we  could  make  no  addition  by  a  narration 
of  our  experiences.  From  the  breathless  summit  of 
the  Karakorum  we  bade  farewell  to  Inner  Asia,  and  our 
route  led  on  to  Ladakh,  Kashmir,  and  Hindustan. 


CHAPTER    XX 

THE    GAME    OF   THE    PLAINS 
By  J.  H.  Miller 

In  these  days,  when  neither  distance,  nor  time,  nor  hard- 
ship deters  the  true  big-game  hunter  from  penetrating 
to  the  most  remote  quarters  of  the  globe  in  pursuit  of 
his  hobby,  and  when  new  and  untrodden  hunting-grounds 
are  becoming  scarcer  year  by  year,  it  is  of  interest  to 
recount  all  the  kinds  of  wild-game  that  roam  the  plains 
of  Dzungaria,  which  we  crossed  and  recrossed  during 
our  wanderings,  and  which,  until  we  penetrated  its 
fastnesses,  no  white  hunter  had  seriously  exploited. 

In  the  spring  of  1900  Messrs.  Church  and  Phelps 
travelled  from  Kulja  to  Urumchi,  by  the  road  which  runs 
along  the  southern  borders  of  Dzungaria.  The  former, 
in  his  interesting  book,  Chinese  Turkestan,  mentions  what 
he  and  his  companions  saw  and  heard  of  game  on  their 
line  of  march,  but  with  this  exception ,  I  am  not  aware  of 
any  one  having  gone  into  the  matter.  Though  ever- 
increasing  numbers  of  hunters  yearly  visit  the  Tekes 
district  of  the  Central  Tian  Shan,  on  the  south,  and,  in  a 
less  degree,  the  Little  Altai  on  the  north,  this  intervening 
region  has  remained  practically  a  terra  incognita.  The 
few  travellers  who,  from  time  to  time,  have  crossed 
portions  of  this  country  have    merely  hurried  through, 

preferring  to  trust  to  the  well-known  sporting  localities 

580 


THE  GAME  OF  THE   PLAINS  581 

rather  than  chance  the  uncertainties  of  pioneering  new 
ground. 

As  long  as  "  sixty-inch  "  Ammon  can  be  secured  in 
the  Altai,  and  the  district  drained  by  the  right  affluents 
of  the  Tekes  can  produce  such  magnificent  heads  of 
sheep,  wapiti,  ibex,  and  roe  as  are  yearly  secured,  what 
need  is  there  to  look  for  a  new  country  ?  But  the  toll 
of  the  native  hunters,  and  that  of  the  less  destructive, 
but  yearly  increasing  Europeans,  will  tell  in  time,  and 
drive  them  to  seek  for  fresh  fields  of  sport.  To  many 
travellers  also,  the  knowledge  that  several  other  sportsmen 
are  hunting  within  a  comparatively  small  radius,  and  the 
feeling  that  they  themselves  at  any  time  may  be  poaching  in 
another's  "nullah,"  does  away  with  that  sense  of  freedom 
which  is  half  the  joy  of  big-game  hunting.  The  fascina- 
tion of  treading  new  ground,  where  there  is  no  likelihood 
of  coming  across  empty  jam- tins  and  match-boxes,  and 
where  the  lure  of  the  next  skyline  is  ever  calling,  is  to 
some  an  essential  adjunct  to  the  actual  hunting. 

These  sketches  of  days  spent  in  the  chase,  and  in 
studying  the  habits  of  big  game,  I  submit  to  the  public, 
in  the  hope  that  they  may  prove  of  interest  to  naturalists 
and  sportsmen  ;  both  to  the  few  who  contemplate  visit- 
ing the  regions  mentioned,  and  to  the  majority  who, 
though  continually  hearing  it,  are  compelled  to  turn  a 
deaf  ear  to  the  call  of  the  "  red  gods." 

There  is  probably  no  region  in  Central  Asia  where 
one  finds  such  a  decided  and  sudden  change  in  altitude, 
and  therefore  in  flora  and  fauna,  as  in  Dzungaria.  From 
the  low,  sandy,  and  jungle-covered  plains  lying  to  the 
north  of  Manas,  which,  although  they  lie  at  a  distance 
of  1,600  miles  from  the  ocean,  are  lifted  only  700  ft. 
above  it,  one  can  look  up  to  peaks  that  lift  their  snow- 


582  DZUNGARIA 

capped  summits  20,000  ft.  into  the  heavens.  Every 
intermediate  zone  possesses  its  own  fauna.  On  the 
boggy  plateaux,  which  lie  tucked  away  among  the  jagged 
sommits,  roam  the  great  wild-sheep,  as  elusive  to  the 
hunter  as  they  are  to  the  naturalist.  The  wolf,  their 
constant  persecutor,  also  inhabits  these  upland  solitudes. 
Slightly  lower  down,  the  steep  slopes  and  crags  above  the 
timber  protect  vast  herds  of  ibex,  whose  greatest  enemy 
is  that  most  beautiful  of  cats,  the  snow-leopard.  The 
dark  forests  of  spruce  and  scrub  conceal  wapiti — of  all 
beasts  in  this  land  the  most  persecuted  by  man — roe-deer, 
bear,  and  wild-pig.  These  are  the  chief  large  game  of 
the  mountains.  The  stony  foot-hills  which  merge  almost 
imperceptibly  into  the  plains  are  a  favourite  locality 
for  gazelle  and  the  wild-ass,  though  both  are  also 
found  far  out  on  the  steppes.  The  dense  jungles  which 
cover  so  large  a  portion  of  the  lowlands,  and  through 
which  sluggish,  mosquito-ridden  rivers  wind  their  way, 
are  the  haunts  of  the  tiger,  roe-deer,  wild  boar,  and  a 
variety  of  wapiti  never  yet  identified,  but  probably 
similar  to  the  Yarkand  stag.  The  last  on  the  list,  and 
in  some  ways  the  most  interesting,  is  the  ungainly  Saiga 
tartarica,  a  lover,  for  the  most  part,  of  the  lowest  and 
most  saline  depressions. 

It  must  not  be  hastily  concluded,  by  those  unfamiliar 
with  Central  Asian  conditions,  that,  because  of  this 
tempting  list  of  game,  inhabiting  a  comparatively  small 
area,  a  large  and  varied  bag  is  easy  to  obtain.  In 
the  first  place,  it  is  a  far-distant  land,  to  reach  the 
western  portion  of  which  necessitates  either  three  weary 
months  of  steady  marching  from  India,  or  from  five  to 
six  weeks  if  one  employ  the  quicker,  though  in  some 
ways  more  tantalizing,  Russian  routes.     Even  when  the 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  583 

happy  hunting-ground  is  at  last  reached,  several  months 
of  strenuous  hunting  are  necessary,  often  without  the 
assistance  of  any  one  who  can  be  dignified  by  the  title 
of  shikari,  before  a  few  good  heads  of,  perhaps,  four  or 
five  varieties  are  obtained.  I  am  taking  it  for  granted 
that,  to  any  one  keen  enough  to  face  the  vicissitudes  of 
such  an  undertaking,  trophies  of  only  the  first  quality 
are  acceptable. 

It  was  in  January,  while  on  our  way  from  Kulja  to 
Urumchi,  along  the  road  with  the  misleading  title 
of  "  The  Imperial  Highway,"  or,  as  it  is  better  known 
to  the  Chinese,  "  Pei-lu  "  (North  Road),  that  we  first 
came  properly  in  touch  with  the  Dzungarian  gazelle 
(Gazella  subgutiurosa).  To  the  Chinese  it  is  known 
as  "  hwang  yang "  (yellow  sheep),  to  the  nomads  as 
"kara  karuk "  (black  tail),  and  to  the  Chantos  as 
"  jeran."  Near  Sairam  Nor  we  passed  several  camels 
laden  with  frozen  carcasses  of  these  gazelle,  and  wild  boar, 
which  were  being  sent  by  the  Kalmuk  chiefs  to  the  Tzian 
Tziun  resident  at  Sweeting.  This  exalted  personage  has 
entire  control  over  all  the  nomads  of  these  parts ;  hence 
these  diplomatic  gifts. 

After  leaving  the  exposed  Sairam  Nor  basin,  which 
lies  at  an  altitude  of  5,600  ft.,  and  possesses  a  very  just 
reputation  for  excessive  cold  in  winter,  we  rambled — ^in 
our  carts — down  over  a  stony  steppe  to  the  little  village 
of  Takianzi,  situated  among  small  scrub  and  tall  reed 
beds.  We  reached  the  seria  in  the  early  morning,  after 
a  terribly  cold  night  in  the  carts.  Several  herds  of  gazelle 
had  been  passed  on  the  road,  so  that  a  broken  wheel 
formed  a  welcome  excuse  for  devoting  a  day  to  hunting 
in  the  vicinity.  The  news  of  our  decision  having  been 
flashed  through  the  small  bazaar,  we  were  besieged  by 


584  DZUNGARIA 

half  the  male  population,  each  man  being,  according  to 
himself,  a  mighty  hmiter,  and  the  only  one  who  really 
knew  where  the  game  was  to  be  found.  Having  selected 
the  two  least  noisy  and  pushing — ^who  chanced  to  be 
Kalmuks — we  sallied  forth. 

As  we  rode  towards  the  foot-hills,  which  rose  like  a 
white  sheet  beyond  the  dark  scrub,  the  vegetation  began 
to  grow  thinner.  It  was  composed  of  patches  of  thorn 
about  5  ft.  high,  tall,  coarse  grass,  and  a  few  stunted 
poplars,  intersected  by  open  glades.  Our  guides  in- 
formed us  that  any  moment  we  might  expect  to  see  "  kara 
karuk "  ;  but,  as  there  were  yurts  scattered  around, 
and  Kalmuk  boys  were  noisily  herding  cattle,  it 
hardly  seemed  a  likely  place  for  such  shy  animals  as 
gazelle.  However,  we  noticed  almost  immediately,  some 
yellow  forms  which  were  moving  about  among  the  bushes. 
They  were  only  does  and  quite  small  bucks ;  but,  as 
we  wished  to  make  certain  of  getting  a  few  specimens, 
and  found  them  absurdly  easy  to  approach,  we  shot 
three  between  us. 

Then,  leaving  the  men  and  horses  behind,  we  soon 
found  some  good  bucks.  Three  of  the  best,  all  carrying 
good  horns  of  between  12  and  14  in.  in  length,  were  added 
to  the  bag.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  if  light  had  per- 
mitted, several  more  could  have  been  shot,  since,  in 
addition  to  their  numbers,  the  ground  was  ideal  for 
stalking,  and  they  showed  little  fear  of  man.  Like 
ostriches,  as  long  as  they  could  not  see  us,  they  seemed 
to  consider  themselves  safe.  When  a  shot  was  fired, 
they  would  quickly  trot  away,  and  start  feeding  again 
within  a  few  hundred  yards.  The  only  accountable 
reason  for  this  stupidity  is  that,  when  in  their  summer 
haunts,  on  the  smooth,  bare  plains,  they  know  well  that. 


THE   GAME  OF  THE   PLAINS  585 

as  long  as  no  human  being  is  in  sight,  they  are  perfectlj^ 
safe,  and  so  they  consider  the  same  to  hold  good  when 
they  are  among  the  scrub.  Any  one  who  has  attempted 
to  approach  gazelle  in  the  former  type  of  country  will 
hardly  be  able  to  believe  that  they  are  ever  easy  to  get 
up  to.     It  was  a  complete  revelation  to  us. 

We  were  not  able  to  skin  all  the  beasts  that  evening, 
and  we  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  the  skins  off 
on  the  following  morning.  The  carcasses  had  been 
frozen  solid  during  the  night,  though  lying  inside  our 
room  in  the  serai.  Before  they  could  be  skinned  they 
had  to  be  hung  over  a  fire  and  thawed  out — a  slow  and 
messy  job.  Though  we  met  with  gazelle  here  and  there 
through  the  scrub-belt  as  far  as  Urumchi,  we  never  again 
saw  them  in  their  winter  quarters  in  such  numbers  as 
at  Takianzi,  and  regretted  not  having  spent  another 
day  there. ^ 

In  the  zone  of  Piedmont  Gravel  on  the  south  side  of 
the  Karlik  Tagh  gazelle-drives  were  organized  for  our 
benefit,  but,  as  is  usual  with  this  mode  of  hunting, 
beloved  by  all  natives,  they  proved  most  unsuccessful, 
one  buck,  which  fell  to  Carruthers'  rifle,  constituting 
our  only  success.  The  method  the  Chant os  adopt  is 
for  a  large  party  of  ten  to  twenty  horsemen  to  ride  out 
to  a  likely  locality.  On  finding  a  herd,  they  ride  rapidly 
forward  on  whichever  side  the  ground  is  most  favour- 
able for  concealment  and  for  taking  advantage  of.     This 

^  The  winter  coat  of  this  gazelle  is  very  dense  and  from  2  to  3  in. 
in  length.  The  upper  part  of  the  body  is  dark  fawn  ;  legs,  belly,  and 
rump  white  ;  tail  black  (6  in.  in  length) ;  neck  and  head  very  pale  fawn, 
but,  in  some  cases,  almost  white,  and  frequently  there  is  a  dark  streak 
under  the  eyes  and  black  hairs  round  the  base  of  the  horns.  The 
characteristic  of  this  gazelle,  as  compared  with  the  other  Central  Asian 
species,  is  that  the  horns  are  considerably  more  divergent  and  less  closely 
and  boldly  ringed. 


586  DZUNGARIA 

move  is  generally  carried  out  in  full  view  of  the  game, 
but,  though  they  bunch  together  and  display  their  white 
rumps,  curiosity  holds  them  back  from  moving  away. 
As  the  hunters  ride  along,  every  two  hundred  yards  or 
so  a  man  slips  from  his  saddle  and  conceals  himself 
behind  some  slight  cover,  or,  if  none  exist,  as  is  gener- 
ally the  case,  he  will  build  a  slight  breastwork  of 
stones,  resting  his  antique  muzzle-loader  over  the  top. 
When  half  the  number  have  been  left  behind  in  this 
fashion,  the  remainder,  leading  the  riderless  horses, 
make  a  wide  detour,  and  spread  out  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  herd.  With  flanks  well  advanced,  they  then 
move  in  open  order  towards  the  guns.  Occasionally 
large  numbers  are  killed  in  this  manner,  for  the  terrified 
gazelle  lose  their  heads  and  run  down  the  whole  line  of 
guns.  More  often,  however,  they  break  away  at  the 
sides,  or  back  through  the  drivers. 

The  Kirghiz,  and  occasionally  the  Chantos,  have  a 
much  more  sporting  way  of  hunting  gazelle,  by  means 
of  trained  golden  eagles,  called  in  Turki  "  bouragut." 
This  method  is  only  attempted  in  winter,  when  the  game 
is  easy  to  approach,  and  the  sportsmen  have  plenty  of 
time  on  their  hands.  Often  we  saw  a  man  riding  along 
with  a  hooded  eagle  on  his  well-gauntlet ed  right  hand. 
The  great  weight  of  the  bird  is  supported  by  means  of 
a  forked  stick  for  the  wrist,  which  fits  into  a  socket  in 
the  front  of  the  saddle.  We  were  never  fortunate 
enough  to  see  a  flight ;  but  Major  Cumberland,  in  Sport 
on  the  Pamirs  and  Turkestan  Steppes,  gives  such  a 
good  account  of  a  kill  he  witnessed  on  the  Tarim  east 
of  Aksu,  that  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  his  descrip- 
tion. 

*'  I  was  anxious  to  see  the  eagle  work,  and,  as  I  could 


THE  GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  587 

see  nothing  of  a  stag,  went  off  with  the  Yuzbeggie  in  the 
afternoon  to  try  for  another  jeran.  I  was  mooning  along 
thinking  of  something  else,  when  all  of  a  sudden  the 
Yuzbeggie  started  off  as  hard  as  he  could  gallop  across 
the  maidan  (plain).  I  followed  suit,  and  soon  made  out 
a  doe- jeran  in  the  distance.  It  stood  and  looked  at  us 
in  amazement,  and  then  cantered  off,  not  very  fast, 
while  we  still  continued  our  headlong  career,  every  now 
and  then  floundering  on  to  our  noses  over  a  tussock  of 
grass  or  into  a  hole  hidden  by  the  snow,  until  we  got  to 
about  a  hundred  yards  from  our  game,  which  only  then 
realized  the  situation,  and  extended  its  stride.  The 
shikari  now  hurled  the  eagle,  which  he  had  unhooded  and 
held  clasped  to  his  breast  during  the  run,  at  the  jeran. 
The  eagle,  instead  of  rising  like  a  falcon  and  sweeping  on 
its  prey,  flapped  along  with  its  great  wings  quite  close 
to  the  ground  ;  and,  although  it  seemed  to  fly  very  slowly, 
gradually  caught  up  the  jeran,  which  was  impeded  in 
its  course  by  the  high  grass,  and  at  last  grabbed  it  by 
the  rump  with  its  strong  talons.  It  regularly  dragged 
the  deer  down,  and  held  on  for  some  time,  the  little 
gazelle  kicking  out  like  mad.  We  still  galloped  on, 
and  I  wondered  what  the  finish  would  be.  The  shikari, 
when  he  got  up  to  them,  without  drawing  rein  threw 
himself  off  his  pony,  and  grabbed  the  deer  by  the  hind- 
leg,  just  as  it  had  kicked  itself  free,  and,  pulling  out  his 
knife,  cut  its  throat." 

In  addition  to  gazelle,  hares,  foxes,  and  even  wolves 
are  killed  by  means  of  the  golden  eagle ;  but,  in  the  case 
of  wolves,  dogs  are  generally  used  to  assist  the  bird. 

Towards  the  end  of  April,  with  the  exploration  of 
the  Karlik  Tagh  completed,  and  the  rigours  of  the 
winter  well  behind  us,  we  were  able  to  devote  the  re- 


588  DZUNGARIA 

mainder  of  our  time  in  Dzungaria  almost  entirely    to 
natural  history  and  hunting. 

Between  that  town  of  stagnation,  Barkul,  and  the 
small  wayside  station  of  Ta-shih-tu,  a  plateau-like  mass 
of  hills,  with  an  average  altitude  of  between  5,000  ft.  and 
7,000  ft.,  projects  northwards  from  the  main  range  into 
the  plains  of  Eastern  Dzungaria.  The  bulk  of  this 
uplift  is  of  a  very  open  nature,  composed  of  low,  rounded 
hills  with  flats  between.  Water  is  scarce,  only  repre- 
sented by  small  springs  at  long  intervals,  and  these  are 
generally  decidedly  brackish.  For  this  reason  the  nomads 
visit  the  region  only  in  winter,  their  place  being 
taken  during  the  summer  by  large  herds  of  gazelle 
and   kulon. 

When  we  marched  through,  westwards,  the  short 
tufty  grass,  which  possesses  such  marvellous  feeding 
properties,  was  in  its  prime,  having  been  well  watered 
by  the  recently  departed  snow.  Thousands  of  gazelle 
and  a  few  wild-asses,  straight  from  their  winter  quarters 
on  the  lowlands  to  the  north,  were  busy  making  up  for 
their  scanty  winter  fare.  Almost  all  day  game  was  in 
sight,  though  rarely  within  shot. 

One  delightful  picture  remains  indelibly  fixed  in  my 
memory.  It  was  on  one  of  those  invigorating  spring 
mornings  with  a  hot  sun,  but  clear,  cool  atmosphere, 
which  make  the  highlands  of  Central  Asia  such  an  ideal 
summer  resort.  Carruthers  and  I  were  riding  ahead 
of  the  caravan,  as  was  our  custom,  for  to  ride  behind 
camels  requires  the  patience  of  a  Job  and  an  Oriental's 
indifference  to  time.  On  reaching  the  crest  of  a  rise, 
we  looked  down  on  a  miniature  plain,  perhaps  a  mile 
long  by  half  a  mile  broad,  and  surrounded  by  quite  low- 
hills.     The  bright  green  grass  shooting  from  the  earth 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  589 

and  gravel  formed  a  delightful  setting  to  the  picture. 
In  the  very  centre,  away  from  any  dangerous  irregularities 
of  the  ground,  lazed  a  large  herd  of  gazelle  and  ten  wild- 
asses.  Most  of  the  former  were  busy  feeding,  but  the  latter 
had  finished  their  breakfast,  and  were  about  to  indulge 
in  a  siesta.  Some  were  already  lying  down,  others  were 
enjoying  a  sand-bath,  sending  clouds  of  dust  floating 
away  to  leeward,  while  two  by  mutual  consent  were 
nibbling  shoulders.  What  a  picture  Mr.  J.  G.  Millais 
could  have  made  out  of  that  scene,  with  all  its  atmosphere 
and  movement ! 

They  were  all  in  an  unstalkable  position,  but  shortly 
afterwards  a  slice  of  luck  enabled  me  to  shoot  a  gazelle 
with  a  very  fine  pair  of  long,  open-spread  horns.  He 
was  among  a  small  herd  of  six,  all  males,  and  in  what 
they  might  justly  have  considered  a  perfectly  safe 
position.  There  was,  however,  just  one  large  mound 
between  me  and  them. 

Having  reached  it  in  safety,  I  lay  there  watching 
them  and  trying  to  imagine  that  they  were  nearer  than 
they  looked  ;  the  most  optimistic  estimation  would  not 
make  them  less  than  four  hundred  yards  off ;  much  too 
far  to  make  at  all  sure  of  hitting  a  small,  indistinct  beast 
like  a  gazelle.  But,  as  I  lay  and  watched,  they  played 
into  my  hands,  for,  strung  out  in  single  file,  they  began 
to  advance  slowly  almost  straight  towards  my  position. 
By  that  time  Carruthers  had  joined  me,  and,  as  they 
approached,  we  criticized  their  horns,  and  decided  that 
the  third  in  the  line  carried  the  best  pair.  Waiting  till 
he  stopped  for  a  moment  to  scratch  his  face  with  a  hind- 
foot,  I  fired  at  his  shoulders.  It  was  a  bad  shot,  for 
the  bullet  merely  grazed  a  horn  and  inflicted  a  slight 
flesh-wound  on  his  back.     He  was,  however,  completely 


590  DZUNGARIA 

stunned  by  the  shock,  and  a  well-placed  second  bullet 
finished  the  business. 

I  will  now  relate  our  experience  with  another  denizen 
of  the  plains,  one  that  has  rarely  been  seen  by  Europeans 
in  its  native  haunts.  Of  all  the  beasts  in  nature,  few 
exceed  the  saiga  {Saiga  tartarica)  for  grotesqueness  of 
form  or  gait.  He  seems  to  be  altogether  a  mistake,  to 
have  been  made  after  all  other  beasts,  when  the  ingenuity 
of  the  Creator  had  already  been  exhausted.  He  is  not 
closely  related  to  any  other  animal,  and  is  a  puzzle  to 
naturalists,  who  class  him  with  the  antelope,  though  he 
is  a  disgrace  to  that  graceful  family.  His  horns  resemble 
the  gazelle's  in  shape,  though  not  in  colour,  while  the 
skull  is  like  that  of  no  other  beast.  The  shape  of  his 
body,  the  texture  of  his  coat,  and  his  bleating,  all  remind 
one  of  a  sheep,  while  the  shnking,  stooping  gait  is  more 
akin  to  that  of  some  of  the  smaller  jungle-living  deer. 
His  chief  characteristic  is,  of  course,  the  great  soft 
"  Roman  "  nose,  which  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the 
body. 

In  the  Pleistocene  period  the  saiga  ranged  over 
Western  Europe,  even  as  far  as  Great  Britain,  but  at 
the  present  day  the  southern  steppes  of  Russia  between 
the  Don  and  Volga  form  its  western  Umit.  From  there 
its  range  stretches  eastwards,  throughout  the  more 
desert  portions  of  Russian  Turkestan,  with  the  Siberian 
Railway  for  its  northern  limit,  and  the  Trans-Caspian 
Railway  and  Tashkent- Kulj a  post-road  for  its  southern. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  low  depressions  of  Lakes  Balkash 
and  Ala  Kul  it  is  said  to  be  numerous.  It  has  for  many 
years  been  supposed  that  the  saiga  extended  over  the 
Russian- Chinese  frontier  eastwards  to  Dzungaria,  but 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  one  having  actually  seen,  much 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  591 

less  shot  one,  with  the  exception  of  that  distinguished 
Russian  explorer,  Colonel  Kozloff,  who  mentions  having 
come  across  saiga  in  the  Gobi  east  of  Barkul. 

We  had  frequently  heard  about  it  both  from  the 
nomads  and  the  Chinese.  To  the  former  it  is  known 
as  "  burkark "  (stooper),  and  to  the  latter  as  "  ling 
yang  "  (white  sheep),  names  which  depict  two  of  its 
chief  characteristics. 

It  was  not  till  we  reached  Guchen,  that  busy  western 
terminus  of  the  great  North  Gobi  caravan-route,  that 
we  first  obtained  absolute  proof  of  its  existence  in  Eastern 
Dzungaria.  Considerable  numbers  of  its  curious  amber- 
coloured  horns  were  hanging  up  in  the  Chinese  shops 
there  for  sale.  The  Chinese  consider  them  to  possess 
valuable  medicinal  properties,  and  give  as  much  as  fifteen 
"  sairs  "  for  a  pair.  Every  year  consignments  are  sent 
to  Pekin,  where  they  are  made  into  medicine,  though 
we  were  unable  to  ascertain  for  what  ailment  it  is  a 
remedy.  The  high  price  put  on  the  head  of  a  saiga 
induces  a  small  army  of  hunters,  mostly  Chantos,  to 
spend  the  summer  months  in  their  pursuit. 

During  our  journey  eastwards  in  February  we  could 
not  devote  much  time  to  hunting,  our  object  being  to 
reach  Kumul  as  quickly  as  possible.  We  were,  however, 
fortunate  in  coming  across  a  local  hunter,  who  was  to 
prove  invaluable  on  our  return  journey  in  the  spring. 

Owing  to  the  impossible  nature  of  the  road,  caused  by 
the  melting  snow,  we  were  delayed  for  two  days  at  the 
small  wayside  post  of  Ta-shih-tu,  situated  on  the  main 
road,  where  it  commences  to  cross  to  the  south  side  of 
the  mountains. 

There  can  surely  be  no  more  abominable  form  of 
hostelry  in  the  world  than  the  average  Chinese  caravan- 
II— 18 


592  DZUNGARIA 

serai,  especially  if  it  is  in  charge  of  that  scum  of  Western 
China,  the  crafty  Dungan.  In  winter  the  traveller  has 
to  put  up  with  either  intense  cold — and  how  that  icy 
wind  can  howl  through  those  ill-fitting  doors  and  paper- 
less windows,  or  a  room  full  of  pungent  smoke !  In 
summer  there  is  no  alternative  ;  it  is  always  a  case  of 
"  dust  and  stench  and  staleness  "  plus  unremitting  atten- 
tion from  a  variety  of  insect-pests. 

Hearing  from  the  man  in  charge  of  the  serai  that 
during  the  winter    months  numbers  of  wild-sheep,  or, 
as  he  called  them  in  Chinese,  Ta  lao  yang  (large-headed 
sheep),  descend  from  the  main  ridge  to  the  low  hills 
round  Ta-shih-tu,  we  spent  the  first  evening  spying  with 
a  telescope  from  a  commanding  position.     A  few  wild- 
sheep  had  been  found,  and  we  were  splashing  our  wa}^ 
through  the  slush  and  mud  back  to  supper,  forming  plans 
for  a  hunt  on  the  morrow,  when  we  fell  in  with  a  wild- 
looking  figure  making  for  the  same  direction.     He  proved 
to   be   one   of   those  curious,  semi-nomadic,  and   semi- 
sedentary  Mohammedans  one  finds  in  this  eastern  end 
of   the  Tian  Shan.     His  wild-looking,  unkempt  appear- 
ance at  once  appealed  to  us  ;    over  his  shoulders  was 
slung  the  most  antique  muzzle-loader  I  have  ever  seen, 
with  a  long,  forked  rest,  and  its  barrel  and  stock  held 
together  with  bindings  of  raw  hide.     It  was  one  of  those 
weapons   better   to    have   fired   at    one    than    to   have 
to  fire.     His  clothing  consisted  of  a  ragged  old  sheep- 
skin coat,  almost  black  with  the  blood  of  many  a  beast, 
bound  round  the  middle  with  a  greasy  cloth  from  which 
hung  his  powder-horn,  flint  and  steel,  and  a  serviceable- 
looking   knife.     Below   this   he   wore   short   sheep-skin 
trousers,  and  round  his  legs  were  wound  puttees  of  felt. 
Moccasins,  made  from  the  breast-skin  of  ibex,  covered  his 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  593 

feet  :  excellent  footgear  for  dry  ground,  but  the  very 
worst  for  the  country  in  its  then  damp  state.  A  tight- 
fitting,  black  skull-cap  was  all  that  protected  his  head, 
which  matched  so  closely  the  colour  of  his  hairless  face, 
tanned  black  by  constant  exposure,  that,  at  a  few 
yards  off,  it  was  impossible  to  see  where  one  ended  and 
the  other  began.  A  glance  was  sufficient  to  tell  that 
he  was  a  hunter,  without  the  evidence  of  a  bundle  of 
freshly  killed  sheep  meat,  tied  up  in  the  skin  of  the 
animal.  He  was  just  the  man  we  had  been  looking  for, 
and  we  lost  no  time  in  questioning  him  as  to  the  game  of 
the  region.  Nears — for  that  was  his  name — was  one  of 
those  children  of  the  wilderness  who,  having  spent  their 
lives,  from  boyhood,  in  hunting,  have  an  unsurpassed 
knowledge  of  the  habits  of  the  various  species  of  game 
which  roam  their  mountains  and  plains.  The  way  he 
could  distinguish  game,  read  spoor,  and  forecast  the 
movements  of  the  animals  was  almost  uncanny.  Yet  in 
other  respects  he  was  nervous  and  childish  in  the  extrem.e. 

The  two  days  at  Ta-shih-tu  were  spent  in  hunting 
for  sheep.  There  were  a  good  many  of  them  about,  but 
I  saw  only  one  with  a  good  head,  and  he,  with  the  wari- 
ness of  his  kind,  eluded  me  at  the  last  moment.  Two 
rams  which  I  had  killed  carried  only  small  horns,  but 
their  skins  v/ere  of  interest,  being  in  full  winter  coat, 
with  a  pure  white  neck-ruff  over  three  inches  in  length. 

As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  sheep  of  the 
Karlik  Tagh  are  karelini,  being  in  every  respect  similar 
to  those  of  the  Borotala.  They  inhabit  the  whole  of 
this  eastern  extremity  of  the  Tian  Shan  wherever  they 
can  find  seclusion  from  the  natives.  Though  their  horns 
do,  undoubtedly,  occasionally  reach  a  great  size  there, 
the  percentage  is  much  smaller  than  farther  west  in  the 


594  DZUNGARIA 

Tian  Shan  and  Ala-tau.  This  I  attribute  to  the  inferi- 
ority of  the  feed  in  the  KarUk  Tagh.  Owing  to  the 
dry  influence  of  the  neighbouring  deserts,  the  growth, 
for  the  most  part,  is  of  a  decidedly  steppe-like  nature, 
there  being  but  little  of  that  boggy  grass-land  which  is 
met  with  in  the  plateaux  farther  west.  During  the 
early  part  of  the  summer  the  sheep  are  independent  of 
water,  finding  ample  moisture  in  the  wild  onions  that 
grow  nearly  everywhere.  Later  on,  when  these  get 
dried  up,  they  visit  the  springs  and  streamlets.  It  is 
then  that  the  native  hunter  lies  in  wait  for  them, 
skilfully  concealed  within  shot  of  the  water  ;  but  it  is 
very  rarely  that  this  method  of  hunting  wild-sheep  is 
adopted  by  natives  of  Central  Asia,  water,  as  a  rule, 
being  abundant  over  all  the  country  inhabited  by  the 
great  wild-sheep. 

In  these  two  days  I  was  able  to  form  a  very  favourable 
opinion  of  Nears  as  a  hunter.  Besides  knowing  all 
about  the  business,  he  was  silent,  keen,  and  persevering, 
in  fact,  as  nearly  ideal  a  shikari,  as  it  would  be  possible 
to  find  anywhere.  We  did  not  wish  to  take  him  with  us 
on  our  way  eastwards,  but  we  engaged  him  to  guide  us 
to  the  haunts  of  the  saiga  on  our  return  in  the  spring. 
He  informed  us  that,  to  reach  the  best  place  he  knew 
of,  would  take  two  marches  northwards  to  the  very  edge 
of  the  hills  where  they  merge  into  the  steppes. 

As  we  rode  northwards,  it  was  hard  to  believe  that 
the  country  was  the  same  which  we  had  passed  over 
only  two  months  before.  The  snow  had  all  gone,  and, 
in  its  place,  the  earth  was  covered  with  short  tufts  of 
bright  green  grass  and  small  desert  plants  of  various 
kinds.  In  the  hollows,  where  the  snow  had  lain  deep, 
and  left  behind   abundant   moisture,  patches  of   dwarf 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  595 

yellow  tulips  and  blue  anemones  flashed  in  the  sun- 
The  icy  blasts  of  winter  had  been  replaced  by  balmy 
breezes,  and  already  the  midday  sun  was  beginning  to 
get  uncomfortably  powerful. 

Animal  life  had  also  awakened  after  its  winter's 
sleep.  The  various  kinds  of  small  desert  mammals  were 
busy  repairing  their  burrows,  which  honeycombed  the 
ground  in  many  places.  Smart  brown-and- white  chats 
bobbed  fussity  in  and  out  of  their  breeding-holes.  Small 
lizards  darted  away  at  almost  every  step.  These  my  dog, 
Wung,  considered  to  be  his  own  particular  perquisite,  and 
was  never  tired  of  chasing  them.  They  were  generally 
much  too  quick  for  him,  but  occasionally  he  made  a  lucky 
shot  with  his  clumsy  puppy  paws,  and  then  he  would 
march  proudty  along  with  the  lizard's  tail  hanging  out  of 
one  side  of  his  mouth,  till  another  caught  his  eye,  and 
the  game  started  all  over  again .  Small  groups  of  gazelle 
were  frequently  within  view,  and  the  tracks  of  wild-asses 
crossed  ours,  but  our  thoughts  were  now  directed  to  the 
saiga,  and  a  sharp  look-out  was  kept  for  it.  A  meagre 
spring  of  none  too  clean  water  befriended  us  the  first  night. 

A  desert  hare  was  shot  at  this  place.  No  native  of 
Central  Asia,  unless  he  is  hard  put  to  it,  will  eat  a  hare, 
for  they  are  said  to  be  unclean  beasts.  In  the  summer, 
when  there  is  ample  grass  for  them,  this  accusation  is, 
I  think,  unjust,  but  during  the  rigours  of  winter  they 
do  undoubtedly  live  on  offal  round  about  the  native 
encampments. 

At  the  end  of  the  second  day's  march  we  reached 
another  spring,  from  which  Nears  had  hopes  that  we 
should  see  a  few  saiga.  It  was  this  very  place  that  he 
had  visited  on  many  occasions.  He  gave  us  glowing 
accounts   of  his  hunting  exploits,  the  number  of  saiga 


596  DZUNGARIA 

he  had  killed,  and  how  at  certain  seasons  the}^  collect 
into  vast  herds  of  as  many  as  a  thousand.  He  did  not, 
however,  hold  forth  much  hope  of  our  seeing  large 
numbers  at  this  season  (early  May),  as  there  was  still 
ample  feed  and  moisture  further  out  on  the  plains.  It 
is  not  till  the  end  of  May,  when  the  open  steppes  begin 
to  get  burnt  up,  that  they  move  in  towards  the  fringe 
of  the  foot-hills,  where  there  are  scattered  springs,  and 
where  abundance  of  grass  is  to  be  found  throughout 
the  summer. 

Leaving  Pereira  to  make  the  camp  snug,  and  Carruthers 
busy  setting  his  traps,  Nears  and  I  rode  off  to  an  out- 
lying bluff  that  protruded  into  the  limitless  plains,  like 
a  headland  into  a  tranquil  sea. 

With  the  horses  concealed  below  the  crest,  we  lay 
on  the  top,  scanning  the  flats  be3'ond,  Nears  with  his 
eyes,  and  I  wdth  the  only  slightly  more  powerful  Zeiss 
glasses.  For  some  time  the  antics  of  a  fox,  busily  in 
search  of  his  evening  meal,  in  the  shape  of  desert  rats, 
riveted  my  attention.  He  was  not  a  hundred  yards 
away,  and  his  method  of  making  the  rats  bolt  was  inter- 
esting and  amusing  in  the  extreme.  Having  found  an 
occupied  hole,  he  would  start  digging  furiously,  first  at 
one  entrance  and  then  at  another,  and  in  between  he 
jumped  up  and  down  on  the  top  of  the  burrow.  He 
was  not  always  successful  in  his  endeavours,  but  bolted 
two  while  I  watched,  one  of  which  he  seized  with  a 
lightning-like  spring.  I  was  contemplating  trying  to 
shoot  him  for  his  skin,  when  Nears,  whose  eyes  had  been 
busy  farther  afield,  touched  me  on  the  shoulder,  and 
pointed  out  over  the  plain,  saying  "  Iky  burkark  "  (Two 
saiga).  Two  white  spots  were  plainly  visible  with  the 
naked  e^^e.     Directl}^  one  of  them  was  focussed  within 


r -ItJi '-'.■: ':irU 


CAT '  I  .  S  •;     I     ■/''- ' ) 


o. 
w  --■ 

f-l    ii 

<  1 

<  "S 

O  -5? 

W 
H 


o 

c 


THE  GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  597 

the  field  of  the  telescope  I  knew  that  I  was  at  last 
looking  at  one  of  those  rarely  seen  beasts.  They  were 
quite  unapproachable  where  they  were,  so  I  contented 
myself  with  watching  them,  till  the  fading  light  drove 
us  back  to  camp.  I  had,  at  any  rate,  the  satisfaction 
of  knowing  that  there  were  some  saiga  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Even  in  sheep-hunting  one  should  be  on  the  move 
before  sunrise,  but,  to  be  successful  with  the  saiga,  camp 
must  be  left  behind  while  the  stars  are  yet  in  the  sky. 
The  reason  of  this  is  that  this  wary  beast  is  essentially 
a  lover  of  the  open  plains,  where  he  is  used  to  an  unin- 
terrupted view  for  several  miles  in  every  direction.  But, 
as  the  merciless  summer  sun  scorches  the  moisture  out 
of  the  lower  levels,  he  is  driven  irresistibly  in  towards 
the  edge  of  the  hills,  where  fresh  green  grass  flourishes 
late  into  the  summer,  and  where  he  can  slake  his  thirst 
at  occasional  springs.  So  unsafe,  however,  does  he 
feel,  among  even  the  lowest  hills,  that  he  only  comes  in 
to  feed  and  drink  at  dusk,  and  soon  after  sunrise  is  far 
out  on  the  plains  once  more,  where  he  passes  the  day, 
lying  down  in  the  shelter  of  some  small  desert  shrub. 

It  was  still  dark  on  the  following  morning  when  we 
mounted  and  made  once  more  for  the  bluff.  Just  at 
break  of  day  we  left  the  horses  tied  head  to  tail  in  a 
hollow  ;  this  bluff  rose  only  about  100  ft.  above  the 
surrounding  plain.  Making  our  way  along  its  crest,  we 
almost  walked  on  to  the  top  of  a  "  burkark  "  feeding  in 
a  hollow.  It  was  a  female  with  no  horns,  so  I  did  not 
fire,  though  I  doubt  if  I  should  have  hit  it  if  I  had,  as 
the  light  was  still  very  bad,  and  it  only  presented  a  stern 
shot.  This  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seen  one  of 
these  beasts  on  the  move.     Not  only  in  structure  does 


598  DZUNGARIA 

the  burkark  differ  from  all  other  animals,  but  also  in  its 
movements.  Even  when  thoroughly  alarmed,  it  never 
raises  its  head  above  the  line  of  its  shoulders.  Its  move- 
ments resemble  those  of  a  clockwork  animal  more  than 
anything  else.  On  being  disturbed  it  gets  into  its  full 
pace  immediately,  and  during  the  first  hundred  yards 
gives  two  or  three  curious  leaps,  with  the  fore  part  of 
its  body  only  ;  it  exhibits  none  of  the  graceful  movements 
of  the  gazelle,  but  moves  its  legs  rapidly,  without  dis- 
turbing the  steadiness  of  its  body,  the  motion  resembling 
that  of  a  pacing  horse. 

We  now  moved  very  slowly  along,  carefully  spying 
the  slopes  of  the  bluff  which  faced  the  plains.  All  along 
the  crest  was  a  line  of  low  stone  sangars,  which,  Nears 
informed  me,  were  used  by  him  and  other  hunters  later 
on  in  the  summer.  He  told  me  that  he  had  frequently 
seen  several  herds  of  burkark,  numbering  hundreds,  from 
this  very  position  during  the  month  of  July. 

Soon  after  this  we  spied  a  solitary  buck  feeding  at  the 
foot  of  the  slopes.  He  was  in  a  very  favourable  position 
for  a  stalk,  and  we  had  no  difficulty  in  getting  within 
fifty  yards.  I  then  made  one  of  the  worst  shots  imagin- 
able, missing  him  clean,  though  he  offered  an  easy  broad- 
side shot.  His  escape,  however,  was  shortlived,  for 
after  a  rapid  spurt  of  a  hundred  yards  he  stopped  for 
a  moment  to  look  back  ;  there  was  no  mistake  about 
the  accuracy  of  the  second  shot,  for  it  caught  him  fairly 
in  the  shoulder.  He  proved  to  be  only  a  young  buck 
with  immature  horns.  Being  in  the  middle  of  changing 
from  his  winter  to  his  summer  coat,  he  had  a  very  untidy 
appearance.  This  animal  stood  27J  in.  at  the  shoulder, 
and  weighed,  when  cleaned,  40  lb.  Besides  being  only 
a  young  beast,  he  was  in  very  poor  condition,  and  I 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  599 

should  estimate  the  weight  of  an  adult  male  in  good 
condition  at  from  50  lb.  to  60  lb. 

We  saw  three  more  saiga,  and  numbers  of  gazelle, 
but  all  well  out  on  the  flat,  and  away  from  any  cover. 
As  we  ate  our  breakfast  on  the  very  point  of  the  little 
promontory,  with  no  sound  to  break  the  stillness  of  the 
desert  except  the  chuckling  cry  of  the  sand-grouse  as 
they  winged  their  way  in  towards  some  spring,  I  could 
not  help  marvelling  at  the  immensity  of  the  view  that  lay 
spread  before  us  in  the  clear  early  morning  atmosphere. 
Westwards  stretched  the  '*  illimitable  plains,"  without 
the  vestige  of  a  hillock  to  break  the  endless  monotony  ; 
to  the  north  a  wavy  line  indicated  the  sand-dune  area, 
which  we  had  visited  from  Guchen,  while  far  beyond 
was  hazily  visible  the  blue  outline  of  the  southern  spurs 
of  the  Altai.  Looking  comparatively  near  on  the  south 
and  south-west,  rose  the  snow-capped  summits  of  the 
Tian  Shan,  culminating  in  the  glittering  crests  of  the 
Bogdo  peaks.  It  is  largely  the  recollection  of  such 
scenes  as  these  which  fires  the  nomadic  blood  in  our 
veins,  and  compels  some  of  us  to  flee,  for  a  time,  from 
the  hurry  and  bustle  of  civilization  to  seek  the  solitary 
regions  of  the  earth. 

That  evening  one  of  those  terrific  dry  winds  which 
seem  to  come  from  nowhere  and  end  as  suddenly  as 
they  start,  sprang  up  and  raged  throughout  the  night  ; 
everything,  including  our  mouths,  was  filled  with  grit  ; 
and  it  was  only  by  constant  attention  to  ropes  and 
pegs  that  the  tents  were  kept  standing. 

Next  day  we  left  the  hills  and  travelled  west- 
wards towards  Guchen.  While  our  camp  was  being 
struck  we  amused  ourselves  with  shooting  sand-grouse. 
For  an  hour  or  more,  flocks  of  these  birds  flew  round  the 


6oo  DZUNGARIA 

spring,  offering  many  sporting  shots.  After  circling 
round  a  few  times  they  reahzed  that  there  was  no  chance 
of  their  getting  to  the  water,  so  headed  off  towards  some 
quieter  spring.  That  evening  we  joined  the  caravan- 
route,  a  broad,  well-trodden  track,  and  rested  for  the 
night  at  a  small  serai.  There  were  two  Chanto  saiga- 
hunters  also  spending  the  night  there,  from  whom  we 
were  able  to  learn  more  about  their  quarry.  During 
the  winter  the  burkark  collect  into  vast  herds,  number- 
ing frequently  from  eight  hundred  to  a  thousand,  and 
retire  to  the  lowest  and  most  sandy  and  saline  portions 
of  the  plains,  at  an  altitude  of  only  from  700  ft.  to  900  ft. 
above  sea-level,  relying  on  the  snow  and  desert  shrubs 
for  their  food  and  water.  In  April  they  split  up  into 
small  parties  of  from  two  to  six  and  spread  over  the 
steppes,  finding  abundance  of  food  in  the  desert  flora 
which  shoots  up  as  the  snow  melts. 

They  drop  their  young  (generally  two)  about  the 
middle  or  end  of  May,  and  later  in  the  summer  again 
collect  into  herds  of  several  hundreds.  From  June  to 
August  is  the  season  during  which  they  are  principally 
pursued,  though  a  few  hardy  hunters  brave  the  rigours 
of  the  winter  in  their  pursuit.  It  is  at  daybreak  that 
the  hunters  catch  them  in  country  sufficiently  undulating 
for  a  stalk,  or  lie  concealed  behind  a  low  breastwork 
of  stones  commanding  a  spring.  In  July  heavy  storms 
occasionally  sweep  over  the  steppes,  leaving  large  pools 
standing  in  the  hollows.  At  these  casual  drinking-places 
the  hunters  dig  skilfully  concealed  pits,  and  one  old 
veteran  told  us  that  at  such  a  place  on  one  occasion  he 
allowed  a  herd  of  several  hundred  to  come  within  twenty 
yards  of  him  before  firing.  During  the  breeding  season 
the  females  utter  a  sheep-like  bleat  to  call  their  young 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  6oi 

to  them  ;  a  wounded  animal  will  sometimes  utter  the 
same  cry. 

The  summer  programme  of  these  two  hunters  was  to 
hunt  the  burkark  till  the  beginning  of  June,  and  then 
hurry  up  into  the  forested  mountains  to  the  south  for 
a  month's  "  bogo  "  (stag)  hunting,  and  then  back  to  the 
burkark  again.  When  it  is  remembered  that  the 
Chinese  merchants  will  readily  give  as  much  as  from 
a  hundred  to  two  hundred  roubles  for  a  good  pair  of 
wapiti  horns  in  the  velvet  it  can  be  understood  that  a 
hunter  who  secures  even  a  moderate  pair,  and  ten  or 
twelve  pairs  of  saiga-horns,  has  made  more  than  enough 
to  support  himself  and  family  for  a  year.  Often  several 
hunters  combine  and  divide  the  spoils  equally. 

The  natives  have  a  method  of  hunting  the  saiga 
which  is  often  successful  in  the  flattest  and  barest 
country  ;  on  one  occasion  we  saw  them  employ  this 
method.  On  finding  some  burkark,  some  eight  men  ride 
slowly  towards  them  in  pairs  with  an  interval  of  about 
eighty  yards  between  each  pair,  the  two  flank  pairs 
being  well  advanced  ;  as  soon  as  the  game  becomes 
alarmed,  and  begins  to  move  away  from  them,  the 
horsemen  quicken  their  pace  till  they  are  tearing  along 
at  full  gallop.  In  this  first  rush  the  horsemen  gain 
shghtly  on  their  quarry,  who,  thinking  that  they  are 
going  to  be  surrounded,  break  back.  As  soon  as  the 
horsemen  see  them  about  to  do  this,  one  of  every  pair 
slips  from  his  horse  and  lies  flat  on  the  ground  with  his 
gun  ready.  The  others  continue  to  advance,  leading 
the  riderless  horses.  The  saiga  then  break  back  between 
the  horsemen,  often  giving  the  prostrate  men  an  easy 
chance. 

I  have  not  yet  dealt  with  the  wild-ass,  or  "kulon," 


6o2  DZUNGARIA 

which  is  the  name  by  which  it  is  known  among  the  natives 
of  Dzungaria.  To  do  so  I  must  retrace  our  steps  to  the 
time  when,  in  January,  we  were  travelhng  eastwards 
along  the  snow-covered  surface  of  the  Pei-lu.  Though, 
in  answer  to  our  frequent  questions,  we  were  continually 
being  vaguely  assured  of  their  existence,  it  was  not  till 
we  reached  Shi-Kho  that  any  definite  information  was 
forthcoming.  A  blacksmith  there  informed  us  that 
not  only  were  kulon  constantly  seen  from  the  road 
between  Shi-Kho  and  the  village  of  Yandzhikhai,  but 
that  two  Chantos  actually  possessed  a  tame  one  not  far 
from  the  latter  place. 

Two  stages  over  rising  treeless  ground,  with  an 
unbroken  expanse  of  snow  in  every  direction,  and  a 
cutting  wind  which  froze  the  breath  to  our  beards  and 
moustaches  till  we  could  hardly  open  our  mouths  to 
speak,  brought  us  to  the  small  village  with  the  un- 
pronounceable name.  On  hearing  from  the  head-man 
that  the  Chantos  owning  the  tame  kulon  lived  ten  miles 
to  the  south,  on  the  edge  of  the  foot-hills,  I  decided 
to  pay  them  a  visit,  the  opportunity  of  seeing  one  of 
these  animals  in  captivity  being  too  good  to  lose. 

Early  in  the  morning  after  our  arrival,  Pereira  and  I, 
with  one  man  as  a  guide,  started  off,  making  a  detour 
in  search  of  a  herd  of  kulon  which  had  been  recently 
seen  in  the  vicinity.  We  did  find  their  tracks,  but  soon 
had  to  give  up  looking  for  them,  owing  to  a  blinding 
snowstorm,  which  made  it  impossible  to  see  more  than 
fifty  yards  in  any  direction.  It  was  a  mystery  to  me  how 
our  guide  found  his  way,  for  any  track  that  there  might 
have  been  was  completely  covered  by  the  snow.  How- 
ever, with  almost  uncanny  native  instinct,  he  led  us 
unerringly  to   our   destination,   a  large  mud-hut  by  a 


CENTRAL   DZUNGARIA    IN    WINTER. 


A    DOMESTICATED    KULON    AND    ITS    CKANTO    OWNER. 


C02I 


THE   GAME   OF   THE   PLAINS  603 

frozen  stream.  We  were  soon  all  sipping  tea  in  front  of 
a  blazing  fire,  which  made  our  faces  tingle  and  the  water 
drip  from  our  snow-covered  garments.  The  kulon  was 
with  us  inside  the  house  in  company  with  several  calves. 
It  was  perfectly  docile,  but  had  stubbornly  resisted  every 
effort  on  the  part  of  its  captors  to  break  it  to  the  saddle. 
Two  years  previously  these  two  Chantos  had  surprised  a 
herd  of  mares  and  young  among  some  low  hills.  Gallop- 
ing down  upon  them,  they  had  captured  one  of  the  foals, 
then  only  a  day  or  two  old,  and  had  brought  it  up  on 
goats'-milk.  Though  I  offered  the  men  a  considerable 
sum  for  it,  they  would  not  part.  I  should  have  liked 
to  have  taken  it  home  to  England,  and  to  have  given  it 
to  the  Zoological  Society,  where  this  variety  of  wild-ass 
is  unrepresented,  though  I  doubt  if  it  would  have  sur- 
vived the  long  journey  to  India. 

On  the  following  morning  I  took  several  photographs 
of  it.  From  the  roof  of  the  house  I  spotted  a  large  herd 
of  kulon,  but  they  were  on  such  fiat  country  that  it 
was  not  worth  while  attempting  to  approach  them,  and 
I  contented  myself  with  a  long  look  through  the  telescope. 
I  decided,  on  the  suggestion  of  our  hosts,  to  return  to 
Yandzhikhai  through  some  low  hills,  where  there  were 
said  to  be  sheep  at  this  season.  To  my  great  sur- 
prise we  did  see  several  sheep,  one  or  two  carrying 
quite  good  heads,  but,  though  the  formation  of  the 
ground  was  very  suitable  for  stalking,  I  failed  to  shoot 
one,  the  reason  being  that,  thinking  we  should  not  be 
likely  to  see  anything  worth  a  shot,  I  had  donned  a  pair 
of  Russian  felt  boots,  to  keep  my  feet  warm  while  riding. 
Though  they  are  about  the  best  footgear  for  that 
purpose,  they  are  quite  the  worst  in  which  to  climb 
steep,  snow-covered  slopes.     Judging  by  the   shape   of 


6o4  DZUNGARIA 

their  horns,  these  sheep  were  0.  karelini,  which  had 
been  driven  down  from  the  high  plateaux  to  the  south  by 
the  rigours  of  the  winter.  On  the  following  day,  while 
driving  along  the  main  road,  we  saw  a  herd  right  down 
on  the  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  and  certainly  not 
more  than  i,ooo  ft.  above  sea-level.  I  should  imagine 
that  there  must  be  some  magnificent  sheep-ground 
somewhere  among  the  confused  mass  of  mountains  at 
the  head  of  the  Manas  River,  close  to  the  Yulduz  divide. 

It  was  in  Guchen  that  we  next  came  in  touch  with 
the  kulon.  A  wild-looking,  bow-legged  Kirghiz  was 
seen  hobbling  through  the  bazaar  with  the  skin  of  a 
freshly  killed  kulon  over  his  shoulder.  He  informed  us 
that  he  came  from  the  kum  (sand),  to  the  north,  and 
that  kulon  were  very  numerous  there.  As  we  were 
anxious  to  visit  this  sand-dune  area,  we  seized  the  oppor- 
tunity of  killing  two  birds  with  one  stone,  and  on  the 
following  morning  started  off  in  a  north-easterly  direction, 
with  this  Kirghiz  as  our  guide.  Two  long  days  in  the 
saddle  brought  us  to  his  aoul  situated  on  the  edge  of 
the  sand,  among  tall  saxaul  scrub.  So  easy  is  it  to 
lose  one's  way  in  the  maze  of  sand-dunes  that  even  the 
nomads,  who  are  past  masters  in  the  art,  or,  more 
correctly,  instinct,  of  finding  their  way,  have  to  build 
cairns  of  brushwood  to  mark  the  position  of  their  camps. 

There  certainly  were  fair  numbers  of  kulon  about, 
but,  as  they  stuck  to  the  flat,  hard  country,  away  from 
the  sand,  a  near  approach  was  quite  out  of  the  question. 
I  have  vivid  recollections  of  wrigghng  along  serpent-wise, 
with  my  sleeves  and  pockets  full  of  snow,  trying  to  keep 
concealed  behind  a  bush  held  in  front.  Five  hundred 
yards  was  as  near  as  I  ever  got,  but  it  was  only  thanks 
to  their  curiosity  ;   they  saw  through  my  feeble  attempt 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  605 

at  concealment  long  before  that.  Just  when  I  was 
considering  the  chances  of  a  long  shot  they  would  wheel 
round  and  gallop  off,  a  muddle  of  tails  and  hoofs  amid 
a  cloud  of  flying  snow.  We  were  told  that,  during 
severe  storms,  they  come  in  among  the  sand-dunes  for 
shelter,  and  it  is  then  that  they  are  shot. 

No  doubt  the  reader  is  wondering  why  I  took  all 
this  trouble  to  try  and  shoot  a  beast  which  is  of  little  or 
no  value  as  a  hunting  trophy,  and  which,  at  any  rate 
in  Tibet,  is  looked  upon  by  hunters  as  nothing  less  than 
a  pest,  owing  to  the  irritating  habit  it  has  of  approaching 
the  hunter  out  of  curiosity,  and  so  warning  nobler  game 
of  his  presence,  though  in  this  respect  the  "  kiang  "  of 
Tibet  must  be  very  different  from  his  near  relative,  the 
kulon  of  Dzungaria.  I  was  anxious  to  secure  a  specimen 
of  the  wild-ass,  so  as  to  be  able  to  prove  to  which  variety 
it  belongs,  no  specimen  having  been  previously  brought 
to  England  from  this  region. 

It  was  not  till  July,  when  crossing  the  Dzungarian 
Gate  north  of  Ebi  Nor,  on  our  way  from  the  Barlik- 
Maili  Mountains  to  the  Borotala,  that  I  at  length  secured 
two  specimens  at  the  very  last  opportunity  which  pre- 
sented itself.  I  can  remember  that  day  well,  as  being 
one  of  the  hottest  I  have  ever  experienced.  While  the 
caravan  started  off  on  its  day's  march  across  the  de- 
pression to  a  spring  in  the  Kizil  Tagh  on  the  western 
side,  my  hunter  and  I  struck  off  in  a  southerly  direction 
to  visit  a  spring  situated  at  the  edge  of  the  hills  on  the 
eastern  side.  He  informed  me  that  this  spring,  being 
the  only  one  for  many  miles,  was  much  frequented  by 
kulon. 

Although,  when  we  reached  the  spring,  a  maze  of 
fresh  tracks  in  the  loose,  dry  earth  made  by  both  kulon 


6o6  DZUNGARIA 

and  gazelle  proved  his  statement  to  be  true,  a  careful 
search  in  the  vicinity  revealed  no  signs  of  their  presence. 
We  had  started  off  at  a  sharp  trot  westwards,  intent 
on  catching  up  with  the  caravan,  and  had  left  the  hills 
behind  us,  when  some  moving,  mirage-distorted  objects 
caught  our  eyes.  The  glasses  showed  them  to  be  kulon, 
moving  slowly,  almost  straight  towards  us.  Hastily  dis- 
mounting, we  led  the  horses  into  a  slight  hollow  which 
effectively  hid  us  all  from  view.  After  moving  forward 
a  short  way  all  together,  I  left  my  man  with  the  horses, 
and  continued  to  advance  by  myself,  making  for  a  clump 
of  sandstone  mounds.  On  reaching  their  welcome 
shelter  I  at  once  saw  that  I  was  in  a  very  favourable 
position,  for  the  kulon,  now  only  some  500  yards  away, 
were  taking  a  line  that  would  bring  them  within  100 
yards  of  my  position.  They  were  moving  slowly  along, 
occasionally  nibbling  at  the  low  saxaul  bushes,  which 
covered  the  ground  in  places,  evidently  making  for  some 
shady  spot  among  the  hills,  there  to  indulge  in  their 
midday  siesta.  As  soon  as  they  were  fairly  opposite 
my  position,  I  fired  at  the  leader,  killing  him  dead  in 
his  tracks,  and  then  made  two  disgraceful  shots  as  they 
galloped  away.  After  going  100  yards  or  so  they  stood 
a  moment  to  look  back,  and  I  dropped  another.  They 
were  both  four  or  five-year-old  males,  and  measured 
respectively  50  in.  and  53  in.  at  the  shoulder;  they 
looked  very  smart  and  well-groomed  in  their  short, 
glossy  summer  coats. 

With  the  exception  of  the  belly  and  rump-patch, 
which  are  white,  the  body  is  sandy  fawn,  the  whole  of 
the  legs  being  of  the  same  colour,  though  of  a  slightly 
lighter  shade  ;  from  the  short,  dark-brown  mane  to  the 
tail-tuft  runs  a  chocolate-coloured  dorsal  stripe,  with  a 


f  ••• 

o 

D 

,'^i^p 

THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  607 

narrow,  dirty  white,  or  very  light  fawn,  margin.  The 
tail,  with  its  black  end-tassel,  is  very  mule-like ;  in  fact, 
in  its  whole  appearance  the  animal  resembles  a  mule 
more  than  a  donkey.  The  ears  are  short  and  horse-like, 
with  dark-brown  tips  and  thickly-haired  edges  ;  the 
upper  portion  of  the  face  is  of  a  dark,  sandy  fawn, 
merging  into  an  almost  white  nose  ;  the  throat  and 
chest  are  "  isabelline."  The  nose  of  the  kulon  is  only 
very  slightly  rounded  in  profile. 

On  comparing  one  of  my  specimens  with  an  adult 
Tibetan  kiang  {Equus  hemionus  kiang),  in  summer 
coat,  in  the  possession  of  the  British  Museum,  I  found 
several  marked  differences,  as  might  be  expected  from 
the  different  environment  of  the  two  animals.  The 
kiang  is  never  found  below  an  altitude  of  15,000  ft., 
while  the  kulon  of  Mongolia  rarely  reaches  an  altitude 
of  3,000  ft.,  and,  at  any  rate  in  Dzungaria  and  portions 
of  Russian  Turkestan,  is  found  at  an  altitude  of  only 
700  ft.  above  sea-level.  This  accounts  for  the  former 
carrying  a  much  rougher  and  more  wavy  coat  than  the 
latter.  The  general  body-colour  of  a  kiang  is  "  rufus  " 
chestnut  instead  of  the  pale  fawn  of  the  more  desert- 
loving  kulon  ;  its  dorsal  stripe  is  also  less  pronounced 
and  without  any  light  margin.  But  the  greatest  differ- 
ence of  all  is  that,  in  the  kiang,  the  whole  of  the  legs  are 
white,  while  in  the  kulon  they  are  light  sandy  fawn, 
right  down  to  the  hoof. 

My  specimens  are  undoubtedly  Equus  hemionus 
typicus,  called  by  Mongols  **  Chigetai "  and  by  Turki 
people  "kulon."  Its  extreme  eastern  distribution  is 
at  present  imperfectly  known ;  Sir  Francis  Young- 
husband,  in  his  journey  across  the  Northern  Gobi,  men- 
tions seeing  kulon  in  the  Gobi  at  the  extreme  eastern 
II — 19 


6o8  DZUNGARIA 

end  of  the  Altai.  They  are  found  north  of  the  Altai 
Range  on  the  plains,  round  the  large  lakes  in  the  Kobdo 
region  ;  we  met  with  them  near  Barkul,  and  in  several 
other  places  throughout  Southern  Dzungaria.  West- 
wards they  extend  throughout  Northern  Russian  Turke- 
stan, being  exceedingly  numerous  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Lake  Balkash.  During  the  summer  they  frequent 
foot-hills,  where  the  grass  does  not  get  so  burnt  up  as  on 
the  plains  ;  during  the  winter  they  roam  all  over  the 
steppes,  eating  snow  in  place  of  water.  The  natives  hunt 
them  occasionally  for  their  skins  and  meat,  which  they 
consider  more  palatable  than  the  best  mutton.  The 
heat  was  so  great  at  the  time  these  two  specimens  were 
killed  that  within  ten  hours  the  hair  showed  signs  of 
"  slipping  "  in  places,  and  it  was  only  with  the  greatest 
difficulty  that  one  complete  skin  was  saved. 

The  wild-ass  is  not  the  only  species  of  equus  that 
exists  in  Dzungaria,  for  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  wild- 
horse  [Equus  cahallus  prjevalskii)  also  inhabits  the 
northern  portions  of  that  region.  We  were  never  lucky 
enough  to  see  any,  but  the  natives,  both  Kalmuk  and 
Kazak,  all  told  the  same  tale,  often  volunteering  the 
information  that,  in  addition  to  the  kulon,  there  were 
wild-horses.  They  described  them  as  being  very  like  the 
kulon,  but  having  longer  and  blacker  manes  and  tails  ; 
also,  they  said,  the  meat  was  not  so  good.  They  told 
us  that  there  were  large  herds  of  them  in  the  vicinity 
of  Lake  Ulungur,  and  eastwards  along  the  southern  foot 
of  the  Altai ;   also  north  of  that  range. 

I  have  now  only  to  mention  what  I  might  call  the 
"  low  country  '*  wapiti,  and  the  tiger.  As  we  were 
never  fortunate  enough  to  see  either  of  these  in  the  flesh, 
there  is  not  much  that  I  can  write   in  connexion  with 


THE   GAME   OF  THE   PLAINS  609 

them.  The  habitat  of  the  stag  points  to  its  being  identical 
with  Cervus  cashmirianus  yarkandensis  of  the  Tarim 
basin,  on  the  south  of  the  Tian  Shan.  The  altitude, 
the  dense  reed-beds,  and  the  poplar  forests  are  identical. 
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  no  specimen  of  this 
Dzungarian  stag  has  ever  been  brought  to  Europe  for 
identification.  They  are  not  much  hunted  by  the  natives, 
owing  to  the  density  and  mosquito-scourged  nature  of 
their  country,  the  mountain  wapiti  (Cervus  canadensis 
asiaticus)  being  more  numerous  and  much  easier  to 
secure.  Their  habitat  is  the  whole  of  the  jungle-covered 
country  from  just  east  of  the  Manas  River  to  the  south- 
east of  Ebi  Nor. 

The  tiger  inhabits  the  same  country  as  the  wapiti, 
though,  perhaps,  keeping  rather  more  to  the  dense  reed- 
jungle.  It  is,  however,  not  entirely  restricted  to  the 
plains,  for  in  the  Kash,  Kunguz,  and  Jingalong  valleys, 
on  the  Upper  Hi  River,  it  is  found  at  an  altitude  of  from 
4,000  ft.  to  5,000  ft.  among  the  thick  scrub  on  the  edge 
of  the  spruce  forest.  Every  year  a  few  tiger-skins  find 
their  way  into  the  Urumchi,  Manas,  or  Shi-Kho  bazaars. 
They  are,  in  nearly  every  case,  secured  in  winter,  by  the 
farmers  and  herdsmen  living  on  the  edge  of  the  jungle, 
by  means  of  poisoned  carcasses  of  sheep  or  goats.  Very 
few  of  the  natives  would  dare  to  fire  at  a  tiger,  with 
their  generally  inaccurate  firearms.  We  met  several 
men  who  had  seen  them,  but  they  all  admitted  that  they 
had  an  absolute  dread  of  them.  Wild-pig,  which  abound 
throughout  all  the  country,  are  undoubtedly  the  tigers' 
staple  food,  but  during  the  winter  they  occasionally 
raid  a  farmer's  flocks,  and  it  is  then  that  poisoned  car- 
casses are  laid  out  for  them. 

During  the  summer,  mosquitoes,  the  density  of  the 


6io  DZUNGARIA 

jungle,  and  the  boggy  nature  of  large  areas  of  the  country, 
make  hunting  impossible.  In  winter,  when  the  whole 
land  is  frozen,  and  covered  with  snow,  and  much  of 
the  vegetation  is  knocked  down  by  the  frost,  a  hardy 
sportsman  would  stand  a  good  chance  of  getting  a  shot 
at  a  tiger,  though  I  doubt  if  they  are  anywhere  numerous. 
Having  found  out  where  a  beast  had  recently  been  seen, 
the  best  plan  would  be  to  take  up  one's  quarters  in  a 
yurt  in  the  vicinity.  Messengers  would  then  be  des- 
patched far  and  wide,  informing  every  one  that  a  substan- 
tial reward  awaited  whoever  brought  in  reliable  informa- 
tion as  to  the  whereabouts  of  a  tiger.  The  sportsman 
would  probably  have  to  put  up  with  a  long,  cold  wait, 
but  the  triumph  of  securing  such  a  rare  trophy  would  be 
ample  recompense.  At  the  same  time,  there  would 
always  be  the  chance  of  a  stag,  about  which  nothing 
is  known  definitely  at  present. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  tiger  which  in- 
habits Dzungaria  and  the  Tarim  basin,  also  the  Ala  Kul, 
Balkash,  Syr  Darya,  and  other  portions  of  Russian 
Turkestan,  is  a  very  different  animal  to  the  Manchurian 
variety.  It  is  not  so  long-haired,  and  it  is  considerably 
smaller  and  less  finely  marked. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX    A 

THE   DUNGANS 

In  the  brief  sketch,  given  in  Chapter  XIII,  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Dzungaria  only  slight  mention  was  made  of  the  Dungans, 
or  Tungans,  as  the  Mohammedan  Chinese  of  the  north-western 
parts  of  the  Empire  are  called. 

These  people,  however,  claim  much  attention,  and  a  more 
detailed  description  of  them  is  required,  not  only  on  account  of 
the  peculiar  position  they  hold  in  the  Chinese  Empire,  but  on 
account  of  the  disturbances  they  caused  in  past  times  and  the 
danger  they  threaten  to  become  in  the  future.  Moreover,  in  a 
book  dealing  with  countries  forming  the  frontiers  of  Islam  and 
Buddhism,  the  fact  of  a  considerable  and  increasing  population 
of  Mohammedan  Chinese  calls  for  further  information  on  the 
subject. 

The  Dungans  of  Dzungaria  are  located  on  the  outskirts  both 
of  the  Chinese  Empire  and  of  the  Islamic  world.  They  are  in  an 
entirely  different  position  to  the  Mohammedan  Chinese  of  the 
central  provinces,  for,  instead  of  being  isolated,  they  are  in 
close  proximity  to  the  great  Mohammedan  centres  of  Central 
Asia,  and  the  vicinity  of  this  great  Mohammedan  population 
— both  in  Chinese  and  in  Russian  Turkestan — grants  them  an 
increased  prestige. 

It  is  not  surprising  to  find  a  strong  Mohammedan  element 
in  China  when  we  realize  the  fact  that,  not  only  had  the  power 
of  Islam  spread  from  the  Atlantic  to  Central  Asia  within  a  cen- 
tury of  the  death  of  Mohammed,  but  that  the  Arabs  themselves 
had  been  in  communication  with  China  for  nearly  two  centuries 
before  the  birth  of  Islam.  We  have  to  remember  that,  when 
the  first  waves  of  the  Arab  conquest  spread  across  Central  Asia, 
China  was  in  closer  communication  with,  and  more  influenced 

613 


6i4  APPENDIX 

by,  Western  Asia  than  it  is  even  in  these  days.  Early  in  the 
seventeenth  century  China  was  in  actual  danger  of  experiencing 
the  savage  onslaught  of  Kutaiba,  the  Arab  conqueror  of  Central 
Asia;  for,  after  bringing  the  lands  bordering  on  the  Chinese 
Empire  under  his  subjection,  the  Arab  general  seriously  con- 
sidered the  question  of  demanding  the  submission  of  the  Celestial 
Empire.  On  one  occasion  they  even  came  to  blows,  the  Chinese 
army  of  200,000  men  being  defeated ;  but  the  flow  of  Islam 
into  Western  China  was  finally  arrested  by  the  death  of  Kutaiba 
and  the  overthrow  of  the  Omeyide  dynasty.  The  spread  of 
Islam  is  one  of  the  marvels  of  history,  and  it  is  not  strange  that 
an  Empire  with  a  number  of  Mohammedan  protectorates,  as 
China  has,  should  produce  a  "half-caste"  element  professing 
this  faith. 

In  the  days  following  the  introduction  of  Islam  into  Central 
Asia,  China  had  dominion  over  many  tribes  of  Turkish  descent 
who  were  the  earliest  to  embrace  the  new  religion.     These  people 
came  of  a  fighting  race,  and  on  several  occasions  were  able  to 
aid  China  when  troubles  at  home  found  her  in  a  difficult  position. 
For  example,  we  are  told,  that  in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century 
some  4,000  "  Arabs  "  (probably  Uigur,  Tadjik,  or  Usbeg  Moham- 
medans from  the  present-day  Chinese  and  Russian  Turkestan) 
came  to  the  assistance   of   the  Emperor  of    China  and   helped 
to  quell  a  rebellion.     These  troops,  we  are  expressly  told,  never 
returned  to  their  original   home,   but   settled  in  the  home  pro- 
vinces   of    China    and    married    Chinese    wives.     It  has   been 
suggested  that  these  people  were  one  of  the  sources  from  which 
sprang  the  five  or  more  millions  of  Mohammedans  who  now  thrive 
within  the  Empire.     On  other  occasions,  also,  people  of  Moham- 
medan  faith  settled  in  China.     Records  exist  which  tend  to 
show  that,  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  century,  there  were  as  many 
as  4,000  families  residing  in  Sianfu,  who  had  originally  come  from 
Central  Asia.     These  people  had  entered  China  for  various  reasons, 
and,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  returning  home, — caused  by  the 
unsettled  state  of  Central  Asia  at  that  date, — they  had  asked 
permission  to  remain  as  settlers.     The  Chinese  granted  them 
their  desire,  and  used  them  as  mercenaries,  paying  them  a  monthly 
allowance. 


THE    DUNGANS  615 

Another  proof  of  the  theory  that  the  Chinese  Mohammedans  are 
of  Turki  origin,  is  found  in  the  derivation  of  the  title  "  Hui-hui," 
by  which  they  are  known  throughout  the  Empire.  This  term, 
according  to  Dr.  Bretschneider,  was  given  formerly  to  the  Uigurs 
of  Northern  Mongolia,  a  people  of  pure  Turki  origin  who  were 
afterwards  driven  out  of  Mongolia,  and  formed  a  kingdom  in 
Southern  Dzungaria  and  Chinese  Turkestan.  These  people  em- 
braced Islam,  and  were  no  doubt  the  main  source  from  which 
emanated  the  Turki  Moslem  communities  in  China  Proper, 
It  is  easy  to  understand  how,  in  time,  the  name  came  to  be 
applied  to  all  Moslems. 

The  next  great  movement  which  brought  China  into  close 
communication  with  Western  Asia  and  Islam  was  that  resulting 
from  the  conquests  of  Jenghis  Khan.  This  great  Mongol  con- 
queror destroyed  the  capitals  of  the  Islamic  civilization,  and 
the  seats  of  Mohammedan  learning,  and,  by  virtue  of  this,  China, 
under  the  Mongol  Emperors,  became  almost  the  sole  protector 
of  Islam  in  Central  Asia.  Vast  numbers  of  Mohammedans  now 
began  to  flock  into  China.  Jenghis  Khan  himself  spared  the  lives 
of  all  those  who  could  be  of  use  to  him,  and  transported  Arab 
and  Persian  skilled  artisans,  and  men  of  learning  into  Cathay. 
This  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a  strong  Mussulman  com- 
munity in  China,  which  increased  rapidly  in  power  and  in 
wealth,  which  kept  its  religious  independence,  although  it  lost 
its  individuality  as  a  nation,  and  which  rapidly  assimilated 
its  neighbours  and  surroundings,  until  the  entire  community 
became  Chinese  in  all  but  name. 

The  Chinese  Moslem  can  generally  be  distinguished  from 
other  Celestials  by  his  physiognomy,  his  build,  and  some  small 
details  in  his  habits.  So  closely,  however,  do  they  sometimes 
approach  each  other  in  type,  that  they  are  almost  indistinguish- 
able except  for  certain  differences  discovered  only  after  much 
observation.  On  the  whole,  it  was  the  manner  and  bearing 
of  the  Dungan  that  most  impressed  me  and  proved  him  as 
different  to  his  fellow-subjects.  Energy  and  keenness,  even  if 
mixed  with  some  insolence,  make  him  preferable  to  deal  with. 
Usually  of  a  fine  build,  with  a  bridged  nose  and  a  modified 
almond-shaped  eye,  the  Moslem  always  shows  some  trace  of  his 


6i6  APPENDIX 

Turki  origin,  and  his  habit  of  following  the  Mussulman  custom  of 
shaving  the  lower  portion  of  the  upper  lip  enables  one  to  identify 
him  in  far  Western  China.  I  am  unaware  if  this  habit  is  adopted 
by  all  followers  of  the  Prophet  throughout  China  Proper, 

It  is  said  that  the  Mohammedan  can  be  detected  by  his  manner 
of  speech,  and  that  many  speak  dialects  of  corrupt  Mongolian 
or  Turki  origin ;  but  this  detail  could  only  be  distinguished  by 
scholars  who  are  well  acquainted  with  the  various  and  confus- 
ing dialects  of  the  Chinese  language. 

It  will  be  noted,  therefore,  that  the  Mohammedan  Chinese 
were  originally  "  half-breeds,"  and,  consequently,  through  in- 
creased virility,  they  have  had  an  advantage  which  has  enabled 
them  to  become  an  important  and  numerous  element  of  the 
Chinese  Empire.  Islam  does  not  appear  to  have  been  pro- 
pagated in  China  either  by  the  sword  or  by  the  making  of 
converts,  but  solely  by  the  rapid  increase  of  an  originally 
small  community  of  foreigners,  who  married  Chinese  wives  and 
naturally  brought  up  their  families  in  their  own  faith.  The  most 
significant  remarks  on  this  subject  were  made  by  the  writer 
Du  Halde  in  1735,  which  I  will  quote  from  Mr.  Broomhall's 
Islam  in  China.  He  speaks  of  the  "  Mohammedan  sect,  settled 
above  six  hundred  years  ago  in  divers  provinces,  where  they  live 
in  quiet,  because  they  take  no  great  pains  to  extend  their 
doctrine  and  make  proselytes.  In  ancient  times  they  increased 
their  numbers  solely  by  the  alliances  and  marriages  they  con- 
tracted ;  but  for  some  years  past  they  have  made  a  consider- 
ableprogress  by  help  of  their  money.  They  everywhere  buy  up 
children  whose  parents,  unable  to  educate  them,  make  no  scruple 
to  sell  them.  During  a  famine  which  wasted  the  province  of 
Shantung  they  purchased  above  ten  thousand.  They  marry  them, 
and  either  buy  or  build  a  considerable  share  of  a  city,  and 
even  whole  country  towns,  to  settle  them  in.  Hence,  by  little 
and  little,  they  are  grown  to  such  a  head  in  many  places  as  not 
to  suffer  any  to  live  among  them  who  goes  not  to  the  mosque  ; 
by  which  means  they  have  multiplied  exceedingly  within  three 
hundred  years." 

The  exact  number  of  Mussulmans  within  the  Chinese  Empire 
cannot  be  estimated  with  any  degree  of  certainty.     The  Moslems 


THE    DUNCANS  617 

themselves,  who  alone  have  any  idea  of  their  numbers,  exaggerate 
the  total  to  such  an  extent,  in  their  endeavour  to  increase  their 
prestige,  that  the  figures  cannot  be  relied  upon.  The  estimates 
vary  in  a  bewildering  way  from  3,000,000  to  70,000,000  ;  but 
it  seems  that  some  reliance  is  to  be  placed  in  Mr.  Broomhall's 
carefully  collected  data  and  general  summary  of  the  maximum 
and  minimum  Mussulman  population  of  the  different  provinces. 
The  conclusion  he  comes  to,  is  that  the  total  number  of  Moham- 
medans within  the  Empire  is  somewhere  between  5,000,000  and 
10,000,000.  This,  of  course,  includes  the  Turki-Moslem  popula- 
tion of  Sin-Kiang, — which  probably  amounts  to  between  1,000,000 
and  2,700,000  of  the  total, — as  well  as  the  true  Chinese  Moslem, 
the  Hui-hui,  or  Dungan. 

In  spite  of  recent  persecution  the  Moslems  retain  a  strong 
hold  on  what  they  possess,  and,  owing  to  their  greater  virility, 
increase  more  rapidly  than  the  Chinamen,  and  are  therefore  able 
to  keep  up  their  numbers  and  make  good  the  check  caused  by 
recent  insurrections,  and  the  massacres  which  followed.  It  is, 
however,  probable  that  the  Moslems  have,  on  the  whole,  lost  and 
not  gained  ground  during  the  last  fifty  years. 

Whether  the  pan-Islamic  movement  will  cause  a  religious 
revival  or  not,  remains  to  be  seen.  Closer  relations  may  spring 
up  between  the  Chinese  and  the  Central  Asian  Moslem  com- 
munities, owing  to  the  definite  advance  of  the  Moslem  nomadic 
tribes  from  Russian  Central  Asia  into  China,  and  to  the  rapid 
increase  of  the  resident  population  of  Dungans  in  Dzungaria. 
In  fact,  the  chain  of  Islam  across  Asia  is  now  complete. 

There  is  small  likelihood,  however,  of  a  complete  under- 
standing taking  place  between  China  and  her  Moslem  subjects. 
The  feeling  between  the  two  sections  is  more  bitter  to-day  than 
before  the  insurrection  of  1862-77.  The  Moslem  in  China  is  also 
probably  more  fanatical  than  his  far  western  co-religionist,  who 
is  slowly  becoming  accustomed  to  European  ideas  and  to  the 
advance  of  science  and  increased  facilities  of  communication. 
Travellers  in  China  state  that  only  amongst  the  Moslems  do 
they  meet  with  studied  insolence  and  undisguised  dislike.  The 
rebellions  of  1862-77  tended  to  prove  that  the  fanatical  feeling 
existing  between  the  Moslems  and  Chinese  had  in  no  sense  abated 


6i8  APPENDIX 

The  mention  of  the  Chinese  Moslems  of  Sin-Kiang,  or  the 
New  Dominion,  called  for  these  further  details  on  the  subject 
of  Islam  in  China.  With  regard  to  this  region,  the  Dungans 
— the  general  term  for  the  Chinese  Moslems  of  the  far  western 
province — are  concentrated  in  Southern  Dzungaria,  whereas 
the  remainder  of  Sin-Kiang  is  almost  entirely  peopled  by  Turki 
Moslems,  who  were  doubtless  the  progenitors  of  the  half-bred 
Turki-Chinese  Dungans,  with  whom,  however,  they  now  possess 
nothing  in  common  beyond  the  religious  point  of  view. 

It  appears  that  the  Dungans  are  mostly  colonists  from  the 
Moslem  populations  of  Kansu  and  Shensi.  The  name  has  a 
doubtful  origin;  Vambery  suggests  that  it  means  "convert," 
and  that  the  Dungans  of  Dzungaria  represent  the  Chinese 
who  were  converted  to  Islam  in  the  fifteenth  century  by  an 
Arab  taken  by  Timor,  or  Tamerlane,  from  Damascus  to  Central 
Asia.  The  colonists,  transported  thither  by  the  Emperor  Kien- 
lung  in  the  eighteenth  century,  also  embraced  Islam  and  added 
to  the  number  of  Dungans. 

Vambery' s  theory  of  the  conversion  of  the  pure  Chinese  to 
the  Mohammedan  faith  remains,  however,  without  confirmation, 
although  several  writers  agree  with  his  explanation  of  the  term 
Dungan.  Amongst  these  is  Abd-ul-Aziz,  a  Mullah  of  Kulja. 
who  wrote  on  the  Moslems  of  China.  The  name  Dungan,  or 
Tungan,  according  to  him,  is  derived  from  the  verb  tunmck — 
"to  turn" — in  the  Turki  language,  as  used  in  Central  Asia. 
The  word  has  become  familiar  to  Europe  through  the  Russians 
who  have  adopted  it  from  their  Turki  subjects  in  Turkestan 
Abd-ul-Aziz  does  not  believe  that  the  Arabs  had  anything  to 
do  with  the  origin  of  the  Dungans,  as  their  physiognomy  and 
customs  are  Mongolian  ;  but  he  does  not  mention  to  what  extent 
he  considers  that  the  Turki  people  of  Central  Asia  mingled  with, 
and  married,  Chinese  women  in  the  past. 

Other  writers,  again,  affirm  that  all  attempts  to  discover  the 
exact  meaning  of  the  word  Dungan  have  proved  unsatisfactory. 
In  China  Proper  the  Moslems  are  always  called  "  Hui-hui"  ;  the 
most  accepted  translation  of  the  word  signified  by  the  character 
"  Hui  "  is  the  phrase  "  to  return,"  which  may  be  the  equivalent 
of  the  Arabic  "  Islam" — "  to  return  and  to  submit." 


SAIRAM   NOR 


619 


APPENDIX    B 


THE   ANCIENT   STRANDS   AND   BARRIERS   OF   SAIRAM   NOR 

Sairam  Nor  is  a  lake-basin  situated  in  the  mountains  to  the 
north  of  Kulja,  at  an  altitude  of  5,900  ft.  above  sea-level.  The 
mountain-wall  surrounding  the  basin  is  complete,  except  at  a 
narrow  opening  on  the  east,  between  the  Kanjik  ridge  on  the 
north  and  the  Kuz-imchik  on  the  south,  through  which,  it  appears, 
that  the  basin  once  drained  to  the  Ebi  Nor  basin  on  the  Dzungarian 
plains  below.     At  the  eastern  end  of  the  Sairam  Nor  basin,  there 


^y^CIEJiJ^T     STRANDS   AND    BARRTEHS    0:F     SAIRAM   TVOR 


statute  Miles 
o 


are  signs  that  the  level  of  the  lake  was  once  much  higher  than 
it  is  at  the  present  day,  and  that  in  all  probability  the  area 
was  transformed  into  a  lake-basin,  at  no  very  distant  date,  by 
the  formation  of  skrees  from  the  Kanjik  and  Kuz-imchik  ridges, 
which  raised  a  barrier  and  enclosed  the  drainage.  The  distance 
between  the  eastern  edge  of  the  lake  and  the  barrier  is  about 
five  miles ;  the  whole  of  this  area  was  once  occupied  by  the 
lake,  as  proved  by  the  succession  of  shingle-banks  which  remain, 
showing  where  once  the  strong  west  winds  heaped  up  those 


620  APPENDIX 

barriers,  in  the  same  way  as  they  are  doing  on  a  minor  scale  at 
the  present  day. 

Along  the  eastern  edge  of  the  lake  these  barriers  are  in 
actual  process  of  formation.  As  will  be  seen  by  the  diagram, 
there  are  two  completely  formed  shingle-banks  enclosing  lagoons 
and  a  third  one  not  so  completely  formed.  In  the  course  of  time 
the  lagoons  will  dry  up  and  more  shingle-banks  will  be  left 
high  and  dry  on  the  shore.  An  almost  imperceptible  rise  leads 
to  another  very  large,  crescent-shaped  bank  ;  beyond  this  are 
two  small  banks,  and  then  another  large  one ;  farther  still,  at 
a  longer  interval,  is  the  last  bank  before  arriving  at  the  actual 
barrier  of  skrees,  which  is  the  watershed  between  the  lake- 
basin  of  Sairam  Nor  and  the  valley  draining  to  Ebi  Nor, 

All  the  banks  conform  to  the  shape  which  the  eastern  end 
of  the  lake  must  have  had  when  the  water-level  stood  at  that  of 
a  given  bank  ;  this  is  especially  noticeable  at  the  oldest  or  most 
easterly  one.  The  banks  are,  of  course,  now  covered  with  soil 
and  support  the  scanty  steppe-flora  such  as  is  found  round  the 
edge  of  the  basin.  No  lagoons  or  shingle-banks  were  seen  in 
any  other  part  of  the  lake. 

The  prevailing  wind  is  from  the  west,  the  Sairam  Nor  plateau 
having  a  reputation  for  winds  of  extraordinary  violence.  These, 
when  concentrated  in  the  narrow  neck  formed  by  the  Kanjik 
and  Kuz-imchik  ridges,  have  their  strength  intensified,  and  the 
gradual  heaping  up  of  shingle-banks  takes  no  great  time.  A 
proof  of  the  strength  of  the  winds  was  given  us  when  we  passed 
along  the  southern  edge  of  the  lake  in  the  month  of  January, 
for  we  noticed  that  its  frozen  surface  was  so  covered  with  gravel 
and  grit  blown  on  to  the  ice  that  it  was  brown  instead  of  white. 
All  this  was  gradually  being  swept  up  towards  the  eastern  end, 
and  no  doubt  eventually  went  to  add  to  the  accumulation  of 
material  which  is  being  slowly  banked  up  there. 

The  precipitation  of  rain  in  summer  and  snow  in  winter  is 
considerable,  and  the  area  which  drains,  into  the  lake  would  be 
sufficient  to  cause  an  overflow,  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  the 
drainage  seems  to  be  exhausted  by  the  surrounding  country, 
before  it  reaches  the  lake.  It  is  noteworthy  that  there  are  no 
streams  entering  the  lake  above  ground,  neither  did  there  appear 


THE    SUMMITS    OF    KARLIK   TAGH 


621 


to  be  any  water-courses  which  might  carry  the  surplus  of  water, 
during  especially  heavy  rainfalls.  Sairam  Nor  is  probably  formed 
entirely  by  spring-water,  which  is  counteracted  by  evaporation. 
Although  the  natives  would  not  use  the  water,  we  found  that 
its  salinity  was  scarcely  noticeable.  The  native  story  that  ruins 
are  to  be  seen  below  the  water,  may  be  another  proof  of  the 
comparative  recent  formation  of  Sairam  Nor, 


APPENDIX    C 

THE   SUMMITS   OF   KARLIK   TAGH 

As  a  guide  to  future  travellers,  and  for  any  one  who  may  be 
urged  by  a  desire  to  climb  the  unconquered  peaks  of  Karlik  Tagh, 
I  add  this  note  and  the  accompanying  diagrams,  to  show  the 
position  and  comparative  altitude  of  the  highest  points  of  the 
range.  Further  exploration — of  an  alpine  nature — will  alone 
show  to  what  extent  my  deductions  are  correct ;  the  adjoining 
sketch  may,  however,  stand  as  a  groundwork,  and  the  numbered 
peaks  as  a  standard,  on  which  to  base  further  work. 

Fig.  I  shows  the  view  from  Hami,  or  Kumul,  at  a  distance 
of  fifty  miles  from  Peak  No.  II.     It  is  only  from  such  a  distance 


Fi^a 


VIEW  OF  HIGHEST  PEAKS  OF  KARUK  TAGH  FROM  RIOCE  SOUTH  OF  UPPER  BARDASH  VALLEY 


■EDt  5H* 


OUTLINE  OF   KARUK   TAGH  FROM  KUMUL  (  SO  Miles  distant  ftwn    highest  peak) 


622  APPENDIX 

that  a  general  view  of  the  highest  points  can  be  obtained  ;  on  ap- 
proaching closer  the  outlying  foot-hills  hide  all  the  peaks  west  of 
No.  VII,  and  add  to  the  difficulty  of  taking  rehable  clinometrical 
readings.  From  a  point  a  few  miles  to  the  south  of  Peak  No.  VI, 
and  in  a  direct  line  between  it  and  Hami — where  the  first  sketch 
was  made — I  obtained  another  clear  view  of  the  same  peaks. 
These  two  sketches  prove  to  be  almost  duplicates  of  each 
other. 

From  the  first,  I  placed  Peak  II,  as  the  highest  point  visible 
on  the  south  side  of  the  range,  although  I  had  doubts  as  to  Peak  I, 
for  it  seemed  to  lie  so  far  back  that  it  might  have  even  equalled 
No.  II  ;  but  a  chance  view  of  Nos.  I,  II,  IV,  and  VI  from  the 
Khamar  Pass  between  the  Edira  and  Bardash  valleys,  proved  to 
me  that  No.  I  was  of  considerably  lower  altitude.  Peak  I  lies 
at  the  head-waters  of  the  Edira  Valley,  and  from  its  two  small 
glaciers  spring  the  two  sources  of  the  Edira  River. 

Peaks  II,  IIP,  III,  IV,  V  and  VI  are  all  reached  by  the 
Bardash  Valley,  and  all,  with  the  exception  of  No.  V,  he  in  a 
semicircle  around  the  head-waters  of  the  Bardash  River,  and 
drain  into  it.  The  exact  position  of  No.  V  remains  undecided ; 
it  either  stands  on  the  watershed  between  Nos.  IV  and  VII  and 
drains  into  an  unexplored  right  affluent  of  the  Karchamak,  or 
it  is  a  high  peak  which  lies  entirely  over  the  watershed  {i.e.  on 
the  north  side). 

The  next  group  of  peaks  eastwards  is  composed  of  Nos.  VII 
and  VIP,  which,  with  VIP  lying  in  between  the  two  (but  in- 
visible from  the  positions  at  which  the  accompanying  sketches 
were  made),  form  a  semicircle  around  the  head  of  the  Khotun-tam 
valley.  The  summit  of  Peak  VII  would  be  accessible  from  the 
ridge  which  lies  between  the  Khotun-tam  and  Karchamak 
valleys,  and  a  very  extensive  and  instructive  view  of  the  alpine 
region  would  be  obtained  if  an  ascent  were  made. 

East  of  Peak  VIP  the  range  runs  out  in  a  straight,  narrow, 
serrated  ridge  to  Peak  IX,  the  most  easterly  summit  visible  from 
the  south.  It  keeps  a  very  even  altitude  ;  there  are  no  cols  or 
passes,  and  only  a  few  peaks  stand  out  as  landmarks  distinguish- 
able at  a  distance.  Peak  IX  lies  behind  the  highest  source  of 
the  Little  Koshmak  Valley;  east  of  this  the  ridge  extends  for  about 


11—20 


623 


624  APPENDIX 

four  miles  at  an  altitude  just  below  that  of  perpetual  snow. 
Peak  X,  which  we  ascended  to  a  height  of  13,240  ft.,  lies  over  the 
watershed  on  the  north  side,  and  is  not  visible  from  the  south. 
On  the  northern  side  there  are  many  outlying  peaks, — spurs  of 
the  main  ridge  and  equal  to  it  in  height.  The  most  prominent 
of  these  are  Nos.  XI,  XII,  XIII,  XIV,  and  XV.  Between  Peaks 
XIV  and  XV  is  an  alpine  region,  which  I  was  unable  to  fill 
in  in  detail ;  the  configuration  of  this  part  of  the  actual 
watershed  remains  doubtful.  I  think  that  there  is  a  wide  ex- 
panse of  snow-field,  and  that  the  range  is  deeper  here  than  else- 
where, which  hindered  me  from  recognizing — from  the  north — 
my  old  points  such  as  Peaks  II  to  VII. 

The  culminating  point  of  Karlik  Tagh  was  estimated  by  the 
first  explorers  at  12,000  ft.  Kozloff,  in  1895,  put  the  altitude 
of  the  highest  peak  at  15,000  ft.  A  later  estimate  was  that 
obtained  by  Stein's  surveyor,  who  marked  two  principal  peaks, 
— which  seem  to  correspond  to  my  Nos.  I  and  II, — and  puts 
their  height,  by  clinometer,  at  12,930  ft.  and  13,070  ft.  re- 
spectively. 


APPENDIX    D 

THE   LIFE-ZONES  OF   NORTH-WESTERN   MONGOLIA  AND   DZUNGARIA 

The  portion  of  Inner  Asia  comprising  the  countries  described 
in  these  volumes,  forms  a  somewhat  remarkable  area  as  regards 
the  distribution  of  Asiatic  flora  and  fauna ;  it  also  contains 
the  lines  of  demarcation  between  the  ranges  of  many  different 
species.  Although  the  whole  of  the  Yenisei  basin,  North-western 
Mongolia,  and  Dzungaria  are  situated  within  one  zoographical 
area — the  Palaearctic,  yet  the  variety  of  altitude  and  climate 
that  they  contain  and  the  extent  of  latitude  that  they  stretch 
over,  as  well  as  the  variety  of  flora  they  produce,  allow  the 
existence  of  a  remarkable  variety  of  animal  life.  These  regions 
include  the  easterly  range  of  many  European  and  Western 
Asiatic  species,  the  southern  limit  of  a  great  many  Siberian  varie- 
ties, the  northern  range  of  some  Chinese  and  Indian,  as  well  as 
the  entire  range  of  a  few  species  peculiar  to  this  part  of  Asia.     As 


625 


626  APPENDIX 

a  whole,  Mongolia  has  a  representative  fauna  of  the  Central  Asiatic 
type ;  but  its  northern  edge,  bordering  on  Siberia,  includes  a 
considerable  number  of  species  peculiar  to  the  temperate  forests 
of  the  northern  Palaearctic  region.  This  is  especially  noticeable 
in  the  Uriankhai  country,  between  the  Syansk  and  Tannu-ola 
ranges,  which,  although  lying  within  the  boundaries  of  Outer 
Mongolia  and  being  in  itself  a  terrace  between  the  Siberian 
plain  and  Mongohan  plateau,  yet  possesses  a  fauna  and  flora 
entirely  Siberian.  Dzungaria  has,  on  the  whole,  a  Central  Asian 
fauna,  but  a  few  Siberian  species  range  thus  far  into  the  heart 
of  the  continent. 

We  can,  first  of  all,  draw  a  main  dividing-line  between  typical 
Siberian  and  Central  Asian  flora  and  fauna ;  this  will  roughly 
follow  the  southern  limit  of  the  forest-zone.  The  southern  or 
Central  Asian  portion  of  this  division  will  again  be  subdivided 
by  the  insular  Tian  Shan  mountain-group,  which  forms  in  itself 
a  peculiar  and  isolated  faunistic  and  floristic  zone.  Another 
dividing-line  is  necessary  between  the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai,  to 
show  the  exact  limits  of  the  special  types  peculiar  to  each 
region.  The  first  great  faunistic  division  to  be  delimitated  is  that 
between  Siberia  and  Inner  Asia.  In  the  course  of  our  journey 
we  first  passed  the  line  of  demarcation  between  these  two  areas 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Tannu-ola  Mountains.  This  water- 
shed between  Arctic  and  Mongolian  drainage  may  be  taken  as 
the  junction  of  the  two  zones,  although,  of  course,  they  overlap 
and  there  is  a  broad  neutral  zone  between  them. 

Broadly  speaking,  the  Tannu-ola  is  the  southern  limit  of  such 
species  as  the  reindeer,  moose,  beaver,  many  fur-bearing 
animals,  squirrels,  black-game  {Tetrao  tetrix),  hazel-grouse 
{Tetrastis  honasia),  and  capercailzie  {Tetrao  urogallus);  the  same 
range  forms  roughly  the  northern  limit  of  such  Central  Asian 
types  as  the  wild-sheep  {Ovis  ammon),  wild-horse  {Equus  prjeval- 
skii),  marmots,  and  a  host  of  small  mammals. 

The  neutral  zone,  of  which  I  spoke,  consists  mainly  of  moun- 
tain-groups such  as  the  Altai  and  Turgun,  or  Kundelun,  which 
extend  southv.-ards  into  Mongolia  across  the  watershed  of  Arctic 
drainage ;  these  by  their  altitude  compensate  for  the  more 
southern  latitude.    On  these  mountains  we  find  that  the  ranges 


LIFE-ZONES  627 

of  many  Siberian  and  Mongolian  species  overlap.  The  Turgun 
Range,  for  instance,  is  more  truly  Mongolian  than  the  Tannu- 
ola.  This  forms  the  northern  limit  of  the  yak ;  it  is  here  we 
first  meet  with  the  ovis  amnion, — although  it  formerly  ranged 
on  to  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Tannu-ola;  here,  too,  begin  the 
snow-leopard,  the  marmot,  and  the  snow-cock.  Siberian  types 
are  represented  by  the  ptarmigan  {Lagopus  rupestris),  which 
ranges  thus  far  over  the  Tannu-ola. 

The  Altai  Range  is  difficult  to  define  as  belonging  exclusively 
to  either  faunistic  zone  ;  but  I  should  continue  the  line  of  de- 
marcation, which  runs  the  length  of  the  Tannu-ola,  along  the 
Little  Altai  and  thence  in  a  south-easterly  direction  along  the 
crest  of  the  Great,  or  Mongolian  Altai  to  the  head-waters  of  the 
Black  Irtish.  In  other  words,  all  that  part  of  the  Altai  which 
drains  into  the  Arctic  should  belong  to  the  Siberian,  whilst  the 
remainder  should  represent  a  portion  of  the  Mongolian  zone.  The 
Urungu  basin  should  probably  be  included  in  the  former.  Beyond 
the  Altai,  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  lies  the  lowland  of  Dzun- 
garia,  which  connects  the  plains  of  Siberia  with  the  plateau 
of  Mongolia,  and  across  which  continues  the  line  of  demarcation 
between  the  two  main  life-zones,  as  well  as  another  secondary 
line  to  show  the  subdivision  between  Altai — whether  Mongolian 
or  Siberian — and  Tian  Shan  fauna. 

The  first  and  most  important  line,  which  we  have  so  far  traced 
to  a  point  on  the  crest  of  the  Altai  somewhere  between  the 
sources  of  the  Black  Irtish  and  the  Urungu  rivers,  now  continues 
across  the  central  plains  of  Dzungaria,  cuts  in  between  the 
mountain  groups  of  Barlik  and  Urkashar  on  the  south  and  the 
Sair  and  Tarbagatai  on  the  north ;  and  runs  westwards  into 
Northern  Turkestan.  This  line  forms  the  southern  limit  of  the 
Siberian  larch  tree  (Larix  sihirica)  and  the  northern  limit  of 
the  Chukar  partridge  {Caccahis  chukar)  and  the  Tian  Shan  spruce 
{Abies  schrenkiana).  But  most  forms  peculiar  to  the  Tian  Shan 
area  stop  at  the  Ala-tau,  and  do  not  extend  their  range  across 
the  Dzungarian  depression,  or  Gate,  to  the  Barlik  Mountains. 

Practically  the  whole  of  Dzungaria  belongs  to  the  Central 
Asian  zone,  which  includes  the  subdivisions  of  the  Tian  Shan 
and  Mongolia.     The  plains  form  a  neutral  ground  for  some  widely 


628  APPENDIX 

distributed  species,  whose  ranges  here  meet  and  overlap.  The 
saiga  antelope  {Saiga  tartarica)  of  the  Russian  and  Siberian 
steppes,  for  instance,  extends  across  Dzungaria  as  far  as  Long.  92° 
East,  but  no  farther  ;  the  wild-ass  {Equus  hemionus)  also  ranges 
as  far  eastwards,  its  place  being  taken  farther  east  by  Prjevalsky's 
wild-horse.  On  the  90°  meridium  of  Longitude,  Prjevalsky  found 
that  the  ranges  of  these  two  overlapped. 

The  southern  border-range — the  Tian  Shan,  together  with 
the  Ala-tau  and  Barlik  groups,  constitute  an  isolated  area  in  the 
midst  of  the  Central  Asian  zone,  while  in  the  east  the  Altai  Mongo- 
lian foims  another  subdivision  which  needs  careful  demarcation. 

A  certain  amount  has  been  written  and  much  conjectured,  as 
to  the  probability  of  the  "overlapping"  of  the  Altai  and  Tian 
Shan  fauna  and  flora  in  the  ranges  of  Barkul  and  Karlik  Tagh. 
The  traveller  Grum-Grjimailo  considered  that  he  had  estab- 
lished a  sure  proof  that  the  Barkul  and  Karlik  Tagh  Mountains 
should  be  distinguished  from  the  Tian  Shan  and  included  in  the 
Altai  system  (see  Geog.  Journ.,  vol.  xiii,  1891)  ;  but  I  think  that 
his  evidence  goes  to  prove  that  these  ranges  form  a  neutral 
ground  between  the  two  main  mountain-systems.  Orographically 
they  belong  to  the  Tian  Shan  group,  but,  from  the  point  of  view 
of  their  flora  and  fauna,  they  show  affinities  relating  to  both 
systems. 

The  Altai  and  Tian  Shan  mountain  sj^stems  approach  each 
other  to  within  a  hundred  miles,  the  intervening  space  being 
occupied  by  high  steppe,  which  forms  the  first  rise  from  the 
Dzungarian  lowlands  to  the  Mongolian  plateau.  This  eastern 
extension  of  the  Tian  Shan  chain,  which  approaches  so  closely 
to  the  Altai  Range  and  which  extends  far  into  Mongolia  before 
disappearing  in  the  Gobi  Desert,  is  composed  of  the  ranges 
called  the  Bogdo-ola,  Barkul,  and  Karlik  Tagh,  and,  still  farther 
east,  the  Ati  Bogdo.  It  is  somewhere  amongst  these  mountains 
that  the  true  dividing-line  exists  between  the  two  subdivisions. 

The  western  portion  of  this  line  has  been  already  deter- 
mined as  lying  between  the  Barhk-Urkashar  and  the  Tarbagatai 
groups  ;  thence  it  runs  across  the  plains  towards  the  south-east ; 
on  reaching  the  Baitik  Bogdo  the  line  divides  into  two,  which 
enclose  a  neutral  zone  before  meeting  again  in  the  Western  Gobi. 


LIFE-ZONES  629 

The  southern  of  these  two  branch-Hnes  cuts  across  the  Tian  Shan 
system  at  the  Tou-shui  plateau  between  the  Bogdo-ola  and 
Barkul  ranges,  and  thence  passes  along  the  south  of  the  Karlik 
Tagh.  The  northern  line  runs  south  of  the  Baitik  Mountains — 
the  almost  isolated  range  between  the  Urungu  River  and  Bogdo- 
ola  Mountains,  and  thence  continues  towards  the  east,  either 
embracing  the  Ati  Bogdo  in  the  neutral  zone  or  leaving  it  to  the 
Altai-Mongolian  subdivision.  All  to  the  north  of  these  lines 
is  Altai  and  Mongolian,  to  the  west  and  south  is  Tian  Shan  and 
Chinese  Turkestan  fauna ;  but  the  neutral  zone,  thus  enclosed, 
has  a  strange  mixture  of  both  fauna  and  flora.  This  area  is  com- 
posed chiefly  of  the  Barkul  and  Karlik  Tagh  ranges ;  the  most 
easterly  portion — the  Ati  Bogdo — must  remain  in  an  indefinite 
position,  for  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  sufficient  details  re- 
garding its  fauna  to  place  it  definitely  within  either. 

Of  the  fauna  of  the  Karlik  Tagh,  the  wild-sheep  is  of  a  species 
peculiar  to  the  Tian  Shan  {Ovis  ammon  karelini),  and  it  is  the 
same  with  the  wapiti,  ibex,  and  roe-deer  ;  the  snow-cock  and 
rock-partridge  are  also  Central  Asian  varieties.  The  forests  of 
the  Karlik  Tagh  are  chiefly  composed  of  the  Tian  Shan  spruce 
{Abies  schrenkiana).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of 
larch  {Larix  sibirica)  gives  the  Karlik  Tagh  the  aspect  of  Altai 
scenery ;  and  the  existence  of  certain  mammals, — such  as  picas, 
or  tailless  hares  {Ochotona),  and  mole-rats  [Ellobius)  of  species 
closely  allied  to  those  of  the  Altai  system — show  the  affinity  that 
the  fauna  of  this  region  has  to  that  of  the  Altai.  The  brown 
partridge  of  this  region  is  the  Mongolian  variety  (Perdix  daurica). 
The  Ati  Bogdo  Range,  which  lies  about  180  miles  to  the 
east  of  Karlik  Tagh, — but  is  only  connected  with  it  by  a  succes- 
sion of  very  low  desert-hills, — probably  belongs  to  the  neutral 
zone.  Kozloff ,  the  Russian  explorer,  reports  finding  larch  forests, 
wild-sheep,  and  roe-deer  in  this  range ;  and  in  all  probability 
these  would  prove  to  be  of  the  same  varieties  as  found  on  Karlik 
Tagh.  Altai  fauna  extends  even  farther  to  the  east,  for  it 
follows  the  long,  low  extension  of  spurs  which  run  out  in  an 
east-south-easterly  direction  from  the  main  Altai  to  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Lat.  44°  and  Long.  401.°  All  these  ranges  contain 
the  wild-sheep  and  the  snow-cock  peculiar  to  the  Altai  and  North- 


630  APPENDIX 

west  Mongolia.  There  is  a  westerly  delimitation  to  the  neutral 
zone  in  a  hard-and-fast  line  drawn  across  the  Tou-shui  (or  Chi- 
ku-ching)  plateau  between  the  Barkul  and  Bogdo-ola  ranges, 
which  defines  the  beginning  of  true  Tian  Shan  flora  and  fauna. 

If  we  take  the  principal  varieties  of  animal-life  separately, 
and  show  their  distribution,  it  will  be  seen  how  these  zones  con- 
form or  overlap,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  wild-sheep,  for  instance, 
which  are  so  typical  of  the  large  fauna  of  Asia,  range,  in  suitable 
localities,  over  the  whole  of  the  area  described,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Upper  Yenisei  basin.  The  Mongolian  zone  holds  the 
Ovis  amnion  typica,  the  Tian  Shan  has  only  the  Ovis  ammon 
karelini,  while  a  small  variety,  Ovis  ammon  sairensis,  exists  on 
the  isolated  ranges  mid-way  between  the  habitats  of  the  other 
two,  namely,  the  Barlik,  Urkashar,  and  Sair  Mountains,  which  lie 
on  either  side  of  the  main  divisional  line  between  Siberian  and 
Central  Asian  fauna,  in  Northern  Dzungaria.  Of  the  goat  tribe, 
ibex  (var.  Capra  sibirica  typica)  are  found  over  the  whole  area 
from  Siberia  to  the  Tian  Shan,  those  belonging  to  the  central 
part  of  the  latter  region  being  distinguished  as  a  variety — 
C.  sibirica  almasyi. 

The  deer  are  well  represented  throughout  the  entire  region, 
but  the  peculiarly  local  distribution  of  forests  in  Inner  Asia  causes 
their  habitats  to  be  unevenly  scattered  and  spasmodic.  Wapiti 
[Cervus  canadensis  asiaticus)  and  roe-deer  {Capreolus  pygargus) 
exist  all  over  the  Upper  Yenisei  basin  and  in  the  forested 
Altai ;  while  closely  allied  varieties  {Cervus  canadensis  songarica, 
or  eustephanus,  and  Capreolus  pygargus  tianshanicus)  range  over 
the  northern  forested  slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan,  Ala-tau,  and 
Barlik  ranges,  and  extend  eastwards  as  far  as  does  the  forest. 
The  large  wapiti  probably  stop  at  the  Karlik  Tagh,  but  the 
roe-deer  range  to  the  Ati  Bogdo.  Another  species  {Cervus 
cashmirianus  yarkandensis),  whose  main  habitat  is  Chinese 
Turkestan,  ranges  into  Dzungaria,  being  found  in  the  jungles 
of  the  Manas  River.  Musk-deer  are  found  only  in  the  mountains 
of  the  Upper  Yenisei  basin ;  the  range  of  the  reindeer,  as  described 
in  Chapter  VIII,  does  not  extend  southwards  beyond  the  walls 
of  this  basin.  Another  northern  form,  the  beaver,  still  exists 
in  the  uppermost  sources  of  the  Yenisei,  and,  it  is  said,  in  the 


LIFE-ZONES  631 

highest  tributaries  of  the  Black  Irtish  in  the  Mongolian  Altai. 
Many  other  fur-bearing  animals  range  as  far  south  as  the  main 
dividing-line  between  Siberian  and  Central  Asian  fauna,  but  no 
farther  ;  although  in  some  cases  they  turn  up  again,  in  sHghtly 
modified  forms,  in  the  Tian  Shan. 

The  gazelle  are  typical  of  an  arid  climate, — such  as  Inner  Asia 
possesses, — and  they  are  generally  to  be  met  with  in  the  open 
plains  south  of  the  main  dividing-hne.  In  Mongoha,  however, 
a  mountain — or  rather  a  plateau — variety  exists,  and  this  gazelle 
{Gazella  gutturosa)  extends  its  range  northwards  on  to  the  high 
steppes  such  as  exist  in  Siberia  at  the  head-waters  of  the  Ob 
River.  The  common  gazelle  of  the  region  is  the  Goitred  Gazelle 
{Gazella  suhgutturosa)  and  its  allies,  which  have  a  wide  range 
from  Western  Asia  to  Mongolia.  Bear  are  found  wherever 
there  is  sufficient  forest-area,  and  wild-pig  range  over  the  entire 
region  both  on  plain  and  plateau  ;  of  both  these  forms,  however, 
the  Tian  Shan  zone  produces  slightly  different  varieties.  Tiger 
are  met  with  only  in  the  most  southerly  portion  of  the  region, 
and  are  of  the  small,  thin-haired  Central  Asian  type.  The  long- 
haired Manchurian  tiger  does  not  range  into  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Yenisei  basin,  which  is  the  only  portion  of  our  region 
which  might  be  expected  to  hold  it.  Snow-leopards  are  to  be 
found  on  all  mountain  ranges  as  far  north  as  the  Turgun  and 
Altai. 

Of  bird-life,  there  is  not  much  to  record,  except  regarding 
the  ranges  of  resident,  non-migratory  species,  such  as  the  game- 
birds.  From  a  collection  of  about  256  species,  I  scarcely  found 
a  variety  that  I  had  not  already  collected  in  Russian  Turkestan, 
this  alone  showing  how  truly  Central  Asian  is  the  fauna  of  Dzun- 
garia.  The  distribution  of  the  game-birds  shows,  however,  certain 
distinctive  areas.  The  northern  forests  hold  the  capercailzie, 
the  black-cock,  the  hazel-grouse,  and  on  the  hill-tops  the 
ptarmigan.  Of  these  only  the  black-game  extend  to  the  Tian 
Shan,  the  ptarmigan  reach  to  the  northern  part  of  the  Mongolian 
Altai,  the  capercailzie  and  hazel-grouse  go  no  farther  south- 
wards than  the  Upper  Yenisei  basin. 

The  dividing-line  between  the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai  fauna 
demarcates  the  northern  limit  of  the  Chukar  partridge,  but  the 


632  APPENDIX 

Brown  partridge  {Pcrdix  perdix)  extends  its  range  from  Siberia 
into  the  Central  Asian  zone,  being  found  as  far  as  the  Bogdo-ola 
Range.  The  Bearded,  or  Daurian  Partridge  {Perdix  daurica), 
ranges  from  its  true  habitat — Mongoha,  northwards  into  the 
Siberian  zone  and  southwards  into  the  Altai-Tian  Shan  neutral 
zone.  Pheasants  are,  of  course,  found  in  all  suitable  localities 
throughout  the  entire  area.  The  Mongolian  pheasant  inhabits 
the  Hi  Valley  and  all  the  Dzungarian  river-valleys,  such  as  the 
Borotala,  Manas,  and  Irtish  ;  while  a  rare  variety  {Phasianus 
hagenbecki)  is  found  on  the  lower  Kobdo  River  in  North-west 
Mongolia.  Two  varieties  of  snow-cock  are  found  within  the 
region,  one — Tetraogallus  altaiciis,  is  peculiar  to  the  Mongolian- 
Altai  zone,  and  the  other — Tetraogallus  himalayensis,  ranges 
into  the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai-Tian  Shan  neutral  zone,  from  its 
true  habitat,  the  Himalayas. 


APPENDIX    E 

TERMS   OF   THE   RUSSO-MONGOLIAN   PROTOCOL  ' 

The  following  is  a  careful  precis  of  the  agreement,  signed  on 
November  3rd,  1911,  between  Russia  and  the  Mongolian  Princes, 
with  regard  to  the  rights  and  privileges  of  Russians  in  Mongolia 
and  Mongols  in  Russia. 

(i)  Russian  subjects  shall,  as  in  the  past,  have  the  right 
freely  to  live  and  travel  in  all  parts  of  Mongolia,  to  conduct 
business,  estjfcblish  factories,  and  arrange  affairs  with  all  in- 
dividuals or  companies,  official  or  private,  whether  of  Russian, 
Mongol,  Chinese,  or  other  nationality. 

(2)  Russian  subjects  shall,  as  in  the  past,  have  the  right  to 
import  and  export  at  all  times  all  products  and  manufactures  of 
Russia,  Mongoha,  China,  and  other  countries  duty  free,  and 
to  conduct  free  trade  exempt  from  all  duties  and  taxes. 

(3)  Russian  banks  shall  have  the  right  to  establish  branch 
banks  throughout  Mongolia,  and  conduct  banking  business  with 
all  individuals  and  companies. 

^  As  published  in  the  Morning  Post  of  December  20th,  1912,  and  in- 
serted here  by  kind  permission  of  the  editor. 


THE    RUSSO-MONGOLIAN    PROTOCOL  633 

(4)  Trade  can  be  conducted  for  ready  money  or  on  credit, 
but  in  the  case  of  credit  transactions  the  Mongol  Princes  or  the 
Treasury  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  the  credit  of  private 
individuals. 

(5)  No  monopoly  can  be  established  either  in  commerce  or 
manufacture.  The  Mongolian  authorities  shall  not  prevent 
Mongols  or  Chinese  from  doing  business  with  Russian  subjects, 
nor  prevent  their  employment  in  Russian  commercial  industrial 
enterprises. 

(6)  Russian  subjects  shall  have  the  right  to  lease  or  buy 
land  in  all  towns  and  cities  throughout  Mongolia  and  establish 
commercial  enterprises  and  manufactures,  build  houses,  stores, 
and  go-downs,  and  lease  vacant  land  for  agricultural  purposes. 
Pasture-lands  and  places  set  apart  for  religious  purposes  are 
not  included. 

(7)  Russian  subjects  are  free  to  arrange  with  the  Mongolian 
Government  concessions  regarding  mining,  forestry,  fishing, 
and  other  business  enterprises. 

(8)  The  Russian  Government  shall  have  the  right  to  establish 
Consulates  in  Mongolia  wherever  it  is  deemed  necessary  after 
consultation  with  the  Mongolian  Government.  The  latter  shall 
have  a  corresponding  right  to  appoint  Mongolian  representatives 
along  the  Russian  frontier. 

(9)  Wherever  Russian  Consulates  are  established  or  Russian 
business  is  conducted,  Russian  trade  settlements  can  be  estab- 
lished, which  will  be  under  the  administration  of  Russian  Consuls, 
or,  where  there  are  no  Consuls,  under  the  administration  of  the 
senior  Russian  merchant. 

(10)  Russian  post  offices  can  be  established  throughout 
Mongolia,  with  postal  services  to  the  Russian  frontier,  at  the 
cost  of  the  Russian  Government. 

(11)  Russian  Consuls  shall  have  the  right  to  use  Mongolian 
post-stations  without  charge  provided  that  the  number  of  horses 
to  be  furnished  by  the  Mongols  shall  not  exceed  one  hundred 
monthly  nor  the  number  of  camels  thirty. 

(12)  All  Mongolian  rivers  flowing  into  Russian  territory  and 
the  branches  thereof  are  open  to  navigation  by  Russian  subjects 
with  Russian  vessels.     The  Russian  Government  will  assist  the 


634  APPENDIX 

Mongolian  Government  in  the  conservation  of  these  rivers  and 
the  improvement  of  navigation  by  buoying  and  lighting,  and 
Russian  subjects  shall,  in  accordance  with  Article  6,  be  granted 
areas  on  river  frontages  as  stopping-places  for  Russian  vessels, 
and  can  there  build  wharves  and  go-downs. 

(13)  Russian  subjects  desiring  to  transport  goods  and  live 
stock  shall  have  the  right  to  use  rivers  and  roads  in  Mongolia, 
and  with  their  own  money  can  build  bridges,  and  establish  ferries, 
and  collect  fees  from  the  people  using  these  bridges  and  ferries. 

(14)  Grazing-lands  in  Mongolia  shall  be  reserved  for  the  use 
of  liocks  belonging  to  Russian  subjects  when  migrating,  and 
such  lands  can  be  used  for  three  months  without  payment,  after 
which  period  charges  can  be  made. 

(15)  All  rights  and  privileges  enjoyed  hitherto  by  Russian 
subjects  along  the  frontier  for  hunting,  fishing,  and  the  cutting 
of  grass  in  Mongolia  are  confirmed. 

(16)  In  regard  to  the  procedure  to  be  followed  in  connexion 
with  business  and  other  agreements  between  Russian  subjects 
and  Mongols  and  Chinese,  it  is  provided  that  property  transfers 
must  be  written  and  that  the  contracts  must  be  submitted  to 
MongoHan  officials  and  the  Russian  Consuls  for  approval.  If  a 
dispute  arises  in  a  case  it  must  be  submitted  to  arbitration.  If 
it  is  still  unsettled,  the  case  must  be  sent  before  a  mixed  tribunal, 
which  shall  be  permanent  where  a  Russian  Consul  is  stationed. 
In  other  places  a  temporary  tribunal  shall  be  organized  by  a 
Russian  Consul  and  the  Mongolian  Prince  in  whose  territory  the 
defendants  reside,  each  side  engaging  to  execute  the  findings  of 
the  Court,  the  Russian  Consul  on  Russian  subjects,  and  the 
Mongol  Prince  on  the  Mongols  or  Chinese. 

(17)  The  protocol  takes  effect  from  the  date  of  signature. 

The  protocol  is  drawn  up  in  Russian  and  ]\IongoHan  in  dupli- 
cate, and  the  copies  were  signed,  sealed,  and  exchanged  at  Urga 
on  the  24th  day  of  the  last  month  of  autumn  of  the  second  year 
of  the  Mongohan  Sovereign,  or  November  3rd,  1911. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Adrianoff,  a.  B.  :    Travels  in  Altai  and  Trans-Syansk.     St.  Petersburg. 

1896.     (Russian.) 
Atkinson,  T.  W.  :  Travels  in  the  Regions  of  the  Upper  and  Lower  Amoor, 

London,   i860. 

Oriental  and  Western  Siberia.     London,  1858. 

Bell,   M.  S.  :     The   Great  Central  Asian  Trade   Route   from   Pekin   to 

Kashgar  {Proc.  R.G.S.,  Vol.   XII.   (1890),   pp.  57-93)- 
BoNiN,  Charles  Endes  :    Voyage  de  Pekin  au  Turkestan  Russe  par  le 

Mongolie,  le  Koukou-nor,  le  Lop-nor  et  la  Dzoungarie  {La  Geographic, 

B.S.G.,  Paris,  Vol.  III.  (1901),  pp.  115-122,  169-180,  map). 
BoRRODAiLE,  A.  A.  :    Notes  of  a  Journey  in  Northern  Mongolia  in  1893 

(Geographical  Journal,  Vol.  V.  (1895),  pp.  562-574). 
Broomhall.  M.  :    Islam  in  China.     London,  1910. 
Campbell,  C.  W.  :     North-east  Mongolia  and  Karakorum  {Geog.  Journ., 

Nov.  1903,  Vol.  XXII..  and  Blue  Book). 
Chalon,  p.  F.  :    En  Mongolie  :    le  pays  des  Saiotes  {Revue  de  Geographie. 

Vol.  LIV.  (1904),  passim,  map  and  illust.). 
Church,  P.  W.  :    Chinese  Turkestan  with  Caravan  and  Rifle.     London, 

1901. 
Curtin,  J.:    The  Mongols:    A  History.     London,   1908. 
Delmar  Morgan,  E.  :  Prjevalsky's  Journeys  and  Discoveries  in  Central 

Asia  {Proc.  R.G.S.,  April  1887). 
Demidoff,  E.  :  After  Wild  Sheep  in  the  Altai  and  MongoUa.  London,  1900, 
Deniker,    J.  :     Les    explorations   russes    en   Asie   Centrale,    1 871-1895. 

{Annales  de  Geographie,  Vol.  VI.  (1897),  pp.  408-430,  map). 
Denniker  :    The  Races  of  Man.     London,  1900. 
Donner,    Otto  :     Voyage  en    Turkestan,    et    en    Dzoungarie    en    1898 

{Fennia,  Vol.  XVIII.  (1901),  No.  4,  pp.  53,  map). 
Eden,  Richard  :   The  History  of  Travayle  in  the  West  and  East  Indies 

and  other  Countries  lying  to  either  way.     ist  Edition.     1555. 
Elias,   Ney  :    Narrative  of   a  Journey  through  West  Mongoha    {Geog. 

Jour.,  Vol.  XLIIL,  1873). 
Elias  and  Ross  :    Tarikh  i  Rashidi.     London,  1895. 
Erman,  a.  :   Travels  in  Siberia.     London,  1848. 

Etherton,  p.  T.  :    Across  the  Roof  of  the  World.     London,   191 1. 
Frontiers  of  Dzungaria  :  Vol.  I.,  Part  I.     Tomsk,  1912.     (Russian.) 
Futterer,  Dr.   K.  :    Durch    Asien.     2    vols.,  maps    and  illust.     BerUn, 

1901-1909. 

635 


636  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

9 

Gibbon,  Edw.  :   Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.     London,  1825. 
GiLMOUR,  J.  :    Among  the  Mongols. 

More  about  the  Mongols.     London,  1893. 

GowAN,  W.  E.  :    Mongolia,  with  an  Introduction  on  "  The  Partition  of 

China  "  {Imp.  and  Asiatic  Quarterly  Rev.,  Vol,  V.  (1898),  pp.  387-400). 
Grano,  J.  G.  :  Archaeologische  Beobachtungen  von  meiner  Reisen  in  den 

nordhchen    Grenzgegenden    Chinas,    1906,    1907.     Map    and   illust.. 

Helsingfors,  1909. 
• Archaeologische   Beobachtungen   von   meiner  Reisen  in   Sudsibirien 

und  der  Nordwest-Mongolei,    1909.     Maps  and  illust.     Helsingfors, 

1910. 
Grum-Grjimailo,    G.    E.  :     Description   of   Travels    in   Western   China. 

3   vols.  (Russian),  maps  and  illust.     St.  Petersburg,   1896,   1907. 
Summary  of  Journey.     Trans,  by  E.  Delmar  Morgan  {Proc.  R.G.S., 

Vol.  XIII.,  1891). 
Hadley,  J.  :    Tramp  in  Dark  Mongolia.     London,  1910. 
Hakluyt  :    The  Journey  of  Friar  WilUam  of  Rubruck    [Hakluyt  Soc. 

Publication.     Second  Series.     No.  IV.,  1900). 

Notes  on  Russia.     Hakluyt  Soc.   Pub.  (Vol.  XL,  1851-2). 

Cathay   and    the  Way  Thither.     Hak.    Soc.    Pub.    (Vol.   XXXVL, 

XXXVII. ,   1866). 
Hannah  :   A  brief  History  of  Eastern  Asia.     London,  1900. 
HowoRTH,  H.  H.  :    The  History  of  the  Mongols.     London,  1880. 
Hue,  E.  R.  :    Travels  in  Tartary  and  Tibet.     1852. 

Christianity  in  China  and  Tartary  and  Tibet.     1857. 

• The  Chinese  Empire.     1855. 

Huntington,  Ellsworth  :    The  Pulse  of  Asia.     London,  1910. 

Problems  in  Exploration.     Central  Asia  {Geog.  Journ.,  Vol.  XXXV. 

1910). 
Jefferson,  R.  L.  :    Roughing  it  in  Siberia,  etc.     London,  1897. 
Keane,  a.  M.  :   Asia.     Vol.  I.     London,  1906. 
Klementz,  D.  :    Voyages  de  Dmitri  Klementz  en  Mongolie  occidentale, 

1 888-1 897  (in  Bull,  de  la  Societe  de  Geographie.      Paris,  Vol.  XX. 

1899,  pp.  308-329,  map). 
KozLOFF,  p.  K. :    Mongolia  and  Kam.     Works  of  the  Imperial  Russian 

Geographical     Society's     Expedition,      1 899-1901.       Several     vols. 

{B.ussiaL.n),  maps  and  illust.     St.  Petersburg,    1905-1911.     Summaries 

in  La  Geographie,  Vol.   III.  (1901),   pp.  41-46,  and  V.    (1902),  pp. 

273-278,  with  maps. 
Kriloff,  R.  N.  :     Journey  to  the  Uriankhai  Region,   1892  (Bulletin  of 

the  Imperial  Russian  Geographical  Society,  Vol.  XXIX.  (1893),  pp. 

274-291,  map.     (Russian.) 
Description    of    the  Uriankhai   Region    {Memoirs    of    the   Imperial 

Russian    Geographical    Society,    Vol.   XXXI V.    (1893),    No.   2,  maps 

and  illust.     (Russian.) 
Kropotkin,  Prince  P.  :  The  Orography  of  Asia  {Geog.  Journ.,  Vol.  XXIII., 

1904). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  637 

Kropotkin,    Prince    P. :   The  Desiccation  of  Asia   {Geog.  Journ.,  Vol. 

XXIII.,  1904). 
Lacosti.   Commdt.  :     Exploration   en  Mongolie  septentrionale   (La  G60- 

graphie  B.S.G.,  Paris,   Vol.  XXI.   (iQio).   375-374.  Mm/>). 

Au  pays  sacre  des  anciens  Turcs  et  des  Mongols.     Paris,   1911. 

Lansdell,  H.  :   Chinese  Central  Asia.     London,  1893. 

Ledes,  Hans  :     Eine   Sommerreise   in  der   nordlichen   Mongolei,    1892. 

{Mitt.  d.  K.K.  Geog.  Ges.  in  Wien,  Vol.  XXXVIII.  (1895),  pp.  26-57, 

pp.  85-118). 
Little,  Archibald  :   The  Far  East.     Oxford,  1905. 
Markoff,  a.  :    Towns  of  Northern  Mongolia   {The  Scottish  Geog.  Mag., 

Feb.  1896). 
Merzbacher,  G.  :    Exploration  in  the  Tian  Shan  Mountains  {Geog.  Journ., 

Vol.  XXXIII. ,  1909). 
Muller,  F.  :    Unter  Tungusen  und  Jakuten.     Leipzig,  1882. 
Murray,   H.  :     Discoveries  and  Travels  in  Asia.     3  vols.     Edinburgh, 

1820. 
Obrucheff,  V.  A.  :    Expedition  to  the  Barlik  and  Tarbagatai  in  1905 

{Preliminary  Report).     Tomsk,   1907.     (Russian.)     (Also  Petermann's 

Mitt.  (1910),  Pt.  I,  21-22). 
Expedition    to    Djair,  Semisstai,    and    Urkashar,  W.    Zungaria,  in 

1906.     Tomsk,     1907.     (Russian.)     (Also    Petermann's    Mitt.,    1908, 

24-39,  map). 
Geographical  Investigations  in  Barlik  Maili  and  Djair  during  1909. 

Tomsk,  1910.     (Russian.) 

Geographical  Sketch  of  the  Auriferous  Deposits  of  Siberia.     Part  II. 

Central  Siberia.     First  section  :   Sayansk  Region.    Map.    St.  Peters- 
burg, 1 911.     (Russian.) 
OsTROVSKY,  P.  E. :  The  Importance  of  the  Uriankhai  Region  to  Southern 

Siberia   {Bulletin  of  the  Imperial  Russian  Geographical  Society,  Vol. 

XXXV.  (1899),  pp.  321-353).     (Russian.) 
Paikoff  :  The  Upper  Yenisei.     {B.  of  Imp.  Russian  Geographical  Society, 

Vol.  XXXIV.  (1898),  pp.  433,  462). 
Paouet,  Dr.  a.  :    Subsibirien  und  die  Nordwestmongolei  {Mitteilungen 

der  Geog.  Ges.  in  Jena,  Vol.  XXVII.  (1909),  pp.  1-127,  maps). 
Pelliot,  Paul  :    La  mission  Pelliot  en  Asie  centrale  {Ann.  de  la  Soc.  de 

Giog.  Commerciale.     See  Indo-chinoise).     Hanoi,  1909.     Map. 
PiASSETSKY,   P.  :     Russian  Travellers   in  Mongoha  and   China.     Trans- 
lated by  J.  Gordon-Cumming.     London,  1884. 
PoTANiN,  G.  N.  :    Potanin's  Travels,   1884-86.     St.  Petersburg,   1893. 
Sketches    of    North-west    MongoUa.       4    vols,    maps    and    illust. 

St.  Petersburg,  1881-83.     (Russian.) 
Survey  of  G.  N.  Potanin's  Journey  in  North-west  Mongolia,  1876- 

77,  and  map  {Petermann's  Mitt.,  Vol.  XXVIL,  Pt.  V..  1881). 
PoTANiN,   M. :    Travels   in   Eastern   Siberia   and   MongoUa,   Tibet,  and 

China.     Moscow,   1895.     (Russian.) 
Pott,  H.  :    A  Sketch  of  Chinese  History. 


638  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

PozDNYEFF,  A.  :   Mongolia  and  the  Mongols  :    Results  of  the  Expedition 

to  Mongolia  in  1892-93.     2  vols.,  illust.     St.  Petersburg,  1896-98. 
Price,  M.  P.  :    Siberia.     London,  1912. 
Prjevalsky,  N.  M.  :    Third  Journey  in  Central  Asia.     St.  Petersburg, 

1883.     Map  and  illust.     (Russian.)     Reisen    in    Tibet.     1879-1880. 

Map  and  illust.     Jena,  1884. 
Radde,  G.  :    Reisen  im  Siiden  von  Ost-Siberien  in  den  Jahren,  1855-59. 

2  vols.     St.  Petersburg,  1862-63. 
Radloff,  D.  W.  :   Works  of  the  Orkhon  Expedition  ;   Atlas  of  Mongolian 

Tombs.      Map    and    illust.      St.    Petersburg,    1892.      (Russian    and 

German.) 

. \^orIaufiger    Bericht     iiber    die    Resultate    der    Expedition     {Bull. 

Acad.    Imp.   Sciences,    St.    Petersburg,    Vol.    XXXV.    (1896),    pp. 

353-398)- 
Records  of  the  Past:    Vol.  V.,  Feb.  1906.     Part  II. 
Richards,    I.  :     Comprehensive    Geography    of    the    Chinese    Empire. 

Shanghai,  1908. 
RicKMERS,  W.  R.  :    The  Duab  of  Turkestan.     Cambridge,  1913. 
RiTTER.  K.  :    Eastern  or  Chinese  Turkestan.     St.  Petersburg,  1869. 
RoBOROVSKY,  V.  I.  :  Works  of  the  Imperial  Russian  Geographical  Society's 

Expedition    to    Central    Asia,    1893-95.     3    vols.     St.    Petersburg, 

1899.     (Russian.)     (Summary  in  Geographical  Journal,  August  1896. 

Map.) 
Conclusion    of    Roborovsky's    Expedition      (Note   in   Geo.   Journ., 

Vol.  IX.,  1897). 
Sapoznikoff,  V.  V.  :    The  Mongolian   Altai,   and  the   Sources  of   the 

Irtysch  and  Kobdo.      Tomsk,   191 1.      (Russian.)      (See  also   Peier- 

mann's  Mitt.,  Vol.  LV.  (1909).  P-  372-) 
Schuyler,  E.  :    Turkestan.     London,  1876. 
Seebohm,  H.  :    Siberia  in  Asia.     London,  1882. 
Semenof,  p.  p.  :   Dzungaria  and  the  Celestial  Mountains  (Journ.  of  R.G.S., 

Vol.  XXXV.,  1865). 
Skrine  and  Ross  :    The  Heart  of  Asia. 
SosNovsKi,   MiRosHNisHENKO,   Matussovski,    AND    MoROZOF :     Recent 

Russian  Explorations  in  Western  Mongoha  (Geographical  Magazine, 

Vol.  n.  (1875),  pp.  196-200.  map.     Proc.  R.G.S.,  Vol.  XX.,  1875-6, 

p.  421). 
Stein,  M.  A.  :   Ruins  of  Desert  Cathay.     London,  1912. 

Sand-buried  Ruins  of  Khotan.     London,  1903. 

SwAYNE,  H.  G.  C:    Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia. 
Taylor,   I.  :    The  Origin  of  the  Aryans.     London,   1892. 
Tchihatcheff,  p.  de  :    A  Scientific  Journey  in  the  Eastern  Altai  and  the 

Adjacent  Regions  on  the  frontiers  of  China.     1845.     (French.) 
Thomsen,:    Early  Turkish  Inscriptions.     (German.) 
Tylor,  E.  B.  :    Early  History  of  Mankind.     London,  1878. 
Vambery,    a.  :    An   Approach   between   Moslems   and    Buddhists    (The 

Nineteenth  Century.     April  1912). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  639 

Vladimirtsoff,  B.  v.  :    A  Visit  to  the   Derbets  of   Kobdo  (/^.   Russ. 

Geo.  Soc,  1910,  46).     (Russian.) 
Wright,  G.  F.  :   Asiatic  Russia.     New  York,  1903. 
YouNGHUSBAND,  CoL.  F.  E.  :  The  Heart  of  a  Continent :  A  Narrative  of 

Travels  in  Manchuria,  across  the  Gobi  Desert,  through  the  Himalayas,, 

the  Pamirs,  and  Hunza,  1 884-1 894.     Map.     London,  1896. 

Lamaism  in  Tibet  [Sociological  Review,  Vol.  IV.,  No.  2,  April  191 1). 

Yule,  Col.  Sir  Henry  :    Travels  of  Marco  Polo.     Edited  by  Cordier.. 

London,  1903. 


II — 21 


ERRATA  FOR  "MAP  OF  THE  KARLIK  TAGH  AND 
BARKUL  MOUNTAINS" 

1.  For  Bagdash  read  Bardash. 

2.  Barkul  Dawan  or  Koshete  Dawan,  8,700  ft. 

3.  Cart-track  leads  from  Kumul  via  this  track  to  Barkul. 

4.  Marsh-land  at  eastern  end  of  Tur  Kul  as  at  western  end. 

5.  Ara-Tam  should  be  close  below  contour- line  representing  4,000  ft. 

6.  Altitudes,  13,686  and  13,282  should  be  denoted  13,686'=,  and  13,282° 

(clinometer  reckoning) . 

7.  Peak,  Alt.  13,240  ft.  was  ascended. 

8.  Glaciers  exist  at  the  other  two  main  sources  of  the  Bardash  River. 

9.  The  names  of  Narin,  Koral,  Edira,  Bardash,  and  Khotun-tam  give 

their  names  to  the  rivers  on  which  they  are  situated. 

10.  The  river  to  the  west  of  the  ShopoU  Valley  is  the  Narin. 

11.  For  Bogdo-olo  read  Bogdo-ola, 


640 


INDEX 


Abakan,  41,  43,  45  ;  steppe,  108  ; 
route  from,  to  Kemelik,  113  ; 
early  inhabitants  of,  198,  200  ; 
tribes  of,  205  ;  cattle  of,  238 

—  Tartars,  45,  240  ;  af&nities  of 
with  Uriankhai,  200,  201  ;  dwel- 
lings of,  208,  209 

—  district,  as  early  home  of  Kirei, 

352 
Abd-ul-Aziz,  618 
Abies  schrenkiana,  418,  516  n.,  625  ; 

on  Karlik  Tagh,  629 
"  Accordion  "  folding  boat,  87 
Achinsk,  32  ;  we  leave,  35  ;  country 

south  of,  35,  36 
Achit  Nor,  22,  273,  277,  278,  286, 

287,   289,    321-3  ;     wild-fowl  of, 

321,   322 
Adak,  486  ;  visited  by  Potanin,  etc., 

496 ;     astronomical    position    of, 

496  ;  visited  by  Kozloff,  498,  521, 

522 
Adrianoff,  A.  B.,  6,  21,  65,  72,  164, 

170,  201,  207,  221  ;    publication, 

635 

^olian  action,  468-9 

Agriculture,  70  ;  in  Minnusinsk  dis- 
trict, 41  ;  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
161,  173,  183-4,  275;  at  Ulankom, 
275  ;  in  Emil  Valley,  407 ;  in  Dzun- 
garia,  458  ;  at  Kumul,  482  ;  in 
KarHk  Tagh,  500-502,  503-504, 
506-507,  508,  511,  512,  525  ;  in 
Barkul  basin,  527,528  ;  on  Manas 
River,  542,  543 

Aimak,  territorial  division,  202,  207 

Ainar  River,  122 

Aji  Bogdo,  452,  519 

Aksai,  plateau,  556  ;  wild-sheep  of, 

569 

Aksu,  579 

Ala  Kul,  411-12,  413,  416,  417,  418  ; 

saiga  near,  590 
Ala  Shan,  23 
Ala-su  Valley,   125,   126,   137,    140, 

213,  216 


Ala-tau  Mts.  as  portion  of  northern 
border-range  of  Dzungaria,  379, 
411,  415,  418,  554  ;  routes  across, 
556  ;  southern  slopes  of,  556-7  ; 
western  position  of,  559  ;  wild- 
sheep  of,  569  ;  game  of,  630 
Ala-tyube,  island  in  Ala  Kul,  413 
Algiak  Pass,  92,  105,  113,  167 
Altai,  4,  22,  23  ;  explorations  of 
Sapoznikoff  in,  24  ;  Russian,  or 
Little,  24  ;  Mongolian,  or  Great, 
24,  326  ;  eastern  extremities  of, 
346-7 ;  altitude  of,  371  ;  first 
impression  of  Mongolia,  371-2  ; 
as  great  natural  boundary,  372  ; 
ease  of  passes  across,  372  ;  pre- 
cipitation on,  372,  380  ;  length  of, 
378  ;  importance  of  to  Dzungaria, 
378  ;  Kran  Valley  of,  397-9 ; 
passes  across  between  Kobdo  and 
Guchen,  451  ;  flora  and  fauna  of, 

625 

Altai-Tian  Shan  divide,  347,  462-3, 
497,  626  ;  as  birthplace  of  Kir- 
ghiz race,  352  ;  as  Kirei  territory, 
357  ;  beauty  of,  361-2  ;  climate 
of,  329  ;   Uriankhai  of,  325,  326-7 

Altai-Tian  Shan  region,  4 

Altan  Khan,  205 

Altitudes  of  Minnusinsk  Steppe,  41 ; 
of  Aradansk,  85  ;  of  Syansk 
passes,  92,  113  ;  average  of  Upper 
Yenisei  basin,  99  ;  of  mountains 
sorrounding,  loi,  102  ;  of  Tannu- 
ola,  loi,  190,  195,  264 ;  peaks, 
134  ;  tree-limit  on,  138  ;  of 
Saklia  Valley,  and  range,  263, 
264  ;  of  Turgun  Mts.,  281,  283, 
284,  286 

Amazon  River,  39 

Amil  River,  43,  45,  46  ;  rise  and  fall, 
79,  167 ;  width  of,  at  Petro- 
pavlovsk,  91  ;  route  from,  to 
Sisti-Kem,  113 

Amursana,  leader  of  Dzungars,  386 

Ancestor-worship,  61,  243 


641 


642 


INDEX 


Ancient  routes,  114,  115 

An-hsi-chow,  474,  494,  514 

Antiquities  of  Southern  Siberia, 
the  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  24,  55- 
72  ;  North-west  ^longolia,  rock- 
drawings,  56  ;  unwrought  stones, 
monoliths,  57-60,  66-7 ;  stone- 
eftigies,  57-64  ;  tumuh,  65-72  ; 
in  Kumul  district,  499  ;  in  Karlik 
Tagh,  504-5  ;  at  Barkul,  532 

Arabia,  6 

Arabs,  28 

Arab  influence  on  China,  613-14 

Aradansk  Range,  42,  85,  96,  loi 

Ara-Tam,  491  ;  Buddhist  remains 
at,  477,  504  ;  visited  by  Stein, 
498  ;  as  summer  resort  of  the 
Khan,  504-5 

Aridity.     See  Desiccation 

Artcol  Mts.,  103 

Asia,  5,  10  ;  significance  of,  9,  27- 
29 ;  contrasts  of,  28,  29  ;  Asia 
versus  Europe,  436 

Asiatic  Mediterranean,  48,  106,  417 

Astine,  486 

Atbushi,  plateau,  wild-sheep  of,  569 

Ati  Bogdo,  519-520,  628  ;  doubtful 
position  as  regards  life-zones  of 
Central  Asia,  629  ;  fauna  and 
flora  of,  629-30 

Atis,  Mount,  520 

Atkinson,  T.  W.,  3  ;  journeys  in 
Mongoha,  18,  278  ;  approached 
Barkul,  531  ;   publication,  635 

Ayar  Nor,  543 

Azaz  River,  148 

Azkiezkaia  Steppe,  65 


Bai,  486,  52 1 ;  visited  by  Kozloff ,  498 

Bai  Musa  Pass,  406 

Baikal,  31,  46,  73,  100,  116,  147,  197, 

212  ;   country  to  east  of,  as  early 

home  of  Kirei,  352 
Bain-Kho,  464 

Bain-Khairkhan,  325,  327,  348,  346 
Baitik  Bogdo,  wild-sheep  on,  346- 

7  ;   as  Kirei  territory,  359  ;   wells 

of,    452  ;    Torguts   of,   360,   391 ; 

routes    to,    from    Guchen,    457 ; 

description  of,  from  Kirei  sources, 

462-3  ;     as    belonging    to    Altai 

zone,  628-9 
Ealkash,     Lake,    417,     41 8 ;    saiga 

near,  590 


Banking  arrangements,  45 
Bardash   River,    504-5 

—  Valley,  505-10 

—  Village,  507-8  ;    revisited,  526 

—  peaks  at  head  of  valley,  622 
Barkul,  18,  19,  20,  22,  395  ;   grazing 

in  vicinity  of  town,  452  ;   horses 
of,  452 

—  Basin,  arrival  at,  526  ;  peculi- 
arity of,  527  ;  Kumuliks  in,  528  ; 
hydrography  of,  528  ;  sand- 
dunes  in,  529 ;  horses  of,  452, 
53^-3  ;   game  of,  588-9 

—  Lake,  meaning  of  name,  532  ; 
salinity  of,  533  ;   strands  of,  533 

—  Mountains,  470,  528  ;  portion  of, 
belonging  to  Khan  of  Kumul, 
491.  493  ;  as  seen  from  Kumul, 
494,  499-500  ;  forest  on,  517, 
529-30  ;  as  belonging  to  Kaxlik 
Tagh  "  neutral  zone,"  628-30 

—  Pass,  526 

—  Town,  superseded  by  Guchen, 
451  ;  distance  between,  and 
Guchen,  451  ;  astronomical  posi- 
tion of,  496  ;  early  visitors  to 
district,  495-9 ;  routes  from, 
and  Kumul,  526  ;  arrival  at,  530  ; 
importance  of,  530  ;  bad  reputa- 
tion of,  531-2  ;   we  leave,  533 

Barlik  Mts.,  4,    23,  389,   410,  411, 
411  n,   414,   417,   418,   541,   548; 
as  Kirei  territory,   359,  360  ;    as 
northern  border-range  of  Dzun- 
garia,    379  ;     character  of,    551  ; 
as    portion   of    dividing-line   be- 
tween Siberian  and  Central  Asian 
life-zones,  627-8 
Barmen  Mts.,  273,  277,  286 
Basins  :  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  2,  94- 
117  ;   Kossogol,  32,  100,  116,  201  ; 
UbsaNor,  192,  205,  224,  261,  266, 
273,  277,  285  ;    Achit  Nor,  273, 
277,  278,  286,  287,  289 
Bassett  Digby,  cited,  236  n. 
Bear,  in  Borotala,  559-60  ;   in  Urta 
Saryk,    576 ;     in    Mongolia    and 
Dzungaria,  631 
Bearded    Partridge.     See    Daurian 

Partridge 
Beavers,  168, 179,  223,228;  southern 

limit  of,  626,  630-1 
Beg  of  Kumul,  503,  505-6,  530 
Bei-Kcm,    32,    98,    103,    104,    107  ; 
rapids  on,  109,  161,  174-6 


INDEX 


643 


Bei-Kem,  Upper,  scenery  of,  145  ; 
routes  from,  to  Siberia,  147,  148; 
scenery  near  Skobieff,  156  ;  popu- 
lation of,  202  ;  tribes  of,  237  ; 
religious  ceremony  in,  247-50  ; 
barrier  between  Upper  and  Lower 
161 

— Khua-Kem  region,  157,  159,  212 

Belju  Pass,  525 

Belka,  dog,  123 

Bell,  Col.  Mark,  visits  Kumul  and 
Barkul,  497 ;  publication,  635 

Belota,  325,  327,  347 

Biakoff,  185 

Bibliography,  635-9 

Biddulph,  H.  M.,  570,  571 

Biisk,  271,  322,  323 

Birch-bark,  221,  229 

Bird-life  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
140,  321,  407,  631-2 

Bishbalik,  383 

Black  Art.     See  Shammanism 

Blackcock,  628,  631 

Black  Irtish.     See  Irtish 

Black  River,  88 

Blandford,  Dr.,  567  ^ 

Bretschneider,  Dr.,  615 

Bodkhon-Khalat,  262,  263,  265 

Bog  art  River,  87 

Bogdo-ola,  4,  25,  285,  358,  359,  378  ; 
desired  by  Kirei,  360,  361,  367, 
460  ;  first  sight  of,  443  ;  northern 
slopes  of,  463-6  ;  eastern  end  of, 
465,  467,  497 ;  explored  by 
Grum-Grjimailo,  497 ;  inhabit- 
ants of,  464-6  ;  importance  of,  to 
Dzungaria,  535  ;  distance  to  be 
seen  from,  535  ;  myths  concern- 
ing, 536  ;  climate  of,  536,  537-8  ; 
alpine  lake  of,  537 ;  early  ex- 
ploration of,  537  ;  to,  from 
Guchen,  537-9 ;  topography  of, 
540-1  ;  altitude  of  highest  peaks, 
540-1  ;    glaciers  of,  540-1 

Bogdo-ola  Lake,  538-9,  540 

Bombay,  4 

Bonin,    C.    E.,    445  ;     publication. 

Boots,    Uriankhai,    219  ;     Kirghiz, 

369 

Borashay  Pass,  114,  115,  194-5,  264 
Borodaile,  A.  A.,  23  ;    publication, 

635 
Boro-Khoro  Range,  428 

Borotala  Valley,  4,  381,  400,   420, 


437 ;  Charkhars  of,  391-3  ; 
we  arrive  at,  552  ;  character  of, 
553.  555  ;  we  travel  up,  556  ; 
forests  in,  556  ;  nature  of  northern 
side,  556-7 ;  hunting  in,  556- 
69  ;  wolves  in,  557,  55S  ;  bears. 
559-60 ;  lack  of  inhabitants, 
500  ;  good  sheep-horns  obtained 
in,    565-6,    509  ;    wild-sheep    of, 

561-74.  5^^.  569-71.  river  of, 
566  ;   pheasants  of,  632 

Borstan,  464-5 

Bouragut.     See  Golden  Eagle 

Bows,  226-7 

Broomhall,  M.,  cited,  614-15  ;  pub- 
lication, 635 

Buddhism,  amongst  Uriankhai,  151, 
192-4,  200  ;  amongst  Mongols, 
311-14,  316,  317;  as  compared 
with  Islam,  363-4  ;  Buddhism 
versus  Islam,  362-6,  365-7 ;  in 
Kumul,  477-8  ;  remains  of,  in 
Karlik  Tagh,  504-5 

Bulon-tokhoi,  401 

Buran,  wind,  413,  414-15 

Buriats,  33,  69,  201,  203  n.,  317; 
horse  sacrifice  amongst,  247 

Burkark,  saiga,  591.  See  refer- 
ences under  Saiga 

Caccabis  chukar,  627 

Camels,   172,   179,    223  ;    transport 

by,  405  ;  cost  of  hire  in  Dzungaria, 

405  ;  usefulness  of,  455 
Campbell,    C.    W.,    cited,    224-5  » 

publication,  635 
Camul.     See  Kumul 
Canoes  on    Upper    Bei-Kem,    146, 

158  ;  on  Chulim,  35 
Capercailzie,  132,  179,  626,  631 
Capra  sibirica  almasyi,  630  ;  typica, 

630 
Capreolus    pygargus,    of    Mongolia 

and    Dzungaria,    630  ;     of    Tian 

Shan,  630 
Caravan  by  camel,  trans-Gobi  ser- 
vice, 452  ;    described,  453-5 
Caravanserai,  on  Chinese  high-roads, 

434 
Carpini,    John   de,   cited,    12,    253, 

254,  276  n.,  286  n.,  304,  406,  411 

Carruthers,  D.,  327,  340,  341,  343, 

344.   347.   556-7.   561.   562,   566, 
568,  569,  575,  577,  585,  596 
Cathay,  10,  13 


644 


INDEX 


Caucasus,  4 

Cervtc^  cashmirianus   yarkandensis, 

611,  630 
—  canadensis  asiaticus,  630;    son- 

garica  or  eusiephanus,  630 
Chagan-bugazi  Pass,  345 
Chagan-bulak  Pass,  517,  526,  527 
Chagan-gol,  Valley  and  River,  325, 

3^7.  349.  350 
Chagan  Nor,  324 
Chagan-oba  IMountains,  389,  411 
Chagatai,  son  of  Jenghis  Khan,  3S5 
Cha-Kul,    43,  107,    III,   154,    203  ; 
distance    from,    to  Krasnoyarsk, 
no;     to    Minnusinsk    by    river, 
no  ;   temperature  at,  112  ;    road 
northwards  from,   113  ;    road  to 
Kemchik    from,     114;     road    to 
Ubsa  Nor  from,  115 
Chalon,  P.  F.,  23  ;  cited,  113,  165-6, 
202,  206,  222,  247  ;  publication, 

635 
Chantos,  389  ;  in  Borotala  Valley, 

392-3.  55^  ;  in  Urumchi,  395,  445  ; 

in  Sharasume,  397  ;    meaning  of 

name,   397  n.  ;    in  Gomil  Valley, 

407  ;    settlers  in  Dzungaria,  435- 

6,  436  n.,  404  ;    in  Djinko,  437  ; 

in    Eastern    Chinese    Turkestan, 

470-1  ;  in  Barkul,  531  ;  difference 

in  character  of,  and  Chinese,  458 

Chapsa  River,  120,  121,  124,  130 

—  Range,   loi,  135 

—  ascent  of,  137 

—  Lake,  135 

Charkhars,  389,    393,  400  ;    history 
of   Borotala,   392  ;   and  Borotala, 
391-3  ;     two    sections    of,    393  ; 
superior  type  of,  393  ;  Amban  of 
Lower     Borotala,      553  ;     enter- 
tained   by    Amban 's    wife,    553  ; 
dress    of  women,   554  ;    we  visit 
Amban  of  Upper  Borotala,  554-5 
Chebash  River,  134,  142,  143 
Chedan  Valley,  104,   184  ;    descrip- 
tion of,  189  ;   altitude  of,  195 
Chien-lung,  Emperor,  383,  387,  391 
Chigetai,  or  kulon,  607 
Chi-ku-ching,  basin,  468-70 
China,  9  ;    Great  Wall  of,  15,  427 
Chinese,    in    N.W.    Mongolia,    275, 
262-3,      310  ;       suzerainty     over 
Mongols,    308-9  ;     Revolution   of 
1 91 1,     314  ;     traders    in    Upper 
Yenisei      basin,      181  ;       frontier 


officials,  324-325  ;  invasion  of 
Dzungaria,  376 ;  massacred  by 
Dungans,  376 ;  element,  in 
Dzungaria,  382,  395-6,  542-3  ; 
destroy  Dzungan  power,  386-7, 
476  ;  begin  to  gain  power  in  Far 
Western  China,  387-8  ;  colonists 
in  Borotala  Valley,  392-3  ;  in 
Sharasume,  397-8  ;  differences 
in  character  between  settlers 
and  Chanto,  458-9 ;  influence 
on  Kumuliks,  482-5,  488  ; 
authority  in  Kumul,  476-7  ;  in- 
fluence on  Taghliks,  508,  514  ; 
influence  on  Karlik  Tagh,  523  ; 
colonists  in  Barkul  basin,  528 

Chinese  carts,  428-9  ;  cost  of  line 
between  Kulja  and  Urumchi,  429 

Chinese  Imperial  high-roads,  5,  426- 
8  ;  stages  on,  429  ;  traffic  on,  in 
M'inter  andsummer,  431-2 ;  mono- 
tony of,  433-5  ;  traffic  on,  be- 
tween Kulja  and  Urumchi,  442-3  ; 
safety  of,  448  ;   guards  of,  448 

Chi-ning  section  of  Charkhars,  393 

Chokerok,  range,  85,  92 

Christianity,  effects  of  on  Sham- 
manism,  241,  255 

Chudes,  49,  65 

Chuguchak,    from    Sharasume    to, 

395.  399.  400.  439,  443  ;  route 
from,  to  Zaisan,  406  ;  arrival  at, 
408  ;  description  of,  408  ;  popu- 
lation of,  408  ;  importance  of 
position  on  frontier,  409  ;  route 
east  and  west  from,  409-10  ; 
routes  from,  to  Kulja,  409-10  ; 
cost  of  transport  from,  to  Kulja, 
410  ;  frontier  route  from,  to 
Kulja,  411  ;  from,  to  Urumchi, 
542  ;   to  Shi-Kho,  541-2,  547 

Chukar  Partridge,  418,  627 

Chulim  River,  35,  49  ;  tumuli  on 
steppe,  66 

Church  and  Phelps,  Messrs.,  580  ; 
publication,  635 

Clementi,  C,  25  ;  astronomical 
position  for  Kumul,  by,  496 ; 
visits  Kumul,  498 

Climate  of  Minnusinsk  district,  40, 
76,  79  ;  of  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
112,  161,  184  ;  of  N.W.  Mongolia, 
254-6,  261  ;  of  Mongolia,  292-3  ; 
of  Karlik  Tagh,  512,  513-14,522, 
523  ;   of  Bogdo-ola,  536,  537-8 


INDEX 


645 


Climatic  changes  in  Southern  Si- 
beria,  78 

Clothes  of  Uriankhai,  219  ;  of  Kirei 
Kirghiz,  362-3 

Coal-mines    in   Central  Dzungaria, 

458 
"  Coir-Cham,"  369 
Collecting  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 

132  ;   in  Mongolia,  289 
Communication,  lines  of,  6,  10 
Constantinople,  Christian  Emperor 

of,  II.     See  also  Stamboul 
Cultivation,  41,  70,  161,  173,  183- 

4,    275  ;    in    Emil   Valley,    407 ; 

north  of  Guchen,  458  ;  at  Kumul, 

482  ;  in  Karlik  Tagh,  501-2,  503- 

4.  5^^-7'  509.  511.  512,  525  ;  in 
Barkul  basin,  527,  528  ;  on 
Manas  River,  542,  543.  See  also 
Agriculture 

Cumberland,  Major,  321  ;  cited, 
586-7 

Curtin,  Prof.,  247  ;  publication,  635 


Dabachin  Pass,  378 

Dain  Kul,  357,  358,  370,  372 

Darkat,  200,  276  n. 

Daurian  Partridge,  629,  632 

Dead  Sea,  salinity  of,  compared  with 

that  of  Tur  Kul,  524 
Deer  in   Mongolia  and   Dzungaria, 

630 
Deforestation,  104,  160,  178,  179 
Demidofi,   E.,   327,    346 ;     publica- 
tion, 635 
Deniker,  J.,  publication,  635 
Denudation  in    Karlik  Tagh,    512 
Desiccation,    178,    307;     in   Dzun- 
garia, 381,  467-70 
Difficulties  of  travel  in  Siberia,  86  ; 

in  Dzungaria,  544-6 
Djinko,  437 
Dogs,  Uriankhai,  227-8 
Dolto  Nor,  325,  357,  358  ;   we  visit, 

37O'  372 
Dora-Kem  Steppe,  104, 111,146, 148, 

202 

Drum,  Uriankhai,  251  n. 

Du  Chaillu,  232 

Du  Halde,  cited,  616 

Dungans,  revolt  in  Dzungaria,  376, 
387,  452,  476,  477,  532  ;  results 
of,  443  ;  colonists  in  Dzungaria, 
382,    387,    394  ;    capabilities    of. 


394  ;  as  carriers,  429  ;  origin  and 
history  of.  Appendix  A,  614-15  ; 
characteristics  of,  615  ;  num- 
bers of,  616-17;  of  Dzungaria, 
618;  origin  and  meaning  of  name, 
618 

Durbet,  3,  205,  266  n.,  272  ;  Dalai 
Khan  of,  267,  269,  270,  273,  278  ; 
various  ways  of  spelling,  267  n.  ; 
visit  to  Dalai  Khan  of,  268 ; 
Wang  of,  273-5  ;  territory  and 
possessions  of,  275-7 

Dzungaria,  3,  4,  5,  9  ;  exploration 
of,  20-6 ;  importance  of,  10; 
northern  border-ranges  of,  23 ; 
origin  of  name,  374-5.  3^6  ;  a 
debatable  land,  375  ;  restless 
state  of,  375  ;  boundaries  of,  376  ; 
topography  of,  376-7  ;  area  of, 
377  ;  altitude  of,  376-7  ;  plains 
of.  377  .'  border-ranges  of,  377- 
80  ;  as  mountain-locked  basin, 
379  ;  influences  of  border-ranges 
on,  379-81  ;  precipitation  on 
border-ranges,  379-80  ;  desicca- 
tion in,  381  ;  hydrography  of, 
381,  467-70  ;  fertile  zone,  381  ; 
early  history  of,  382-8  ;  as  por- 
tion of  Mongol  Empire,  385  ; 
repopulation  by  colonists,  387  ; 
inhabitants  of,  389-96  ;  nomadic 
zone  of,  388-93  ;  settled  zone  of, 
393-5  ;  towns  of,  395  ;  future  of, 
396  ;  travel  in,  400  ;  administra- 
tion of,  400  ;  variety  of  inha- 
bitants, 402  ;  climate  of,  410, 
410  n. ;  Southern  Dzungaria,  424- 
66  ;  capital  of,  443-7  ;  postal  ser- 
vice of,  445-6  ;  break  of  winter  in, 
438,  463,  466 ;  sand-dunes  of, 
456-63  ;  prevailing  winds  of, 
413,  414  n.,  460-1;  contrasts 
between,  and  Chinese  Turkestan, 
467-8  ;  condition  of,  compared 
with  Turfan,  464  ;  Central,  542- 
6  ;  forests  in,  542  ;  scenery  in, 
543  ;  cultivation  in,  542-3  ; 
Central,  mirages  in,  543  ;  native 
guides  in,  544-6  ;  saxaul  forest 
in,  546  ;  ravines  in,  545-6 ; 
game  of,  580-610,  628  ;  fauna 
and      flora     of,      Appendix      D, 

624  ;  map  showing  life- zones  of, 

625  ;  "  Frontiers  of  Dzungaria," 
Tomsk,  igi2,  635 


646 


INDEX 


Dzungarian  Gate,  409,  410  ;  early 
description  of,  411  ;  first  sight  of, 
411-12  ;  we  cross,  412  ;  prevailing 
winds  of,  413  ;  description  of, 
415-19  ;  as  a  natural  dividing-line, 
418-19,  627  ;    kulon  in,  605 

Dzungars,  4,  267  n. ;  origin  of 
name,  374,  386  ;  extent  of  king- 
dom, 386  ;   site  of  capital  of,  407 

Dzusan  Mountains,  411,  414 

Ebi  Nor,  413-14,  414  n.,  417,  418, 
438,  552,  605  ;   stag  near,  609 

Eden,  Richard,  cited,  197 ;  pub- 
lication, 635 

Edira  Valley,  525,  526  ;  forests  in, 
517;  Bardash  Pass,  622  ;  peak 
at  head  of  valley,  622 

Edsin  Gol,  520 

Ee,  River,  148 

Elegess  Valley,  194,  203 

Eleuth,  branch  of  Western  Mongols, 
385  ;    kingdom  of,  385-6,  392 

Elias,  Ney,  3,  20  ;   publication,  635 

Eliutei,  first  ruler  of  Eleuths,  385 

Ellobius,  on  Karlik  Tagh,  629 

Emil,  R.,  381,  382,  384  ;  district, 
385  ;  valley,  historical  interest  of, 
406 

Emir  Tagh,  519 

Enderti,  River,  283,  286,  287 

Environment,  effect  on  character 
of  Uriankhai,  214 ;  effect  on 
religious  ideas  of  Uriankhai, 
244.    245 

Ergik  Range,  107 

Errata,  640 

Eskimo,  217 

Etherton,  Lieut.  P.  T.,  25  ;  pub- 
lication, 635 

Equus  hemionus  typicus,  607 ; 
range  of,  627.     See  also  Kulon 

Equus  prjevalskii,  608  ;  northern 
range  of,  626 

Europe,  10  ;   and  Asia,  436 

Exploration,  previous,  2,  3,  6  ;  re- 
sume of,  of  Mongolia,  10-26 ; 
resume  of,  of  Karlik  Tagh,  495-9 


Falj,  or  circular  pit  in  sand-dunes, 

529 
Fauna  of  Karlik  Tagh,  516-7,  517  n. 
Finns,  8,  198,  217,  218 


Fish  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  170, 
171 

Fishing  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
229 ;  Uriankhai  methods,  229 

Flowers  in  Siberia,  jj,  84 

Food-supplies  at  Kushabar,  82  ; 
at  Cha-Kul,  182 

Forests,  south  of  Achinsk,  36,  86, 
91,  190,  138,  178-9  281  ;  in 
Dzungaria,  382,  438,  462,  469-70, 
542  ;  in  Karlik  Tagh,  505,  509, 
510,  512,  516-17,  627;  in  Ati 
Bogdo,  521-2,  627;  in  Barkul 
Mountains,  530  ;  in  Borotala, 
556-7 ;  saxaul,  459-60 ;  dying 
poplar,  468-70 

Forestry,  77,  78 

Fur,  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  168, 
•  207,  223 


Galdan,  King  of  Eleuthes,  385-6 

Gardner,  E.  A.,  cited,  56 

Gashiun  Nor,  520 

Gazelle :  Gazella  gutturosa,  hunting 
of,  328  ;  range  of,  348,  631  ; 
coloration  of,  348-9 

—  Gazella  subgutturosa,  582,  583, 
631  ;  hunting  of,  583-90  ;  colora- 
tion of,  585  n.  ;  near  Ebi  Nor, 
552  ;  near  Barkul,  532-3  ;  of 
Mongolia  and  Dzungaria,  631  ; 
compared     with     G.     gutturosa, 

348-9 

picticaudata,  349 

prjevalskii,  349 

Gesser  Khan,  204 

Glaciation  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 

152,  130  ;    in  Turgun  Mountains, 

282,    283,    287 ;     in    Bogdo-ola, 

540-1 
Glaciers,  in  Karlik  Tagh,  509,  518, 

522  ;   in  Bogdo-ola,  540-1 
Gobi,  4,  20,  23,  292,  307  ;   northern 

route  across,  448-51 
Goitred  Gazelle.     See   Gazella  sub- 
gutturosa 
Gold,  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  167, 

221  ;    in  Mongolia,  316 
Golden  Eagle,  or  "  bouragut."  used 

for  hunting  purposes,   358,   491, 

586-7 
Grano,  J.  G.,  24  ;    publication,  636 
Gregorievski,  42 
Grum-Grjimailo,  G.  E.,   22  ;   visits 


INDEX 


647 


Bogdo-ola  and  Barkul  region. 
497 ;  in  Bogdo-ola,  537 ;  on 
flora  and  fauna  of  Karlik  Tagh, 
628  ;    publication,  636 

Griinwedel,  Prof.,  477,  499 

Guchen,  22,  346,  395,  359  ;  import- 
ance of,  448-9,  451  ;  trade  and 
route  between,  and  Pekin,  448- 
52  ;  distance  from,  to  Barkul, 
451  ;  replaces  Barkul  as  trade 
centre,  451  ;  description  of,  448- 
56 ;  sand-belt  to  north  of,  456-63  ; 
we  finally  leave,  463  ;  grazing  in 
vicinity,  452  ;  importance  of  for 
caravans,  452-3  ;  revisited,  534  ; 
saiga-hunting  near,  591 

Hakas.     See  Kirghiz 

Hakluyt  Society  publications,  re- 
ferences to,  636 

Hami.     See  Kumul 

Han-hai,  292 

Hare,  considered  unclean  in  Dzun- 
garia,  595 

Hattak,  286  n. 

Hazel-grouse,  132,  179,  626,  631 

Herm,  59 

History:  early  history  of  Minnu- 
sinsk  district,  48-55  ;  of  Russian 
penetration  of  Siberia,  32-3  ;  of 
Uriankhai  country,  198-9  ;  of 
Russian  advance  into  Uriankhai 
country,  163-7 

—  allusions  to :  of  Mongol  invasions, 
296-306  ;  of  Dzungaria,  382-88  ; 
of  Kumul,  476-7 

Himalayas,  5 

Hoang  Ho,  4 

Hong-Kong,   25 

Horses  at  Kushabar,  81,  83  ;  at 
Minnusinsk,  44  ;  at  Sofianofi, 
173  ;  Siberian,  185  ;  Uriankhai, 
228,  238-9,  239-40 

Houng-miao-tzi,  444  n. 

Howorth,  H.  H.,  205,  384  ;  cited, 
114,  351  ;    publication,  636 

Hui-hui,  Dungans,  615,  618 

Hungary,  8,  12 

Hunter,   Mr.,  cited,   449 

Hunting  of  reindeer,  129,  131, 
136-7;  of  wild-sheep,  330,  331, 
332,  334-9  ;  in  MaU  Mountains, 
551-2  ;  in  Borotala  Valley,  556- 
69,   572-5,  594  ;    of  gazelle,  328, 


348,  583-90  ;  of  marmots,  342  ; 
of  ibex,  576-7 ;  of  saiga,  591- 
601;  of  kulon,  or  wild-ass,  602- 
6  ;  of  tiger,  610 

Huntington,  Ellsworth,  307  ;  pub- 
lication, 636 

Huns,  8,  II,  375,  383 

Hwang  yang  (yellow  sheep),  583 

Hydrography  of  Dzungaria,  381  ; 
of  Kumul,  478-82 

Ibex,  in  Karlik  Tagh,  517,  517  ^■> 
627  ;  in  Barlik  Mountains,  551  ; 
in  Borotala  Valley,  561,  564  ; 
in  Ala-tau,  566,  567 ;  in  Urta 
Saryk,  576-7,  578  ;  of  Mongolia 
and  Dzungaria,  582,  630 

Ice  Age,  in  Siberia,  etc.,  48,  106 

Idolatry,  243,  253-4 

Hi  Valley,  4,  378,  421,  431 ;  coloniza- 
tion of,  387  ;  devastation  in,  387  ; 
winter  in,  424-5  ;  likened  to  val- 
ley of  Hoang  Ho,  429-30  ; 
Chinese  settlers  in,  436  n.,  Chanto 
settlers  in,  436  n. 

Images   of    felt,    253-4  ;   of   stone, 

254-5 
Imil.     See  Emil 

India,  8,  13,  22 

Irdi  Khe  River,  229,  528 

Irkutsk,  18,  32,  147 

Irrigation,  183,  186,  381 

Irtish,  Black,  22,  23,  357  ;  arrival 
of  Russians  on,  33  ;  as  home 
of  Kirei,  358  ;  we  cross,  401  ;  as 
southern  limit  of  the  beaver,  631  ; 
pheasants  of,  632 

Islam,  151,  269,  314 ;  effects  on 
Shammanism,  241,  364 ;  Islam 
verstis  Buddhism,  356-7,  362-6; 
we  first  enter  world  of,  362  ;  uni- 
formity of,  364  ;  Kirghiz  pilgrims 
to  Mecca,  364-5  ;  advance  of,  in 
Asia,  365-6,  366-7 ;  in  Kumul, 
477-8,  484-5  ;    in  China,  613-18 

Iti  Kul,  481 

Jair  Mountains,  541 

Jenghis,  Chief  of  Kirei,  359,  368-9 

Jenghis  Khan,  7,  8,  200,  203  ;    as 

suzerain  of  Uriankhai,  53,   204  ; 

of   Kirei,  295,    303,    306,    352-3. 

310  ;   as  protector  of  Islam,  615 
Jingis  Mountain,  519 


648 


INDEX 


Jordan      Valley,      compared     with 

Dzungarian  Gate,  416 
Journey,  resume  of,  2-5 

Kalgan,  448 

Kalmuk,     203,     388  ;      origin    and 

meaning  of  name,  385  ;    of  Boro- 

tala,   437-8 
Kamchatka,  34 
Kamsara  River,  107,  126,  142,  143, 

144.  154 

Kandagai  Valley,  189,  194-5 

Kandat  River,  134,  202  ;  range, 
92,  loi,  135 

Kandic,  root,  220 

Kanjik  Range,  420,  432,  619-20 

Kansu,  51 

Kara-adir  Range,  402 

Karagatch  River,  158,  161 

Kara-Kapchin,  526 

Kara-Kitai,  empire  destroyed  by 
Jenghis,  382,  384,  406 

Karakorum,  4,  13,  21,  293  ;  first 
visitor  to,  12 

Karakorum  Pass  crossed,  579 

Kara-Kuruk  (gazelle),  583,  584 

Kara-tuz,  82 

Karauls,  Mongol,  201,  260,  273 

Karcharmak  Valley,  510  ;  peaks 
at  head  of,  622 

Karlik  Tagh,  4,  25,  276  n.,  400  ; 
first  view  of,  471,  475  ;  sandstone 
foothills  of,  479,  500-5  ;  influence 
of,  on  Taghliks,  508  ;  rivers 
of :  Narin,  479,  501-3  ;  Edira, 
479  n.  ;  Bardash,  504,  505-10  ; 
drainage  from,  481-2,  502-3  ; 
as  eastern  extremity  of  Tian 
Shan,  494-5  ;  previous  ex- 
ploration of,  495-9  ;  affinity  of 
with  Altai,  497,  516  n.  ;  Russian 
Government  map  of,  498  ;  anti- 
quities of,  498-9  ;  viewed  from 
Kumul,  499-500  ;  orography  of, 
499-500,  510-11;  Buddhist  re- 
mains in,  504-5  ;  inhabitants  of, 
486,  506-8  ;  moraines  in,  508-9, 
518,  522  ;  glaciers  of,  509,  518, 
522  ;  forests  of,  505,  509,  510,  512, 
516-17,  525  ;  orography  of  alpine 
region,  510  ;  absence  of  sand- 
stone foothills  at  eastern  end  of, 
511  ;  influence  of  this  on  Tagh- 
liks, 511;  spring  in,  512,  513; 
denudation  of,   512  ;    vegetation 


in.  5°5>  509-12,  516-17  ;  climate 
of  Eastern,  51 3-1 4  ;  climate  of 
Northern,  522  ;  rainfall  of  Eastern, 
513-14,  513  n.  ;  Chinese  element 
in,  511,  514,  523  ;  character  of 
region  to  south-east  of,  514-15  ; 
fauna  of,  516-17,  517  n.  ;  immense 
views  from,  518-19  ;  nature  of 
country  between,  and  Ati  Bogdo, 
520-1  ;  section  of,  from  north  to 
south,  diagram,  521  ;  character 
of  Northern,  521-2  ;  pass  across, 

525  ;     character    of    inhabitants, 

526  ;  as  portion  of  Khanate  of 
Kumul,  491  ;  diagrams  of  sum- 
mits, 621  ;  map  of  alpine  region 
of,  623  ;  alpine  region  of,  621-24  ; 
estimates  of  altitudes,  624  ;  wild- 
sheep  of,  347,  570  ;  fauna  and 
flora  of,  629  ;  wapiti  of,  630  ;  as 
"neutral  zone,"  628-30;  gazelle- 
hunting  on  south  of,  585-6 

Karmukchi,  486 

Kasaks,  distinction  between,  and 
Kirghiz,  353  ;  of  Russian  terri- 
tory, 367  ;  in  Emil  Valley,  407  ; 
in  Borotala,  560-1 

Kash  Valley,  423 

Kashgar,  4,  25,  449,  579 

Kashmir,  4,  579 

Kastren,  200 

Kazir  River,  134,  202 

Kemchik  Bom,  108  ;  description  of, 
no;  as  hindrance  to  navigation, 
109 

Kemchik  Valley,  21,  23,  43,  102, 
103.  345  ''  tumuli  in,  16,  67  ;  as 
original  home  of  Kirghiz,  53,  351- 
2  ;  sources  of,  108,  109  ;  dryness 
of,  112,  185  ;  routes  northwards 
from,  113  ;  routes  westwards 
from,  116;  character  of,  188, 
191  ;  unexplored  portion  of,  117  ; 
tvpes  of  Uriankhai,  216  ;  cattle 
of,  238  ;  Uriankhai  inhabitants 
of,  203,  208  ;  Chedan  tributary  of 
Kemchik  River,  185-91,  195  ; 
Biakoff  on  the  river,  1 85  ;  Kurias 
in  the,  194 

Kem-Kemjuks,  203  n. 

Kendikti  Kul,  191,  345 

Kergen  Tash  Pass,  406 

Khalka  Mongols,  520 

Khamar  Pass,  622 

Khan  of  Kumul.  See  Mahsud  Shah 


INDEX 


649 


Khanate  of  Kumul,  extent  of,  491- 

3  ;   peculiar  features  of,  492 
Kharkir,  266  n.,  278,  282,  284-5 
Khitans,  352 
Kho-ching,    section    of    Charkhars, 

393.  554  n. 
Kho-Kho-Koto,    nomenclature    of, 

449  n.,  449,  450 

Khopuza,  old  town  of,  458 

Khotun-tam,  486,  502,  511  ;  visited 
by  Stein's  surveyor,  498  ;  altitude 
of,  511  ;   valley,  512 

Khua-Kem,  21,  32,  98,  103,  106, 107, 
109,  202,  203,  212  ;  river  and 
valley,  connexion  between  and 
Kossogol,  116;  head- waters  of, 
116  ;    upper  portion  of,  194 

Kiabek  sali,  Kobuk  sai,  391 

Kiang  of  Tibet,  compared  with 
Dzungarian  wild  ass,  607 

Kirei,  3,  11,  314  ;  we  first  enter  ter- 
ritory of,  350  ;  various  forms  of 
spelling,  351  n.  ;  early  history  of, 
352-3  ;  as  subjects  of  Prester 
John,  353-6  ;  as  Mohammedans, 
356-7,  363-5  ;  present  distribu- 
tion of,  357-61  ;   western  branch 

of,  359,  400  ;  visited,  549-50  : 
winter  migration  of ,  359 ;  southern 
section  of,  359-60  ;  taxation  of, 
361  ;  we  first  meet,  362  ;  char- 
acter of,  362-3  ;  compared  with 
Mongols  and  Buddhists,  362-4  ; 
pilgrims  to  Mecca,  364-5  ;  move- 
ments of,  367-6  ;  chief  of,  368-9  ; 
costumes  of,  369  ;  independence 
of,  370  ;  race-course  belonging 
to,  372,  389 ;  distribution  of 
western  branch,  389,  393  ;  in 
Kran  Valley,  398,  401  ;  in  Ulun- 
gur  district,  403  ;  of  Sand  district, 
457 .'  we  visit,  457-63  ;  on 
Bogdo-ola,  465-6  ;  movements  of, 
468 
Kirghiz,  53,  203  n.  ;  increase  of, 
345,  404  ;  race,  351  ;  birth-place 
of,  351-2  ;  early  history  of,  352- 
3  ;  distinction  between  and 
Kasaks,  353  ;  as  compared  with 
Mongols,  362-4  ;  as  Mohamme- 
dans, 364-6 ;  advance  of,  into 
Chinese  territory,  365-7  ;  drive 
out  Uigurs,  383  ;  in  Dzungaria, 
388,  389  ;  hunting  with  golden 
eagle,  586-7 


Kirghiz  Nor,  273,  274,  277 

Kitan,  or  Liao  dynasty,  384 

Kizil-bashi  Nor,  543 

Kizil  Tagh,  552,  605 

Klementz,  D.,  21,  200,  217,  276; 
publication,  634 

Kobdo  River,  23,  325  ;  valley  of 
Upper,  358  ;  beauty  of,  361-2  ; 
we  traverse,  367-68  ;  pheasants 
of,  632 

Kobdo,  town,  20,  22,  23,  24,  113, 
114,  115,  164,  273,  399,  450,  451 

Kobuk  Valley,  390,  391  n.,  404  ; 
inhabitants  of,  404  ;  Wang  of, 
404-5  ;  Torguts  of,  391,  391  n., 
404  ;  to  Chuguchak,  405,  408 

Kojur  Ridge,  406,  407 

Koko  Nor,  20 

Koko-undur,  452 

Kok-su  Valley,  422 

Koral  Valley,  525 

Kosh-agatch,  348 

Kosheti-dawan,  496,  526 

Koshmak  Valley,  511  ;  Little,  511  ; 
expedition  of,  516-18;  peaks  at 
head  of,  622 

Kosho  Valley,  389 ;  River,  549 

Kossogol  Lake,  20,  21,  24,  32,  136, 
201;  Uigurs  of,  199  ;  inhabitants 
of,  200  ;  reindeer  domesticated 
near,  212  ;  divide  between,  and 
Baikal,  100  ;  tracks  between  and 
Upper  Yenisei  basin,  116 

Kozloff,  P.  K.,  3,  6,  15,  23,  520, 
591  ;  crosses  Dzungaria,  456  ; 
exploration  in  Karlik  Tagh,  497- 
8  ;  estimates  of  altitude  of  Kar- 
lik Tagh,  624  ;  on  Ati  Bogdo, 
629  ;    publication,  636 

Kulja,  4,  18,  25,  87,  343,  399,  400 
we  reach,  420 ;  time  to,  from 
Chuguchak,  420 ;  arrival  at,  42 1-2 
winter  at,  425  ;  from,  to  Urumchi 
roads,  methods  of  transport  at 
428-9  ;  we  leave,  429  ;  revisited 
579  ;   and  finally  leave,  579 

Kulluk  Pass,  526 

Kulon,  or  wild-ass,  439,  460  ;  near 
Barkul,  532-3,  602  ;  domesti- 
cated, 602-3  ;  hunting  of,  603- 
6  ;  on  foothills  of  Tian  Shan,  602- 

4  ;      in  Central  Dzungaria,    604- 

5  ;  in  Dzungarian  Gate,  605-6  ; 
native  names  of,  607;  coloration 
and    measurements    of,     606-7 ; 


650 


INDEX 


range   of,    608 ;    compared    with 
Tibetan   kiang,   607 

Kran  Valley,  373.  397.  398.  400.  4° i 

Krasnoyarsk,  30,  37,  39,  44,  no 

Kriloff,  R.  N.,  22,  113  ;  cited,  183  ; 
publication,  636 

Kublai  Khan,  297,  316 

Kum  Chaza,  438 

Kummis,  220,  248 

Kumul,  4,  22,  25  ;  nomenclature  of, 
472  n.  ;  description  of,  473-6  ; 
our  arrival  at,  473-4  ;  entertained 
by  Khan  of,  473-4  ;  importance 
of  situation  of,  474-5,  476-7 ; 
history  of,  476-7  ;  religion  of  in- 
habitants, 477,  478  ;  size  of  oasis, 
478-9 ;  hydrography  of  oasis, 
478-82  ;  lakes  in  district  of, 
480-82  ;  cultivation  at,  482  ; 
Islam  in,  484-5  ;  Khan  of,  484- 
93  ;  discontent  amongst  inhabi- 
tants, 485-6;  neighbouring  oases, 
486  ;  subjects  of  the  Khan  of, 
486-7  ;  administration  of,  487  ; 
town  of,  488  ;  view  from,  494  ; 
early  visitors  to,  495-9 ;  astro- 
nomical position  of,  496 ;  we 
leave  for  Toruk,  501  ;  steppe  to 
north  of  oasis,  501  ;  return  to, 
503  ;  finally  leave,  503  ;  routes 
from,  to  Barkul,  526  ;  view  of 
Karlik  Tagh  from,  621-22 

Kumulik,  their  rendering  of  Turki 
words  relating  to  water,  etc.,  480- 
2  ;  Chinese  influence  amongst, 
482-5  ;  dress  of,  483  ;  women, 
483  ;  morality  of,  484-5  ;  strict- 
ness of,  484-5  ;  discontent 
amongst,  485-6  ;  administration 
of,  487  ;  taxes  imposed  upon, 
491  ;  on  Bogdo-ola,  465  ;  in 
Barkul  basin,  530-1  ;  compared 
with  Taghliks,  507-8 

Kunde-Kuria,  267,  270,  281 

Kundelun  Mountains.  See  also 
Turgun  Mountains,  3  ;  first  sight 
of,  266  ;  valley,  first  approach  to, 
267 ;  beauty  of,  268  ;  Dalai 
Khan's  residence  in,  273  ;  valley, 
281  ;  Peak,  282,  283,  287,  289  ; 
fauna  of,  345,  626-7 

Kunguz  Valley,  391 

Kuntiza,  457,  459 

Kun  Valley,  389 

Kurgans.     See  Tumuli 


Kuria,    of    Upper    Bei-Kem,    148  ; 

description  of,    150  ;    of  Chedan 

Valley,    186,    192-4  ;     of    Upper 

Kemchik,  191  ;    of  Upper  Yenisei 

basin,    194  ;     Kunde,   267,    271  ; 

influence  of,   on  Uriankhai,  211  ; 

as   meeting-place  for   Uriankhai, 

223 
Kurtuski  Pass,  113 
Kushabar,  43,  46,  79  ;    description 

of,  75,  80  ;   spring  at,  75,  76,  yj  ; 

forests  near,   77  ;    grazing  rights 

at,  80-1  ;    supplies  at,  82  ;    start 

from,  83 
Kutaiba,  Arab  conqueror  of  Central 

Asia,  614 
Kutun  River,  546 
Kuz-imchik  Range,  432,  619-20 
Kuzu-Kem,  147 
Kuzuk  Khan,  grandson  of  Jenghis 

Khan,  385,  406 


Lacoste,  de,  24  ;    publication,  637 

Ladikh,  579 

Lagoons,  of  Sairam  Nor,  620 

Lagopus  rupestris,  627 

Lakes  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  106, 
108,  134,  135  ;  LakeChapsa,  135  ; 
Toji  Kul,  152,  153  ;  Sut  Kul,  185  ; 
Noyon  Kul,  148  ;  Ubsa  Nor,  22, 
16,  192,  205,  261,  266,  273-5,  277, 
285,  221  ;  Uriu  Nor,  266,  273, 
277,  286,  287  ;  AchitNor,  22,  273, 
277,  278,  286,  287,  289,  321-3; 
Chagan  Nor,  324  ;  Kendikti  Kul, 
191,  345  ;  in  Kumul  district, 
480-2  ;  Barkul,  532-3  ;  Tur  Kul, 
523-4.  533  ;  Bogdo-ola,  538-9  ; 
Ala  Kul,  411-13,  416-18  ;  EbiNor, 
413-14,  417-18,  438,  552,  605; 
Kizil-bashi  Nor,  543  ;  Telli  Nor, 
381,  543  ;  Ayar  Nor,  543  ;  Sai- 
ram Nor,  420,  432,  438,  578,  560, 
619-21 

Lamaism,  amongst  Uriankhai,  206, 
222,  225,  256,  ;  evils  of,  270 
amongst  Mongols,  270  31 1-4 

Lamas,  215 

Lao-tzao-gou,  430 

Larch,  Siberian,  122,  178,  185,  190, 
627  ;  on  Baitak  Bogdo,  462  ;  on 
Karlik  Tagh,  629  ;  on  Ati  Bogdo, 
629 

Larix    Sibirica,    on    Karlik    Tagh, 


INDEX 


651 


51611.,  629;    on  Ati  Bogdo,  627, 

629 
Lapchuk,  486 
Laps,  198 

Lecoq,  Dr.  von,  499 
Leh,  4 
Lhasu,  269 

Liao,  or  Kitan,  dynasty,  384 
Liao-tun,  493 
Life-zones  of  N.W.    Mongolia  and 

Dzungaria,  Appendix  D.,  624-32  ; 

map  of,  418,  623 
Ling-yang,  saiga,  591 
Littledale,  St.  George,  327,  346,  548 
Lodun,  493 
Lydekker,  569 


Magyars,   8 

MahxnotBeg,  Chief  of  Western  Kirei, 
359  ;    made  pilgrimage  to  Mecca, 

365 

Mahsud  Shah,  Khan  of  Kumul,  487  ; 
power  of,  487  ;  entertainment  by, 
488-91  ;  hospitality  of,  487-8, 
503  ;  residence  of,  4S8-9  ;  garden 
of,  489-90  ;  country  seats  of, 
491,  504,  507  ;  extent  of  terri- 
tory of,  491-3 

Maili  Mountains,  389,  411,  548,  551  ; 
as  Kirei  territory,  359  ;  charac- 
ter of,    551  ;    sheep-hunting    on, 

551-2 

Makandaroff,  G.,  82,  320,  326,  330, 
332,  341,  421 

Manas,  town,  395,  439  ;  importance 
of,  440-2  ;  to  Urumchi,  442-3  ; 
Bogdo-ola  viewed  from,  535  ; 
revisited,  541  ;  routes  north- 
wards from,  541,  542  ;  we  leave 
finally,  542 

—  River,  381  ;  in  summer  flood, 
440  ;  importance  of  district,  441- 
2,  541  ;  character  of,  541,  542  ; 
forests  on,  542  ;  cultivation  on, 
542-3  ;  summer  rains  by,  542  ; 
we  cross,  543  ;  stag  near,  609  ; 
pheasants  of,  632 

Manchuria,  31,  35 

Man  River,  54 

Maral,  wapiti,  516 

Marco  Polo,  12,  15  n.,  129,  477,  482, 
485  ;    cited,  197,  254,  472 

Mardi  tribe,  125,  202,  204,  208 

Marmot,  271,  322-33,  342 


Martianoff,  N.,  72 

Matussovskd,   3,   18-19,    20  ;     visits 

Kumul,  495 
Mecca,    pilgrims    to,    from   Central 

Asia,    364-5  ;     from    Dzungaria, 

550 

Mengou-tsason,  266  n. 

Merzbacher,  G.,  25 ;  work  in  Tian 
Shan,  456  ;  in  Bogdo-ola,  537,  539, 
540  ;    publication,  637 

Metshin-ola,  493,  523,  528 

Migrations,  8,  9  ;  in  Yenisei  region, 
50  ;  Mongol,  cause  of,  295  ;  Mon- 
gol, influence  of,  297  ;  of  Torguts 
from  Dzungaria,  390-1 

Miller,  J.  H.,  4,  90,  94,  121,  130,  135, 
137,  140-7,  148,  150,  152,  154, 
223,  224,  231,  247.  251,  264,  266, 
289,  399,  414,  422,  439,  460,  466, 

504.  5M>  529,  530.  534 

Miller,  T.  P.,  421 

Mingyn,  Mongols,  520  ;  Gobi,  531  ; 
saiga  in,  591 

Minnusinsk,  30,  32,  35  ;  first  view 
of,  district,  36  ;  arrival  at,  40  ; 
temperature  of,  40  ;  rainfall  at, 
40  ;  richness  of  district,  41  ; 
population  of,  42  ;  early  history 
of  district,  48 ;  tumuli  in  dis- 
trict, 65 

Minnusinsk  steppes,  early  inhabit- 
ants of,  198,  200 

Miroshnishenko,  402-3  ;  publica- 
tion, 638 

Miskan  Pass,  537 

Mississippi  River,  39 

Mogoi,  521  ;  visited  by  Young- 
husband,  497 

Mohammedan  Chinese,  394.  See 
Dungans 

Mohammedanism.     See  Islam 

Mole-rats  of  Karlik  Tagh,  629 

Mongolia,  3,  5.  7-  9,  13  ;  importance 
of,  10  ;  discovery  of,  10  ;  com- 
munication with  Europe,  10,  12  ; 
our  lack  of  knowledge  of,  i,  3,  25  ; 
size  of,  29  ;  scenery  of,  29  ;  as  site 
of  Uigur  kingdom,  51  ;  fort  of, 
plateau,  y^  ;  Russian  traders  in, 
271,  322-33  ;  administrative  di- 
vision of,  272  n.  ;  climate  of, 
286  n.,  319,  321,  329,  361  ;  desic- 
cation in,  307  ;  zones  of,  292-3  ; 
nature  of,  292-3 

Mongolia,  North-western  23  ;  signifi- 


652 


INDEX 


cance  of,  7  ;  nomenclature  of,  14, 
15  n. ;  recent  changes  in,  26  ;  an- 
tiquities of,  24;  atmosphere  of,  as 
compared  with  Siberia,  257-9  ; 
nature  of,  291-3  ;  typical  scene 
in,  290;  sheep-country  of,  319; 
wild-sheep  of,  320,  size  and 
weight  of,  320,  life-zones  of, 
624-32  ;  map  showing  life-zones, 
625  ;  fauna  and  flora  of,  624-32. 
See  also  Ovis  ammon 

Mongols,  38  ;  invasions,  1 1  ;  signi- 
ficance of  race,  203,  296  ;  inva- 
sion of  Europe,  299-301  ;  strength 
of,  303  ;  of  present  day,  306-18; 
under  JNIanchu  yoke,  308-9 ; 
idolatry  amongst,  253-4 ;  as 
compared  with  Uriankhai,  260  ; 
of  high  rank,  270  ;  of  N.W.  Mon- 
golia, 293  ;  Durbet,  267-81  ; 
hardiness  of,  333  ;  independence 
of,  340-41  ;  as  compared  with 
Kirei,  362-4  ;  retrogression 
amongst,  366-7;  former  conquest 
of  Dzungaria,  382  ;  in  Dzungaria, 
388-9 ;  former  suzerainty  over 
Kumul,  476.     See  also  Durbet 

Monoliths,  ^y  ;  distribution  of,  58  ; 
use  of,  59 

Moose,  157  ;    southern  limit  of,  628 

Moraines  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
130,  152  ;  i!n  Turgun  Mountains, 
283,  287  ;  in  Upper  Kobdo  Val- 
ley, 371  ;  in  Karhk  Tagh,  508-9, 
518,  522  ;   in  Bogdo-ola,  538 

Moslem  element  in  China,  613-18. 
See  also  Islam 

Mosquitoes,  90,  143,  239 

Mounds  in  Southern  Dzungaria,  438 

Moving  sands,  460-2 

Mukutai  Plain,  403 

I\Iu-li-kho,  463 

Musk-deer,  157,  630 

Naimans,  352,  382,  384 

Nan-lu,  428,  475 

Narin  Kara,  402 

Narin  Kur,  530 

Narin  Valley,  479,  525-6,  506 

Narin,   village,  visited  by   Kozloff, 

498 
Nature-worship,  241-50 
Nears,  Kumulik  hunter,  592-8 
Nestorian  Christianity,  354,  356 
Nay  Elias,  3,  20,  25,  321 


Nile,  39 

Nom,    486,    521,    522  ;     visited    by 

Potanin,  496  ;   visited  by  Kozloff, 

498 
Nomadism,  208-11 
Noyon  Kul,  148 
Noyon,    of    Uriankhai,    204-5  ;     of 

Toji     tribe,     202,     204,     248-9  ; 

of    Kemchik    tribe,    186-7,    203, 

204-5 
Novi-Udinsk,  147 

Obos,  153,  245-7 

Ob  River,  20,  36,  39,  115 

Obrutcheff,  V.  A.,  23  ;  publica- 
tion, 635 

Ochotona  of  Karlik  Tagh,  629 

Ogarka-ola  Mountains,  loi,  103 

Ogodai.     See  Oktai 

Oina,  203,  204,  212 

Oinar,  ditto  Oina,  200 

Oktai,  son  of  Jenghis  Khan,  385 

Olon  Nor,  458-9 

Omsk,  18,  19 

Omyl,  or  Emil,  406 

Ondar,  200 

Ordoos,  20 

Orengai,  200 

Orography,  of  Karlik  Tagh,  as  seen 
from  Kumul,  500  ;  of  alpine  re- 
gion, 510  ;  of  foothills,  510  ;  of 
eastern  portion,  511,  514-15 

Ostiak,  32,  61 

Ostrovsky,  P.  E.,  23,  112;  pub- 
lication, 637 

Oureghe,  tax-unit,  207 

Ovis  ammon  hodgsoni,  571 

Ovis  ammon  karelini,  347 ;  in 
winter  haunts,  439,  603-4  ;  of 
Borotala,  565  ;  measurements  of, 
569  ;  compared  with  Tian  Shan 
specimens,  569  ;  distribution  of, 
569,  570,  628;  horns  of,  de- 
scribed, 570-1  ;  coloration  of, 
571-2  ;  of  Karlik  Tagh,  593-4,  629 

Ovis  ammonlittledalei,  566;  distribu- 
tion of,  570-1 
Ovis    ammon   poli,  compared   with 

Ovis  ammon  karelini,  570-1 
Ovis,    amtnon    sairensis,    548,    549, 

551--^.  630 
Ovis  ammon  typica,  264,  626,  630  ; 
size    and    weight    of,    320  ;     first 
mention  of,  321  ;    habits  of,  330, 
331,    334-45.    52>7  '.    hunting    of. 


INDEX 


653 


33 1 >  332,  334-9  ;  size  of  Miller's 
big  ram,  339 ;  coloration  of,  339  ; 
old  horns  of,  343  ;  distribution  of, 

344-7 
Ovis  nigrimontana,  549 

Paikoff,  23  ;   publication  of,  637 

Pamir,  35 

Paquet,  Dr.,   24 ;    publication,   637 

Paris,  Matthew,  299 

Partridge,  of  Karlik  Tagh,  629  ; 
of  Chukar,  627-9,  631  ;  Brown, 
629,  632 

Pavlinoff,  19 

Pei-lu,  409,  428,  440,  583  ;  passes 
from,  to  Nan-lu,  447-8 

Pekin,  4,  8,  20 

Perdix  daiirica,  629,  632 

Perdix  perdix,  632 

Pereira,  John,  421,  564,  568,  575, 
596,  602 

Pereira,  Major  G.,  25,  373 

Persia,  6 

Petersen,  Mr.,  445,  449 

Petropavlovsk,  86,  90,  92 

Pheasants,  in  Kash  Valley,  423  ;  of 
Mongolia  and  Dzungaria,  632 

Piassetsky,  P.,  477,  495,  532  ;  pub- 
lication, 637 

Picas,  140  ;  of  Karlik  Tagh,  629 

Pievtzof,  3,  20 

Poland,  12 

Poplar  forest,  dying,  468-70 

Potanin,  G.  N.,  3  ;  explorations  of, 
19-20,  274 ;  work  in  Turgun 
Mountains,  278,  284-5  '>  near 
Barkul,  531  ;  visits  Barkul  and 
Kumul,  496 ;  maps  by,  496 ; 
publication,  637 

Pozdnyeiff,  22  ;    publication,  638 

Precipitation  on  Tian  Shan,  379; 
on  Altai,  380 

Prester  John,  3,  11,  350,  351,  353  ; 
the  romance  of,  353-6 ;  the 
accredited  wealth  and  power  of, 

355 

Previous  Explorations.  See  Ex- 
plorations 

Price,  M.  P.,  4,  44,  77,  94,  121,  130, 
137,  138,  147,  148,  150,  152,  154, 
1S5,  216,  223,  247,  251,  263,  286, 
287,  289,  327,  340,  347,  399,  421  ; 
cited,  418  ;   publication,  638 

Prjevalsky,   N.   M.,   3,   6,    15  ;     ex 


ploration  in  Mongolia,  21,  313  ; 
crossed  Dzungaria,  456 ;  cited, 
484,  526,  626 ;  visits  Kumul, 
496 ;  near  Barkul,  531  ;  sights 
Bogdo-ola  from  Urungu  River, 
535  ;  wild- horse,  608  ;  publication, 
638 

Protocol,  Russo-Mongolian,  632-4 

Ptarmigan,  140,  627,  631 

Rabdan,  Khan  of  Eleuths,  386 

Radloff,  D.  W.,  6,  21  ;  publica- 
tion, 638 

Raemdonck,  Father,  421 

Rafailow,  20  ;  visits  Barkul  and 
Kumul,  496 

Rafts,  119,  120,  230 

Rai  Lai  Singh,  Stein's  surveyor,  498 

Railway  construction  between  Si- 
beria and  Mongolia,  323 

Rainfall  at  Minnusinsk,  40  ;  in 
Upper  Yenisei  basin,  107 ;  on 
Turgun  Mountains,  284,  285, 
286  n.  ;  in  Karlik  Tagh,  513  n., 
514  ;  on  Bogdo-ola,  530 

Rapids  on  Bei-Kem,  174-6 

Raschid-ed-din,  200 

Rashid  historian,  15  n. 

Ratzel,  cited,  256 

Ravines  in  Central  Dzungaria,  545- 
6 

Red  Indians,  8 

Regel,  20 

Reindeer  (domesticated),  early  men- 
tion of,  in  North  Asia,  15  n.,  197  ; 
rock-drawings  of,  50,  56  ;  exist- 
ence in  Chinese  Empire,  198  ; 
their  love  of  cold,  etc.,  127-8,  209  ; 
dependence  of  Uriankhai  upon, 
212,  220  ;  distribution  of,  157; 
212,  213  ;  wood-carvings  of,  223  ; 
Uriankhai  care  of,  124,  230,  234, 
235  ;  description  of  Uriankhai: 
measurements  of,  etc.,  231-3  ; 
Norwegian  reindeer  as  compared 
with,  231,  232  ;  habitat  of,  233, 
234  ;  southern  limit  of,  105,  127, 
179,  626,  630  ;  Uriankhai  dislike 
of  parting  with,  141 

—  (wild),  128,  129,  135  ;    range  of, 

136,  157 
Religion,     religions    of    Asia,     28  ; 
religion  and   art,  55  ;    primitive, 
55  ;    influence  of,  on  Uriankhai, 


654 


INDEX 


192,  193,  211  ;  early  beliefs  of 
Uriankhai,  241  ;  Shammanism 
amongst  Uriankhai,  241  ;  an- 
cestor-worship amongst  Urian- 
khai, 243  ;  idolatry  amongst 
Uriankhai,  243,  253-4  ;  progress 
of  ideas  amongst  Uriankhai, 
241-56 

Reservation  for  Uriankhai,  188 

Rhododendron,  95 

Rickmers,  W.  R.,  cited,  379  ;  pub- 
lication, 638 

Ridgeway,  Prof.,  217 

Riga,  30 

River-terraces  at  Tomsk,  501 

Roads.     See  Routes 

Roborovsky,  V.  I.,  23  ;  leader  of 
expedition  to  Karlik  Tagh,  497- 
8  ;    publication,  638 

Rockhill,  cited,  417 

Roe-deer,  157,  582  ;  in  Ati  Bogdo, 
521,  629,  630  ;  in  Borotala,  566  ; 
in  Urta  Saryk,  576  ;  in  Karlik 
Tagh,  629  ;  of  Mongolia  and 
Dzungaria,  630 

Roubles,  45,  181,  281 

Routes  :  Achinsk  to  Minnusinsk, 
35-7  ;  to  sources  of  Yenisei  from 
Siberia,  31,  32,  42-3  ;  in  Upper 
Yenisei  basin,  1 12-16,  147,  148  ; 
between  jMongolia  and  Siberia, 
115,  180,  188,  274  ;  taken  by  pil- 
grims to  Mecca,  365  ;  from  Hi 
Valley  to  Kumul,  428  ;  between 
China  and  Sin-kiang,  444  ;  be- 
tween Dzungaria  and  Chinese 
Turkestan,  447-8;  between  Dzun- 
garia and  China,  448-52  ;  be- 
tween Kalgan  and  Dzungaria, 
448-52  ;  between  Kho-Kho-Koto 
and  Dzungaria,  449-52  ;  over 
Tou-shui  Plateau,  466 ;  from 
Urumchi  to  Kumul,  447-8  ;  be- 
tween Barkul  and  Kumul,  536 
Rubruck,  William  of,  12;  cited,  61, 
200,  276  n.,  321,  369,  411,  417 

Russian-Chinese  frontier,  2,  9,  13, 
^7>  35.  4^'  73  '>  rnovements  of 
nomads,  366-7 

Russians,  explorers,  i,  3,  6,  13,  15  ; 
advance,  into  Central  Asia,  6,  9, 
13  ;  into  Siberia,  32,  33  ;  Geo- 
graphical Society,  15,  72  ;  maps 
40  versts,  16 ;  trading  expedi- 
tions of,  20,  531  ;  adaptability  of. 


33  ;  ability  to  increase, 35  ;  pro- 
gress in  Siberia,  34  ;  traders 
in  Upper  Yenisei  basin,  152,  155, 
160-73  ;  as  fur-hunters,  168  ;  as 
fishermen,  169  ;  traders  in  I\Ion- 
golia,  271,  275,  322-33;  in  Mon- 
golia, 315-17;  influence  on  Mon- 
gols, 316  ;  in  Urumchi,  388,  445  ; 
progress  and  advance  on  Chinese 
frontier,  406,  567,  569  ;  Russo- 
Mongolian  Protocol,  632-34 


Sabie,  159-62,  173  ;   we  leave,  174 

Sable,  207,  223 

Sacrifices  amongst  Uriankhai,  246, 
247 

Safianoff,  112,  147,  154,  167,  172-3, 

Sahara,  6 

Saiga,  534,  552,  582  ;  peculiarities 
of,  590  ;  habitat  of,  590-1  ;  na- 
tive names  of,  591  ;  value  of  horns 
of,  591  ;  hunting  of,  595-601 
movements  of,  597-8  ;  weight, 
etc.,  of,  598  ;  habits  of,  600  ;  na- 
tive method  of  hunting,  600-1; 
range  of,  628 

Sailugem  Range,  102,  191,  273,  277 

Sairam  Nor,  420,  432,  438,  578,  560, 
583  ;  Appendix  B,  619  ;  ancient 
strands  and  barriers  of,  619-21  ; 
prevailing  winds  of,  620  ;  la- 
goons of,  620  ;    salinity  of,  621 

Sair  Mountains,  23,  404,  406  ;  wild- 
sheep  of,  548  ;  as  Kirei  territory, 
559  ;  as  portion  of  northern 
border-range  of  Dzungaria,  379  ; 
position  of,  as  regards  life-zones, 
627 

Saklia  River,  263  ;  pass  from,  into 
Upper  Kemchik,  264  ;  range,  264, 
277  ;    tumuli  in  valley  of,  265 

Saksai  River,  22 

Saljak  tribe,  202,  204,  208,  212 

Samoyedes,  8,  34  ;  origin  of,  52, 
198-200,  201 

Sand-belt  of  Southern  Dzungaria, 
438  ;  of  Central  Dzungaria,  543  ; 
north  of  Guchen,  456-63  ;  in- 
habitants of,  457;  moving  dunes 
of,  460-2 

Sand-dunes,  in  Barkul  basin,  529 

Sand-grouse,  migrations  of,  407-8 

Sandstone  foothills  of  Karlik  Tagh, 
479,  500,  501.  502,  503 


INDEX 


655 


Santai,  432 

Sapoznikoff,  V.  V.,  23,  24,  371,  380, 
403  ;   publication,  638 

Sart,  meaning  of  name,  397  ;  emi- 
grants to  Bogdo-ola,  465 

Sasik  Kul,  418 

Sa-veen,  544 

Saxaul  forest,  459-60 

Scotch  Pine,  T],  78 

Seebohm,  H.,  38  ;   publication,  638 

Semenof,  P.  P.,  15  ;  publication,  638 

Semipalatinsk,   45 

Severtzoff,  6 

Shabin-daba,  113 

Shamman  doctors,  250-3,  255 

Shamar-daba  Pass,  114 

Shamnianism,  152,  214,  241-56 ; 
amongst  Uriankhai,  250-6 ; 
amongst  Mongols,  311  ;  amongst 
Siberian  tribes,  61 ,  364  ;  secrecy  of, 
250-1  ;  remnants  of,  amongst 
Kirghiz,  364  ;  destroyed  by  Islam, 

364 
Shammanist,  28 
Shargak-taiga,  103,  107 
Sharasume,    360,    395  ;     described, 

397-9  ;     important    position    of, 

398,    401  ;    population    of,    398  ; 

distance  from  Kobdo  and  other 

towns,  399  ;   cost  of  transport  at, 

405  ;    we  leave,  399  ;    to  Urum- 

chi,  542 
Shensi,  51 
Shi-kho,    395,    438,    439,    546 ;     to 

Chuguchak    route,    541-2,    547  ; 

kulon  near,  602 
Shingle-banks,    at    eastern    end    of 

Sairam  Nor,  617-19 
Shive  River,  121 
Shona  Nor,  480,  481 
Shopoli,  511,  513-14.  515  :  region  to 

south-east  of,  514-15 
Siberia,  6,  7,  13,  14  ;    tribes  of,  2  ; 

frontier  of,  5,  9  ;  colonization  of, 

33-4;  early  spring  in,  30  ;  break-up 

of  winter,  30  ;    Russian  conquest 

of    32-3  ;    accessibility    of,     34  ; 

opening   up   of,    34  ;    prehistoric 

man  in,  49 
Siberian  colonists,  winter's  work  of, 

76  ;   types  of,  80 
Siberian    larch.      See    Larch     and 

Larix  sib  trie  a 
Siberian  servants,  82 
Siberian  spring,  76 

II — 22 


Siberian-Mongol  frontier,  tribes  of, 

199  ;  nature  of,   30-2,  35,   41-7  ; 

delimitation  of,  15  n,,  47 
Sibos;  387 
Sin-kiang,  387-8,  400  ;    capital  of, 

444-7  ;   Chinese  settlers  in,  436  n. 
Sin  Taiga,  159 
Sisti-Kem,  94,  105,  154  ;  depot  on, 

118 
Skobieff  ranch,  iii,  155 
Skulls,  types  of  in  tumuli,  70 
Snow,  distribution  of,   in  Southern 

Dzungaria,  438 
Snow-cock,  of  Karlik  Tagh,  629  ;  of 

Ati  Bogdo,  629  ;   of  Mongolia  and 

Dzungaria,  632 
Snow-leopards,  582,  631 
Snuff-bottles  amongst  Mongols,  62,63 
Soiot,  124,  199-201 
Solons,  387 

Songares.     See  Dzungars 
Sosnovski,  20  ;   visits  Kumul,  495  ; 

publication,  638 
Spring,    at   Kushabar,    76,    77  ;     in 

Karlik  Tagh,  512  ;    in  Southern 

Dzungaria,  534 
Spruce-tree,  yy  ;    Tian  Shan,    627  ; 

of  Karlik  Tagh,  516-7  n.,  629 
Squirrels,  southern  limit  of,  626 
Stag,    Yarkand,    582  ;    in    Central 

Dzungaria,  542,  608-9 
Stamboul,  8 
Stefansson,  217 
Stein,  22  ;  astronomical  position  for 

Kumul,     496  ;      explorations    in 

Karlik  Tagh,  498  ;   on  antiquities 

of  Am-Tam,  504-5  ;    estimate  of 

altitude     for     peaks    of     Karlik 

Tagh,  624  ;  publication,  638 
Steppe  between  Achinsk  and  Min- 

nusinsk,  36 ;    conditions    in    the 

Upper  Yenisei  basin,  103-5,  108, 

1 12-13 
Stocks,   i.e.  unwrought  stones,    56, 

58  ;    around  tumuli,  66 
Stone-effigy,  60,  61 
Strands    of   Uriu    Nor,    286-7 ;     of 

Sairam  Nor,  617-19;  of  Bar  Kul, 

533 
Su-chow,  514 

Suok,  323,  324,  325  ;   river,  327 
Surveying  in  Upper  Yenisei  Basin, 

132,  133  ;    in  Turgun  Mountains, 

283,  288-9 
Stis  scrofa  nigripes,  567 


6=i6 


INDEX 


Sutai,  433 

Sut  Kill,  185 

Swayne,  Major,  331  n. 

Syansk,  17,  31,  32,  36  ;  routes  over, 
42,  43  ;  first  indication  of,  45  ; 
Minnusinsk  to,  45  ;  view  of,  from 
Kushabar,  84  ;  approach  from, 
S^  ;  foothills  of,  92  ;  watershed 
crossed,  92  ;  impression  of,  from 
Algiak  Pass,  94  ;  length  of,  100  ; 
description  of,  loo-i  ;  flora  of, 
105  ;  tracks  across,  113  ;  water- 
shed of,  134  ;   reindeer  of,  232 

Sythians,  197 


Taghliks,  mountaineers  of  Karlik 
Tagh,  4S6,  502,  306,  507,  525  ; 
compared  with  Kumuliks,  507-8  ; 
character  of,  507-8,  526  ;  influ- 
ence of  Chinese  on,  508  ;  semi- 
nomadic,  523  ;  environment  of, 
526 

Taiga  (forest),  first  view  of,  46 ; 
impenetrability  of,  74  ;  atmo- 
sphere of,  89-90,  95-6  ;  travel  in 
the,  86,  91 

Taiga  (rocky  uplifts),  in  Upper 
Yenisei  basin,  95,  131,  137,  139; 
venerated  by  Uriankhai,  244-5 

Takianzi,  435-7  ;  gazelle-hunting  at, 

583 
Tal,  520-1 

Ta  lao  Yang  (large-headed-sheep), 
392 

Talki  Pass,  378,  428,  430,  432 

Tamarisk  mounds,  468-70 

Tamerlane,  Timur,  34 

Tannu-ola,  3,  17,  21,  23,  100,  201  ; 
length  of,  description  of,  loi  ;  al- 
titude of,  10 1  ;  difference  between 
and  Syansk,  10 1  ;  snowfall  of, 
III,  192  ;  routes  across,  114,  115  ; 
as  natural  boundary  of  Siberia, 
166  ;  as  seen  from  Cha-Kul,  182  ; 
ascent  of,  190  ;  character  of,  190  ; 
we  cross  the,  195  ;  impressions 
from  summit  of,  257-9  ;  south 
side  of,  261  ;  wild-sheep  of,  345  ; 
as  dividing-line  between  Siberian 
and  Mongolian  fauna,  624-5 

Tapsa  Valley,  157,  167,  172 

Taranchi,  486 

Tarbagatai  INIountains,  as  Kirei  ter- 
ritory, 359  ;    as  northern  border- 


range  of  Dzungaria,  379,  389,  406 ; 

sheep  of,  548,  627,  628 
Ta  Shar,  486,  503-4 
Tash-bulak,  4S6,  511,  514 
Ta-shih-tu,    378,    464,    466-7,  588, 

591  ;    revisited,  534  ;    Bogdo-ola 

peaks  seen  from,  535  ;  wild-sheep 

of,  593,  593 

Tash-kil  Range,  130 

Tashkil,  103,  159 

Tastandi  Range,  loi 

Tartar,  199 

Tartary.     See  Mongolia 

Tchihatcheff,  P.  de,  18  ;  publica- 
tion, 638 

Tekes  Valley,  391 

Telli  Nor,  381,  543 

Tengri,  good  spirit,  254,  256 

Tepee,  124 

Teri  Nor,  194 

Tess  Valley,  24,  114,  150,  274; 
Amban  of,  205 

Tetrao  urogallus,  626 

Tetrco  tetrix,  626 

Tetrastis  bonasia,  626 

Tetraogallus  altaicus  632  ;  hima- 
layensis,  632 

Thomas,  Oldfield,  567 

Tian  Shan,  18,  21,  25,  378,  439,  440  ; 
as  southern  border-range  of 
Dzungaria,  378  ;  as  insular  moun- 
tain-group, 418,  628  ;  at  south  of 
Manas,  442  ;  of  Urumchi,  390  ; 
influence  on  Dzungaria,  379  ; 
Torguts  of,  390  ;  viewed  from 
Ala-tau,  555  ;  viewed  from  Cen- 
tral Dzungaria,  543 

Tian  Shan- Altai  divide,  347,  462-3, 
497,  628 

Tibet,  16,  17,  21,  106 

Tiger,  542,  582,  609,  610,  631 

Tihua-Tihua-fu,  443,  444  n.  See 
Urumchi 

Togucha,  477;  Buddhist  remains 
at,  477,  499  ;  visited  by  Lecoq 
and  Griinwedel,  499;  "Kariz" 
at,  479  n. ;  Iti  Kul  near,  481, 
486 

Toji,  tribe,  125,  146,  149,  154,  156, 
202,  204,  212  ;  Noj'Onof,  148;  dis- 
tinction between,  and  other  Urian- 
khai, 208  ;  migration  of,  209-10  ; 
religious  ceremony  amongst,  247- 
50  ;  wrestling-match  amongst, 
223 


INDEX 


>57 


Toji  Kul,  148,  152,  153,  170,  209, 
229 

Toll  Lake,  480-2 

Tomdun,  523,  524,  525 

Tomsk,  24 

Tomyukuk,  Turkish  hero,  67 

Toran,  112 

Torguts,  360,  386-7,  389-90  ;  num- 
bers of,  who  migrated  to  Russia, 
390  n.  ;  Kobuk  section  of,  391  n.  ; 
390-1,  404-5  ;  two  sections  of, 
in  Dzungaria,  389-90  ;  in  Kran 
Valley,  398,  401  ;  migration  of, 
393  ;  of  Bartik  Bogdo,  462  ;  of 
Edsin  Gol,  520 

Tortsi-bek,  chief  of  Torguts,  391  n. 

Toruk,  486  ;  visited  by  Stein,  498  ; 
country  between  Kumul  and, 
50  ;  we  visit,  501-3  ;  description 
of,  501-2  ;    revisited,  526 

Tou-shui,  378,  526  ;  plateau,  466- 
7,  468,  533,  630 ;  explored  by 
Grum-Grjimailo,  497 ;  as  dividing- 
line  between  Tian  Shan  zone  and 
Karlik  Tagh,  629-30 

Trade  between  Mongolia  and  Rus- 
sia, 322-3  ;  between  China  and 
Dzungaria,  449-52  ;  India  and 
Chinese  Turkestan,  449 

Trade-routes  of  Asia,  425-6 

Trans-Baikalia,  199 

Transcaspia,  6 

Transport,  in  Upper  Yenisei  basin, 
184,  194  ;  in  Mongolia,  279,  280  ; 
between  China  and  Dzungaria, 
449-55  ;    cost  of,  449,  450 

Travel,  difficulties  of,  in  winter,  422 

Tsagan  Gol,  22 

Tszouselan,  266  n. 

Tuba,  race,  49,  124,  199,  200  ; 
Chinese  form  of,  200 

Tuba  River,  41,  200,  202 

Tumuli,  36,  49 ;  constructed  by 
Uigurs,  53,  65-72  ;  two  types  of, 
66  ;  size  of,  66  ;  contents  of,  68  ; 
skulls  found  in,  70 

Tungan.     See  Dungan 

Tunguse,  15  n.,  32,  33,  70,  199,  201, 
212,  231,  236,  241 

Turfan,  apricots  of,  398  ;  settlers 
in  Dzungaria,  464 

Turgun   Mountains,    3,    192,    205  ; 
early  visitors  to,  20,  22  ;  first  sight 
of,   266  ;     nomenclature,   266  n.  ; 
as  Durbet  territory,   272-3  ;    as 

II — 22* 


home  of  Durbet  Mongols,  267-7  ; 
square  mileage  of,  277  ;  character 
of,  277-8  ;  Peak,  281  ;  River, 
282  ;  precipitation  in,  284-5  '• 
temperature  in,  285  ;  vegetation 
in,  308  ;    fauna  of,  626-7 

Turk,  8 

Turkestan,  Chinese,  4,  9,  22  ;  Rus- 
sian, 4  ;    in  general,  16,  17 

Tur  Kul,  493,  522,  523  ;  visited  by 
Kozlofi,  498  ;  salinity  of,  524  ; 
bird-life  of,  524  ;  compared  with 
Bar  Kul,  533 


Ubasi  Khan,  Torgut  leader,  391 

Ubsa  Nor,  22,  116,  192,  205,  261, 
266,  273-5,  277,  285  ;  Khan  of, 
205,  228  ;  salt  of  basin,  221 

Ugro-Samoyede,  52 

Ugut,  121 

Uigurs,  8,  198-9,  218,  352,  382, 
383-4,  388 ;  origin  of,  51  ;  of 
Kossogol,  199,  200  ;  plateau, 
361  ;  river,  325  ;  valley,  344  ; 
dominion  over  Kumul,  476, 
504-5  ;   of  Karlik  Tagh,  505 

Uiuk  River,  43,  177,  203  ;  valley, 
105  ;   village,  112  ;   pass,  113 

Ulan-daba  Pass,  345 

Ulan  Kom,  262  ;  as  residence  of 
Wang  of  Durbets,  274  ;  import- 
ance of,  274 

Uliassutai,  19,  20,  113,  114,  115,  150, 
164,   188,  204,  272,  272  n.,  450, 

451 
Ulu-Kem,  98,  103,  107,  203  ;   unites 

with   Kemchik,    108  ;    free  from 

ice,  109  ;  navigation  of,  109,  no  ; 

velocity   of,    109,    179;     rises   in 

flood.  III 

Ulungur  Lake,  19,  357,  401,  402  ; 
supposed  connexion  with  Irtish, 
402-3  ;  salinity  of,  403  :  wild- 
horses  near,  608 

Ulu-tai,  511 

Ulu-taiga,  317,  139 

Unwrought  stones.     See  Monoliths 

Upper  Yenisei  basin.      See  Yenisei 

Ural  Mountains,  29,  33 

Urga,  22,  114,  150,  180,  269,  451; 
Dalai  Lama,  194 

Urge,  522 

Uriangut,  199,  201 

Uriankhai,  2  :    earliest  mention  of. 


658 


INDEX 


15  n.  ;  origin  of,  51  ;  religious 
ideas  of,  58,  137;  first  signs  of, 
122  ;  introduction  to,  124  ;  Ala- 
su,  encampment  of,  124-8  ;  yearly 
movements  of,  132  ;  Buddhistic 
ceremony,  151  ;  as  fishermen, 
153  ;  as  watermen,  153  ;  encamp- 
ment near  Skobiefi,  156  ;  lamas, 
151.  193  ;  limits  of  territory, 
188,  260  ;  religion,  192-4  ;  reli- 
gious ceremony,  193-4  ;  religious 
ideas  of,  241-56 ;  early  history 
of,  198,  199,  204  ;  nomenclature 
of,  199  ;  tribes  of  Oinar  and  On- 
dar,  200  ;  of  Kossogol,  201  ;  of 
Altai,  200  ;  affinities  with  Aba- 
kan Tartars,  200,  201  ;  distribu- 
tion of,  201,  202  ;  area  of  ter- 
ritory, 201  ;  estimate  of,  popula- 
tion, 202  ;  tribal  division  of,  202, 
203  ;  tribal  areas  delimitated,  203  ; 
administration  of,  204,  205  ;  ab- 
sorption by  Siberians,  206  ;  La- 
maism  amongst,  192,  193,  206; 
taxes  imposed  upon,  206-8,  228  ; 
nomadic    tendencies    of,    208-11, 

214  ;  reindeer-keeping  section, 
209 ;  sheep  and  cattle  rearing 
section,  210-11  ;  effect  of  religion 
upon,  211  ;  domestic  economy  of, 
212  ;  differences  between  rein- 
deer-clans and  others,  208,  209, 
236,  237,  240  ;  distribution  of 
reindeer-clans,  212,  213  ;  isola- 
tion of,  213  ;  character  of,  131, 
213,  214,  215  ;    laziness  of,   172, 

215  ;  shyness  of,  215  ;  dealings 
of,  with  Russian  traders,  163,  164, 
215  ;  ethnographical  affinities  of, 
18,  126,  215;  average  height  of, 
216;  hair  of,  216-18;  "  blond- 
ness  "  of,  217,  218  ;  hair-dressing, 
218  ;  dress,  headgear,  boots,  219  ; 
food,  220  ;  fur-hunting,  221  ;  de- 
sire for  children,  222  ;  melancholia 
of,  222  ;  musical  instruments,  222  ; 
wood-carvings,  223  ;  wrestling, 
224-5  ;  skill  in  hunting,  225-8  ; 
dogs,  227-8  ;  as  fishermen,  229  ; 
as  watermen,  229,  230  ;    singing, 

229,  230  ;     herding   of   reindeer, 

230,  234,  235  ;  riding  reindeer, 
235;  use  of  reindeer,  235-6; 
Mongolized  section  of,  237 ; 
use  of  yurts,  238  ;  herds  of,  238  ; 


horses  of,  238  ;  use  of  lasso,  239- 
40  ;  Shammanism  amongst,  241, 
256  ;  ancestor  worship  amongst, 
61,  243  ;  idolatry  amongst,  243, 
253-4  ;  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being, 
244,  253-6 ;  effect  of  environ- 
ment upon,  214,  242-4  ;  of  Altai, 
325.   326,   327 

Uriu  Nor,  266,  273,  277,  286,  287 

Urkashar  Mountains,  389,  406, 
407 ;  as  portion  of  northern 
border-range  of  Dzungaria,  379; 
position  of,  between  life-zones  of 
Central  Asia,  627,  628  ;  wild- 
sheep  of,  548 

Urkhogaitu  Pass,  370,  373,  373  n. 

Urta  Saryk  Valley,  560,  568,  576  ; 
ibex  in,  576-7,  578 

Urumchi,  4,  382,  383,  399  ;  seat  of 
government,  395  ;  as  site  of 
ancient  Uigur  capital,  383-4  ; 
nomenclature  of,  443-4,  444  n.  ; 
position  of,  444  ;  population  of, 
445  ;  postal  service  to  and  from, 
445-6  ;  to  Guchen,  447-8  ;  from, 
to  Kumul,  447-8 

Urungu  River,  19,  381  ;  Torguts  of, 
391  ;   as  Kirei  territory,  358,  359 

Usinsk  Range,  96  ;  town,  42,  165, 
180 

Uss  River,  103,  no  ;   pass,  113 

Utt  River,  202,  203 

Uturuk,  52T,  522 


Vacelkoff,  163 

Vambery,  A.,  cited,  366,  618  ;  pub- 
lication, 638 

Vegetation  in  Dzungaria,  382,  377. 
See  also  Forests 

Verkhoyansk,  34 

Vladimir  Riedel,  63,  64 

Vladimirtsoff,  B.  V.,  272,  274  ; 
publication,  639 


Wang,  dog,  595 
Wang-fu,  262-3 
Wapiti   deer,    161,    162,    179,    227  ; 

in  Altai,  344,  422,  582  ;    in  Urta 

Saryk,  576  ;   in  Karlik  Tagh,  627 ; 

of  Mongolia  and  Dzungaria,  628 
Wiggins,  Capt.,  38 
Wild-ass,  439,  460,  582,  628.  See  also 

Kulon 


INDEX 


659 


Wild-horse,  626,  628 

Wild-pig,  566-7,  582,  631 

Wild-sheep,  264,  439,  466,  582  ;  in 
Borotala  Valley,  561-74,  568, 
569  ;  in  Ala-tau,  567 ;  of  Karlik 
Tagh,  517  n.  ;  of  Ati-Bogdo,  521  ; 
of  Mongolia  and  Dzungaria,  630. 
See  also  Ovis  ammon,  etc. 

Winds,  prevailing,  of  Guchen  dis- 
trict, 460-1  ;  of  Dzungarian  Gate, 
413  ;     tradition   concerning,    413 

Winter,  in  Dzungaria,  effect  on 
animals,  439  ;  in  Central  Asia, 
424,  425  ;  difficulties  of  travel 
in,  422 

Wolves,  557,  558 

Wooden  images  of  animals,  246 

Yaks,  275,  276  n.  ;  on  Karlik  Tagh, 
526 

Yakub  Beg,  476 

Yamachu  glacier  287  ;  Peak,  287  ; 
valley,  287  Plateau,  288-90 

Yandzhikhai,  439 ;  kulon  near, 
602 

Yarkand,  4,  579 

Yenisei,  Upper,  basin,  2  ;  recent 
changes  in,  26  ;  character  of,  74  ; 
earliest  mention  of,  15  n.  ;  lack 
of  knowledge  of,  17,  25  ;  early 
exploration  of,  18,  26  ;  antiqui- 
ties of,  24  ;  routes  to,  from 
Siberia,  31  ;  routes  from  Minnu- 
sinsk,  42,  43  ;  difficulties  of 
access,  75,  80;  first  view  of ,  93- 
6  ;  scenery  in,  95  ;  orographic- 
ally,  politically,  and  physically, 
97 ;  area  of,  98  ;  hydrography  of, 
98, 107-8  ;  topography  of,  98-1 1 7 ; 
average  altitude  of,  99  ;  border- 
ranges  of,  99  ;  northern  wall  of, 
100;  southern  wall  of ,  101,147- 
8  ;  protective  nature  of  border 
ranges,  102  ;  western  wall  of,  102  ; 
eastern  wall  of,  102,  107,  135  ; 
orography  of,  103 ;  vegetation 
zones  of,  104-6, 160, 178  ;  advance 
of  steppe  conditions  in,  104,  150, 
178;    rainfall   in,    107;    drainage 


from,  108 ;  river-transport  in, 
109-110 ;  meteorology  of,  no, 
III  ;  climate  of,  112  ;  routes 
across,  11 2-1 6;  land-character 
of,  106;  central  portion  of,  112, 
1 78-9 ;  unexplored  portion  of,  117; 
scenery  in  eastern  portion  of, 
145-6;  routes  from,  to  Baikal, 
147;  rivers,  the  life  of,  155; 
cultivation  in,  161,  173, 183,  184  ; 
Russian  advance  into,  163-5  '• 
tribes  of,  164-73  ;  Russian  ab- 
sorption of,  166;  furs  of,  168, 
221,  207;  fisheries  of,  169-70; 
temperature  in,  184 ;  as  Uri- 
ankhai  reserve,  201  ;  popula- 
tion of,  202,  214  ;  furbearing 
animals  of,  207  ;  pasture  in,  211  ; 
fauna  and  flora  of,  624-7,  630- 
2 ;  musk-deer  of,  630  ;  roe-deer 
of,  630 

Yenisei  River,  sources  of,  i,  3,  107  ; 
frozen  over,  30  ;  arrival  of  Rus- 
sians on,  33  ;  divide  between,  and 
Ob-Irtish,  36  ;  near  Minnusinsk, 
36,  37  ;  navigation  between  Kras- 
noyarsk and  Minnusinsk,  37 ; 
break-up  of  ice  on,  38-9  ;  size  of, 
39  ;  meaning  of  name,  39  n.  ; 
navigation  above  Minnusinsk, 
109  ;  rapids  above  Minnusinsk, 
no  ;  early  inhabitants  in  neigh- 
bourhood of,  198-9,  205 

Yeniseians,  49,  199 ;  early  beliefs  of, 
55 ;  in  Bronze  Age,  70  ;  as 
mineralogists,  70,  168 

Yeniseisk,  16,  44 

Yermak,  32,  33 

Younghusband,  F.  E.,  3,  22,  291, 
346-7,  517  n.;  visits  Kumul, 
497  ;   publication,  639 

Yulduz  Plateau,  390,  391  ;  wild- 
sheep  of,  569,  570-1 

Yule,  Col.  M.,  472 

Zaisan  Lake,  20,  357,  401,  406,  542 
Zalanash  Lake,  416,  417 
Zungar.     See  Dzungar 
Zungaria.     See   Dzungaria 


PRINTED    BY 

HAZELL,    WATSOM  AND  VDTEY,   LD., 

LONDON  AND   AYLESBURY. 


1 


DATE    DUE 

JUN2&t| 

.'      *      y.        —    , 



r^ 

T 

y'  .■%'■' 

Xh 

"■^V 

CAT.  HO.  1137 

Robarts  Library 

"       DUE   DATE-. 

Oct.  27, 1995 


For  Touch  Tone 

telephone  renewals 

cad  971-2400 

-Km  to  midnight 


i^Ceu: 


DS 

793 
M7C39 
191^ 
V.2 


Carruthers,  Douglas 
Unknown  Mongolia 


i.^®.s^ 


