EX     LIB  R  I  S 


^<y^ 


em 


mm 


ALEXR  ALLAN. 


V 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP 
IN    THE    ALTAI    AND    MONGOLIA 


OVIS  AMMOIM 


AFTER  WILD  SHEEP 

IN    THE 

ALTAI  AND   MONGOLIA 


E.    DEMIDOFF 

Prince  San  Donato 
author  of  "hunting  trips  in  the  caucasus' 


WITH  S2   ILLUSTRATIONS 
A    COLOURED    FRONTISPIECE 
AND    MAP 


LONDON 

ROWLAND  WARD,  limited 

166,   PICCADILLY 


1900 

All  rights  resetted 


k\v\z\ 


«,x 


' 


PLYMOUTH 

WILLIAM    liRENDON    AND    SON 

PRINTERS 


PREFACE 

In  attempting-  to  describe  an  expedition  in  search 
of  the  wild  sheep  of  Mongolia  (Ovis  ammon),  I  am 
fully  aware  that  I  have  undertaken  a  difficult  task. 
The  want  of  practical  information  concerning-  the 
country  visited,  the  wild  scenery,  the  curious  habits 
and  mode  of  life  of  the  native  Kalmuks  and  Kirghiz, 
the  flora  and  fauna  of  a  little -explored  region,  and 
finally  an  account  of  the  mightiest  of  wild  sheep  in 
its  natural  haunts,  are  matters  of  such  importance 
and  so  closely  connected,  that  one  may  well  feel 
embarrassed  in  commencing"  the  narrative. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  been  so  much  pressed 
by  English  sportsmen  to  give  an  account,  however 
brief,  of  the  journey,  its  successes  and  failures,  that 
feeling  encouraged  by  the  reception  accorded  last 
year  to  my  volume  entitled  Hunting  Trips  in  the 
Caucasus,  I  have  decided  to  publish  the  present 
account  of  my  experiences  in  the  Altai  Mountains 
and  Monoolia. 


do 


8547 


vi  PREFACE 

May  it  meet  with  the  approval  of  those  to  whom 
it  is  particularly  addressed,  viz.  the  sportsmen  who 
have  devoted  the  best  years  of  their  lives  to  the 
chase  of  wild  animals  in  distant  countries,  and  the 
naturalists,  without  whose  aid  the  labours  of  the 
hunter,  so  far  as  science  is  concerned,  might  often 
be  undertaken  in  vain. 

In  addition  to  my  own  photographs  here  repro- 
duced, I  am  indebted  for  others  to  Mr.  St.  George 
Littledale,  Professor  Sapoknikoff  (of  Tomsk  Uni- 
versity), and  Mr.  Ford  Barclay,  to  whom  my  grateful 
acknowledgments  are  due,  and  should  here  be  re- 
corded. 

DEMIDOFF. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  I. 
From  London  to  Barnaoul  via  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow — Meeting 
with  Littledale — Nijni-Novgorod — Down  the  Volga  ;  up  the  Kama 
to  Taguil — Three  days  at  Taguil — Our  luggage — Cook — Special 
Car— Journey  to  Krivostchekovo  (Ob  River) — Governor  of  Tomsk — 
General  Boldyreff,  head  of  the  Altai  district — Ispravnik — Village  of 
Nikolaievsk — Up  the  Ob  to  Barnaoul  .  .  Page       i 

CHAPTER  II. 
From  Barnaoul  through  Bisk  and  Ongudai  to  Kosh-Agatch  (Siberian 
frontier)  —  Tarantass  —  Bad  Roads— Bisk  —  First  sight  of  the  Altai 
Mountains — The  "Maralnik,"  or  Deer  Park  at  Shebalina — Kalmuks 
—Ongudai  —  Russian  Police  Official,  M.  Meyer — Preparations  at 
Ongudai — Tchouia  Valley — Singular  Performance  of  Native  Priest 
— Kosh-Agatch  —  Customs  Official — Zaissan  Semion — Taba — Duck 
Shooting  .  .  .  .  ...     36 

CHAPTER  III. 
Start  from  Kosh-Agatch — Steppe — Camp — Up  Tchagan-Burgaza Valley 
— First  sight  of  Wild  Sheep — Kotchkor — Arkhar— Snow  Bridge — 
Pitching  Camp — First  Shooting  Camp — Kalmuk  Vocabulary-  -Cold 
Nights— Stalks— The  Happy  Valley  {Bain-Tchagan)—  More  Stalks 
— Snow  and  Wind  .  .  .  ...     90 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Last  days  on  the  Tchagan-Burgaza —  Pass  over  the  Frontier  —  Shift 
Camp  into  Mongolia — A  Blizzard — Major  Cumberland's  Camp — 
The  Start — Map  unreliable — Meet  Chinese — Great  numbers  of  Sheep 
Heads  —  Karaoul  Suok  —  Chinese  Governor — Passports  —  Chinese 
Officials — Interpreters — Joseph  returns  with  fresh  Stores — Start  for 
Bain-Khairkhan  Hills  ,  .  .  ...    132 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  V. 


March  to  the  Suok  River — Camp  at  foot  of  Bain-Khairkhan  Range — 
Snok  Valley — Wild  Sheep  seen— An  unsuccessful  Stalk — Antelopes 
seen — Sand-grouse — Wolves — Plover — Gray  ling  fishing — Snow-cock 
— Littledale's  success — More  Stalks — Shift  Camp — Russian  Merchant 
— March  by  Kobdo  River — Hares — Marmot  —  Horses  footsore — 
Kirghiz  Yourts — Marmot  Skins — Crossing  Tchagan-Kol  River — 
Chinese  Karaoul — Valley  of  the  Sumdairik—  Muss-Taou  Range 
— A  new  Guide     .....  Page 


CHAPTER    VI. 

Sources  of  Kobdo  River — Lakes — Fishing — Muss-Taou  Hills — Journey 
northwards  —  Nicolas  sent  for  Sheep  —  Sumdairik  River  Camp  — 
Meat  at  last — Fresh  Ponies  expected  at  Tchagan-Kol  River — March 
on  16th  of  July — No  Sport — Fresh  Ponies  and  Men  arrive — More 
Marches — Moraine  of  old  Glacier — Crossing  the  Tchagan-Kol  back 
— Camps — Snowstorm — Littledale  finds  Wild  Sheep — Joseph  sent 
for  Stores— Olonur  Valley — Snow — July  23rd— Shooting — Game  at 
last — Antelope — First  sight  of  Ibex  (Copra  Sibirica) — Stalks  with 
Taba  —  Littledale  brings  in  a  good  Ram — Meeting  with  Zaissan 
Semion  and   Kirghiz  Chief .  .  .  .  .  .   217 

CHAPTER  VII. 
Olonur  Camp — Stalking  Sheep— Weather-beaten  horns  of  Maral  found 
—  Lake  Valley  — Hares  and  Brahminy  Geese  seen — Joseph  returns 
with  Stores — My  Wife  goes  out  Stalking — Littledale's  Record  Head 
— Thunderstorms  — I  wound  a  fine  Ram— We  Shift  Camp — Taba's 
successful  Ruse — Unsuccessful  Pursuit — Our  Camp  under  the  Nam 
Daba  Pass — Stampede  of  the  Pack-horses  — A  good  Stalk  on  August 
2nd  —  Shift  Camp  over  Frontier  —  More  Stalking — The  Tarkhaty 
River — Kirghiz  Encampment  with  great  Herds  of  Horses — I  get 
a  good  Ibex — Return  to  Camp  on  the  Tchagan-Burgaza  River  .   243 


CONTENTS  ix 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
Pack-ponies  go  astray  ;  replaced  by  Camels  from  the  Kirghiz — Again 
in  the  Happy  Valley  —  More  Stalking- — Letters  at  Last — Weather 
breaks  up  —  Kosh-Agatch  Plain  —  Antelope  —  Our  Bag- — Start  for 
Bashkaous  Valley — Shooting  Wild  Fowl  on  the  Kosh-Agatch  Steppe 
—My  Wife  kills  a  Wild  Swan  with  the  Rifle— In  the  Altai  Woodlands 

—  Pine,  Larch,  and  Birch — After  Maral  and  Roe-deer — Grayling 
Fishing  in  the  Bashkaous  River — The  Zaissan's  Home  — Kara  Kodjur 
Stream — Unsuccessful  Approaches — Wild  Scenery — Sorry-Kol  Lake 
— Tracks  of  Maral  and  Moose — Littledale  shoots  a  good  Roe-buck 

—  Our  Camp  at  Yulientash  —  Absence  of  Deer  —  September  6th  — 
General  Retreat  to  Ongoudai  —  Meeting  with  Major  Wissmann  — 
Homeward  Bound  ....  Page  28 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


PAGE 

A  Wild  Sheep   .....             Frontispiece 

On  the  Volga    ..... 

7 

Taguil                   ..... 

ii 

Lake  Taguil       ... 

14 

On  Taguil  River                .... 

15 

"  Sheleznaia  Gora"  {i.e.   Iron  Mountain) 

•7 

Taguil   Iron-works             .... 

21 

"  Outside  the  station-house  we  saw  long-  wooden  planks  set 

ip"  •       <H 

Bridge  over  the  Ob          .... 

•       31 

Arrival  at  Kosh-Agatch  .... 

•       36 

Source  of  the  Katoun      .... 

■       37 

Lake  Teletzkoi                    .... 

•       39 

Tarantasses        ..... 

•       40 

Bisk                      ..... 

42 

Bielukha  Glaciers               .... 

•       43 

Marmot   Hunting                .... 

■       4b 

Deer  Park  at  Shebalina 

•       50 

"  Knowing  their  master's  call,  would  gather  round   him  " 

51 

Maral   Hind        ..... 

•       53 

Kalmuks              ..... 

•       57 

Kalmuk  Zaissan                 .... 

•       59 

The  last  Station                 .... 

.       62 

Altai  Scenery     ..... 

•       63 

Crossing  the  Katoun        .... 

•       67 

Saldjar  Pass      ..... 

.       69 

Kalmuks  between  Ongudai  and  Kosh-Agatch 

7' 

Kalmuk  offerings  to  gods 

•       72 

"As  we  advanced,  the  country  grew  wilder" 

73 

"  Waving  the  legs  of  the  skins  to  and  fro " 

75 

Kalmuk  Yourt   .                 .                 . 

■       76 

LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


Passing  a  "Boma" 

Up  the  Valley  of  the  Tchouia 

Kosh-Agatch  Plateau 

Catching  Horses 

Punishing  a  Kalmuk 

The  Start  from  Kosh-Agatch 

Loading  a  Horse 

A  Snow-bridge 

Our  Kitchen 

Our  first  day's  Bag 

Our  Camp  under  Snow  . 

"  Enjoying  his  morning  siesta  ' 

Returning  to  Camp 

"A  large  herd  of  Sheep,  apparently  all 

The  Happy  Valley 

Waiting  for  the  Storm  to  Pass 

"  Watching  " 

"  They  crossed  the  stream  at  full  gallop  " 

"There  were  three  first-class  old  rams  amongst  th 

Taba  .... 

"A  pack  of  Wolves  attacked  our  ponies". 

"  We  ran  down  the  slope  " 

A  Day's  Rest    .... 

Skulls  of  Sheep  piled  up  in  heaps 

"We  were  met  by  half  a  dozen  Chinamen" 

Daniel  .... 

Littledale  trying  the  Yak 

A  Tame  Yak     .... 

Waiting  for  the   Pack-ponies 

Preparing  to  Cross  the  Tchagan-Kol 

Mrs.  Littledale  and  the  Author  Crossing  the  Tchagan-Kol 

A  Smooth  Passage 

"Janny"   Ratting 

Our  new  Demitcha  and  men  .  -  . 

Jacob,  the  Demitcha,  in  the  Bashkaous  Valley 

"  Heads  of  Sheep  strewed  the  ground  " 

The  Asiatic  Ibex  (Capra  sibirica) . 

Olonur  Camp     .  .  .  • 

"Two  or  three  Rams  quietly  feeding" 

Littledale's  Record   Head  of  Ovis  amnion   . 


79 
Si 

83 
86 

87 
88 

92 
97 
99 
109 

114 
117 
119 
121 

1-23 
126 

i^7 
135 
i37 
i45 
149 
163 
170 

i73 
176 
178 
'79 
203 
205 
206 
207 

215 
219 

229 

135 
245 
249 
261 


LIST   OV    ILLUSTRATIONS 


Comparing  Heads           .                .                .  ...  273 

Return  to  Tchagan-Burgaza          .                 .  ...  282 

Our  Kirghiz      .                 .                 .                 .  ...  284 

Our  Camels       .                 .                 .                 .  ...  285 

Taba  with  a   Pack  Camel                .                  .  ...  287 

The  Bag  at   Kosh-Agatch                .                  .  .              .          .  291 

Packing  Horses  at  Kosh-Agatch  .                  .  ...  293 

Twelve  Ponies  laden  with  Horns  start  for  Ongoudai  .  295 

Our  Camp  on  the  Banks  of  Lake  Sarry-Kol  .              .          .  303 

Siberian  Roe-buck  {Capriolns  pygargus)        .  ...  305 

Homeward  Bound              .                  .                  .  .              .          .  310 

The  Author's  Bag  from  the  Altai                   .  .              .          .  311 

Our  Special   Luggage  Van  for  Trophies  and   Packages       .  313 


AFTER   WILD   SHEEP 

IN   THE 

ALTAI    AND    MONGOLIA 

CHAPTER    I. 

From  London  to  Barnaoul  via  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow — Meeting 
with  Littledale — Nijni- Novgorod — Down  the  Volga  ;  up  the  Kama 
to  Taguil — Three  days  at  Taguil — Our  luggage — Cook — Special  Car — 
Journey  to  Krivostchekovo  (Ob  River) — Governor  of  Tomsk  —General 
Holdyrefif,  head  of  the  Altai  district — Ispravnik — Village  of  Niko- 
laievsk — Up  the  Ob  to  Barnaoul. 

It  was  in  the  spring-  of  1897  that,  strolling  down 
Piccadilly,  my  wife  and  I,  on  passing  the  well-known 
window  of  Mr.  Rowland  Ward,  were  struck  by 
the  unusual  size  and  massiveness  of  some  heads 
of  wild  sheep  which  were  there  on  view.  On 
making  inquiry  we  were  told  that  they  were  heads 
of  Ovis  amnion,  lately  secured  by  Major  Cumberland 
on  the  Russo-Chinese  slopes  of  the  Altai  Mountains. 
There  were  six  or  seven  of  them,  and  I  think  I 
never   was   more   impressed    by   any   trophies    I    had 


?\ltf:    ai  t;:k  w:i,p  .sheep  in  the  aetai 

seen.  I  at  once  decided  that  the  year  should  not 
pass  before  I  also  would  attempt  to  make  a  similar 
bag-.  From  that  moment  my  only  thought  was  to 
start  as  soon  as  possible.  I  accordingly  endeavoured 
to  secure  all  the  information  possible  on  the  subject, 
chiefly,  of  course,  on  the  locality  where  the  animals 
in  question  had  been  shot.  Failing  to  find  Major 
Cumberland  himself,  who  I  understood  had  set  out 
on  another  and  more  distant  journey,  I  luckily  came 
across  the  interpreter  who  had  accompanied  him  to 
the  Altai,  Joseph  Abbas  by  name,  and  with  whose 
useful  help  I  marked  on  the  map  the  route  leading 
to  those  happy  hunting  grounds.  He  told  me  that 
there  was  plenty  of  sport  to  be  obtained,  that  the 
magnificent  sheep  whose  heads  I  had  so  much 
admired  were  by  no  means  scarce,  and  that  if  we 
only  went  further  into  Mongolia  we  would  come 
across  virgin  country  where  no  sportsman  had  yet 
had  the  pick  of  such  trophies.  To  this  I  of  course 
agreed  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm,  having  four 
good  summer  months  before  me,  and  at  once  engaged 
Joseph's  services,  enjoining  him  to  be  ready  to  start 
by  the  middle  of  April.  In  the  meantime  I  com- 
municated this  plan  to  my  friend  Mr.  St.  George 
Littledale,  who  had  also  seen  the  heads,  and  who  was 
equally  keen  to  secure  similar  trophies. 


PREPARATIONS  3 

Mrs.  Littledale  said  she  could  not  be  left  behind  ; 
my  wife  also  insisted  upon  accompanying  us,  and 
in  this  way  our  party  of  four  was  made  up. 
We  calculated  that  from  Moscow  it  would  take  us 
little  more  than  a  month  to  reach  our  grounds,  and 
accordingly  decided  to  meet  there  between  the  10th 
and  15th  of  May,  so  as  to  reach  the  Siberian  frontier 
towards  the  middle  of  June.  Moreover,  though  very 
impatient  to  start,  I  had  been  told  that  some  of  the 
large  rivers  we  should  have  to  cross  on  our  way  were 
absolutely  unfordable  until  the  beginning  of  June  ;  the 
roads,  too,  were  supposed  to  be  very  bad  in  spring 
(our  subsequent  experience  indicated  that  this  was 
the  case  all  the  year  round)  ;  several  passes  would 
also  be  difficult  to  negotiate — all  this  delayed  our 
departure  and  postponed  our  rendezvous  at  Moscow 
until  the  middle  of  May. 

Having  concluded  our  preparations  in  London,  we 
started,  my  wife  and  I,  for  St.  Petersburg  early  in 
April.  Our  tents  and  stores  and  other  impedimenta 
had  been  shipped  a  few  days  previously  to  Libau, 
a  port  which  at  that  time  of  year  was  not  frozen. 
I  had  a  few  matters  to  settle  in  St.  Petersburg  before 
leaving,  the  most  important  being  to  secure  the 
services  of  a  good  doctor,  who  would  not  mind 
roughing  it,   and    who  was   accustomed  to   travelling 

B     2 


4  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN   THE    ALTAI 

in  a  wild  country.  The  choice  fell  upon  1  )r.  Newsky, 
who  had  been  actively  engaged  in  Russian  Turkestan 
during-  the  time  when  cholera  was  raging  there.  He 
seemed  most  willing  to  accompany  us,  and  expressed 
the  intention  of  taking  numerous  photographs  and 
collecting  botanical  as  well  as  geological  specimens 
for  the  St.  Petersburg"  Museum.  I  received  a  most 
encouraging  letter  from  Mr.  P.  Semenoff,  Vice- 
President  of  the  Imperial  Geographical  Society, 
urging"  me  to  bring  back  as  much  information  as  I 
could  on  the  country  I  was  about  to  visit,  adding  that 
the  slightest  details,  to  whatever  branch  of  science 
they  might  belong,  would  be  most  acceptable  to  the 
Society.  Mr.  Alpheraki,  a  Russian  naturalist,  called 
upon  me  and  gave  me  a  highly  interesting  account 
of  his  travels  to  Kuldja  and  the  Yulduz  valleys, 
stating  that  he  had  brought  back  many  new  species 
of  insects  and  plants,  and  expressing  the  hope  that 
I  would  likewise  contribute  to  his  collection.  Unfor- 
tunately I  was  wholly  unprepared  for  such  scientific 
objects,  and  deprecated  his  too  sanguine  expectations. 
Mr.  Alpheraki  was  at  that  time  (and  I  believe  is 
still)  engaged  in  completing  a  work  on  the  Anatidce 
of  the  Russian  Empire.  He  was  kind  enough  to 
show  me  some  advanced  coloured  plates  which  were 
to  illustrate  his  interesting"  book,   and  they  appeared 


A    RARE    DUCK  5 

to  me  highly  successful.  He  told  me  that  there  was 
a  particular  duck  which  was  supposed  to  breed  on 
the  Mongolian  plateaux,  and  which  he  was  most 
desirous  to  obtain  ;  he  gave  me  a  water-colour  sketch 
of  it,  asking  me  to  try  and  secure  a  specimen  for  him. 
I  promised  to  do  my  best,  but  unluckily  failed  in 
my  attempts,  though  the  Kalmuks  to  whom  I  showed 
the  drawing  assured  me  that  they  had  often  seen  the 
species  on  the  numerous  lakes  of  the  Kosh-Agatch 
plain.  I  entrusted  Dr.  Newsky  with  the  scientific 
portion  of  our  researches,  intending  to  devote  myself 
entirely  to  chase  of  sheep  and  ibex.  To  my  great 
disappointment,  however,  he  also  was  unprepared 
for  the  task,  and  the  small  efforts  made  in  that 
direction  resulted  only  in  a  collection  of  plants  which 
my  wife  made  on  our  way  from  one  camp  to  the 
other,  a  list  of  which  will  be  given  later  on.  Cristo, 
my  valet,  who  accompanied  me  on  this  journey, 
proved  very  useful  in  many  ways. 

We  started  from  St.  Petersburg,  my  wife  and  I, 
the  Doctor  and  Cristo,  on  the  13th  of  May,  reaching 
Moscow  the  following  morning,  where  we  found 
Joseph,  the  interpreter,  awaiting  us  on  the  station 
platform.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Littledale  had  just  arrived 
at  the  Slaviansky  Bazaar,  and  we  lunched  merrily 
together,   talking    over    our   forthcoming   trip.     They 


6  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE   ALTAI 

had  secured  as  servant  a  first-rate  man,  Gabriel  by 
name,  who  had  accompanied  us  the  previous  year 
to  the  Caucasus,  and  with  whom  Littledale  had  been 
thoroughly  satisfied.  He  rendered  himself  very 
useful  in  camp,  and  by  no  means  the  least  of  his 
accomplishments  was  his  art  of  skinning  heads.  In 
order  not  to  waste  a  whole  day,  as  our  boat  was  to 
leave  Nijni-Novgorod  on  the  following  afternoon, 
we  decided  to  quit  Moscow  at  4  p.m.,  reaching  Nijni 
earl\  next  morning.  Our  baggage,  amounting  to 
about  a  ton,  was  to  be  sent  by  the  next  steamer 
and  join  us  at  Taguil,  a  place  in  the  Ural  Mountains 
belong  110-  to  my  family,  where  we  intended  to  stop 
two  or  three  days  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the  ladies 
a  rest  before  commencing  the  long  and  dreary  journey 
on  the  Siberian  Railway,  and  for  the  purpose  also  of 
getting  our  luggage  into  a  more  expeditional  shape, 
taking  only  what  was  immediately  wanted,  and 
leaving  the  remainder  to  follow  later.  Moreover, 
we  had  to  engage  the  services  of  a  cook.  Accord- 
ingly, early  on  May  15th  we  found  ourselves  at 
Nijni  in  time  to  see  the  preparations  that  were  beino' 
made  for  the  great  annual  fair.  The  banks  of  the 
Volga  were  covered  with  goods  of  all  kinds,  which 
find  their  way  there  from  all  parts  of  Asia,  and  the 
traffic   was  just  beginning,   owing  to  the   opening  of 


DOWN    THE    VOLGA  9 

the  rivers.  Our  steamer,  the  s.s.  Ekaterinburg, 
of  the  Lubimoff  Company,  was  awaiting  us  alongside 
the  pier,  and  at  1.30  p.m.  we  began  slowly  to  move 
down  the  great  river  Volga. 

It  was  a  somewhat  monotonous  journey,  the  scenery 
on  either  side  bearing  a  decided  look  of  uniformity  : 
large  rolling  plains  covered  with  wheat  or  grass,  woods 
very  scarce,  now  and  then  higher  banks  overshadow- 
ing the  riverside,  and  a  few  villages  scattered  here 
and  there,  conspicuous  by  their  churches  towering- 
above  the  wooden  huts  and  glistening  in  the  sun.  The 
weather,  it  must  be  owned,  was  beautiful,  and  the  air 
as  transparent  as  possible,  such  as  one  only  encounters 
in  Russia  in  spring-time.  I  have  nowhere  seen  a 
more  striking  wakening  up  of  nature  than  in  that 
country.  Every  bud,  every  blade  of  grass  at  that 
season  seems  to  be  alive,  and  birds  appear  to  rejoice 
more  exuberantly  than  anywhere  else.  Long  strings 
of  swans,  geese,  and  ducks  appearing  from  the  south, 
hundreds  of  yards  high,  are  then  constantly  observ- 
able, and  life  shows  itself  in  its  utmost  intensity. 

Our  steamer  called  at  several  places  before  we  hove 
in  sight  of  Kasan,  the  great  Tartar  town,  which  we 
reached  at  6  a.m.  on  the  following  morning.  Here 
we  stopped  till  1 1  a.m.  Tons  of  cargo  were  shipped, 
and  we  began  to  fear  that  we  might  miss  our  train 


,o  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

at  Perm  if  we  were  delayed  much  longer.      Here  also 

we  witnessed  a  curious  and  lively  bargaining  affray 
between  the  captain  of  our  ship  and  a  crowd  (I  was 
going  to  say  a  herd)  of  squalid-looking  Tartars  who, 
wanting  to  he  conveyed  to  some  landing-place  further 
on,  made  offers  for  the  price  of  their  passage.  The 
captain  was  demanding  i  rouble  50  kopecks  apiece, 
shouting  from  the  top  of  the  deck  ;  the  Tartars  were 
willing  to  give  only  1  rouble  30  kopecks.  Finally, 
after  a  long  and  noisy  dispute,  the  bargain  was  struck 
at  1  rouble  43  kopecks,  and  the  whole  throng  poured 
in  with  yells  and  a  strong  smell  of  Russian  leather 
boots  and  unwashed  humanity. 

After  leaving  Kasan  we  soon  branched  off  from 
the  Volga  up  the  Kama,  and  saw  many  icebergs 
floating  down  the  river.  Here  the  scenery  changed 
as  we  neared  Perm.  Both  sides  of  the  stream  were 
covered  with  beautiful  dense  fir  woods  and  pine. 
The  weather  still  remained  cloudless,  and  in  the 
best  of  spirits  we  landed  at  Perm  on  the  1 8th  of 
May   at  9.30  p.m. 

Although  a  couple  of  hours  late,  we  found  that 
we  were  in  time  for  the  train,  which  started  at  1  1  p.m. 
We  also  received  the  good  news  that  our  baggage 
had  left  Nijrti  by  the  following  steamer,  and  would 
find    us    in    three   days   at    Taguil.      On    the    morning 


TAGUIL  13 

of  the  15th  of  May  we  reached  Taguil  and  drove 
to  the  house. 

Taguil  is  the  head  town,  or  rather  the  head 
village,  of  a  vast  mining  district  in  the  centre  of 
the  Ural  Mountains.  It  cannot  be  called  a  town, 
not  having  a  municipality,  but  as  regards  size  it  is 
larger  than  many  towns,  and  contains  over  30,000 
inhabitants,  principally  workmen  and  engineers.  It 
lies  at  the  foot  of  the  "  Sheleznaia  Gora "  {i.e.  iron 
mountain),  one  of  the  richest  in  iron-ore,  and  the 
works  are  spread  all  round  it  in  order  to  avoid 
expenses  of  transport.  Copper  is  also  to  be  found 
within  a  few  miles  in  great  abundance,  and  is  melted 
at  the  other  end  of  the  village.  Platinum  and  gold 
are  likewise  distributed  in  the  neighbourhood. 

At  the  head  of  the  village  lies  a  lake  about  twelve 
miles  long,  into  which  flows  the  river  Taguil,  yielding- 
considerable  water-power  for  the  iron- works.  The 
country  round  Taguil  presents  the  aspect  of  low 
rolling  hills  covered  with  pine,  fir,  and  birch  woods, 
which  become  denser  as  one  proceeds  further  from 
the  inhabited  districts.  These  woods  contain  a  fair 
amount  of  game.  I  have  myself  shot  elk  and 
cariboo  within  fifty  miles  north  of  Taguil.  Brown 
bears  abound,  also  the  Siberian  Roe-deer  [Caprcolus 
pygargus),  which  I  have  secured  close  to  the  village, 


1 1 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


and  which  I  believe  is  identical  with  die  roc  which 
we  found  in  the  wooded  regions  of  the  Altai.  1  have 
been  lately  informed  that  a  hunter  of  the  Ekaterin- 
burg Shooting  Club  brought  news  that  he  had  come 
across  three  large  beasts  in  the  woods  which  he  had 


never  seen  before.  On  showing  him  various  draw- 
ings in  a  book  of  Natural  History  and  on  reaching 
that  of  an  Aurochs,  he  immediately  recognised  it 
as  resembling  the  animals  he  had  seen.  Aurochs, 
therefore,  may  exist  in  the  dense  Siberian  Taiga  and 
may  have  come  over;  but  I  give  this  information 
with  all   reserve.      As  regards  birds,  Capercaillie  and 


TAGUIL  15 

Black  Game  are  found  in  great  numbers.  The  native 
hunters,  who  frequent  the  woods  in  search  of  fur- 
bearing-  animals,  such  as  Sable  (now  becoming  very 
scarce),  Siberian  Squirrel,  White  Fox,  etc.,  assert  that 


ON    TAGUIL    KIVI-.K. 


they  would  rather  meet  a  Bear  in  the  woods  than  an 
Elk,  which  is  supposed  to  be  more  dangerous  than  any 
other  animal.  A  local  proverb  on  the  subject  always 
struck  me  :  "  For  bear  prepare  your  bed,  for  elk  your 
coffin."  The  Taguil  estate  lies  on  the  very  boundary 
between  Europe  and  Asia,  and  a  huge  red  post  stands 


16  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

in  the  middle  of  the  woods  with  the  inscription  : 
-'.Here  ends  Europe,  here  begins  Asia."  There  are 
also  many  traditions  of  the  passage  of  Ermak,  the 
adventurer,  who  in  the  sixteenth  century  crossed  the 
Ural  Mountains  with  a  few  followers  and  conquered 
Siberia  for  the  Russian  Tsar,  Ivan  the  Terrible. 
I\Ian\-  rocks  bear  witness  to  his  journey,  with  in- 
scriptions in  places  where  he  had  camped.  A  few 
villages  are  scattered  about  the  country,  most  of  them 
having  sprung  up  owing  to  mines  or  gold  washings 
in  the  neighbourhood.  At  their  outskirts  usually 
stands  a  shed  where  the  peasants,  each  in  turn,  place 
bread  and  "kvas,"  a  Russian  beverage  made  of 
barley.  A  wooden  board  above  the  shed  bears  these 
strange  words  :  "  For  the  miserable."  This  is  an  old 
custom  of  the  country.  Russian  convicts,  who  con- 
trive to  escape  from  the  Eastern  Siberian  galleys, 
cross  the  Ural  range  on  their  way  back  to  Europe. 
Being  short  of  food,  and  in  order  to  obtain  it,  they 
used  to  raid  the  villages  by  night,  and  bloodshed 
would  often  ensue.  In  order  to  put  an  end  to  this 
state  of  things,  the  inhabitants  decided  to  provide 
these  outlaws  with  food  in  the  way  I  have  described, 
and  thus  prevent  the  frequent  murders  that  took 
place.  The  mining  people  are  sometimes  very  savage 
and    cruel  ;    in    one    case    a    girl    was    slowly   burnt    to 


THREE    DAYS   AT   TAGUIL  19 

death    for    non-compliance    with    the    wishes    of    her 

torturers.       Other    instances    of   this    kind    might    be 

given,  but  it  would  carry  me  too  far  from  my  subject. 

On  the  day  we  arrived  at  Taguil  (the  Littledales, 

my  wife,  and  myself),  we  visited  the  iron-works,  and 

having    heard    that    there    was    some    fair    woodcock 

shooting  to  be  obtained  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town, 

we  decided  (Littledale  and   I)  to  go  out  that  evening 

with     our    guns.       Spring    woodcock -shooting    is    a 

favourite   sport    in    Russia.      It    is    known    under    the 

name    of    "Tiaga,"    which    signifies    a    marked   place 

where    woodcock    fly    towards    evening   in   search    of 

their  mates,  skimming  the  tops  of  trees  and  uttering 

a  hissing  cry,  which  is  heard  from  afar.      They  usually 

skim    in    circles   round   the   place,   and   the   guns   are 

posted    in   the   centre   of  the   line   of  flight.      I    have 

heard   of  a  dozen   birds  having  been  bagged  in  this 

way    between    7    and    7.30   p.m.      We   travelled   in   a 

luggage    van    for    about    ten    miles    along    the    new 

railway  that  had  just  been  constructed  to  the  works, 

and  soon  found  ourselves  in  the  midst  of   the  woods. 

As  the  sun  was  setting   I   heard  the  first  woodcock's 

cry,   followed   immediately  by  shots.      Nothing  came 

in    my   direction,   but    Littledale   secured   three.      We 

returned    in    the    dark,    and    found    our    platform -car 

waiting  for  us. 
c  2 


2o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

The  next  two  clays  were  spent  in  visiting  the 
mines.  The  ladies  drove  down  to  see  the  platinum 
washings,  whilst  we  went  after  ducks  on  the  lake  ; 
but  the  wind  was  so  strong  that  we  did  not  succeed 
in  getting  any,  and  had  to  give  it  up.  Through  the 
courtesy  of  General  Pavlovsky,  the  chief  inspector 
of  the  West  Siberian  Railway,  to  whom  I  had  wired, 
a  special  car  was  placed  at  our  disposal  for  our  four 
days'  journey  along  the  line  to  the  Ob  River,  where 
we  branched  off  towards  Barnaoul.  This  was,  indeed, 
a  great  relief  to  us,  there  being-  nothing  more  tiring 
for  ladies  than  a  long  journey  in  a  bad  railway-car. 

Our  house-car,  for  the  next  few  days  thus  amiably 
provided,  arrived  at  Taguil  on  the  26th,  and  we  went 
to  the  station  to  see  it.  It  was  a  comfortable  first- 
class  carriage,  with  plenty  of  room  for  our  part)-, 
rifles,  and  hand-baggage — by  no  means  a  trifle.  In 
the  meantime  I  had  engaged  the  services  of  a  cook, 
Vassili  by  name,  a  young  fellow  who  had  worked  in 
the  platinum  mines,  and  was  willing  to  accompany 
us  and  show  us  his  proficiency  in  culinary  art.  He 
proved  quite  a  success,  and  none  of  us  ever  regretted 
having  engaged  him.  On  the  afternoon  of  May  22nd 
our  anxiously  expected  impedimenta  at  last  arrived, 
and  we  began  forthwith  sorting  our  stores,  packing 
up   what    we    strictly   required    into  carefully    weighed 


OUR   LUGGAGE  23 

pony  loads,  and  leaving  articles  of  luxury  behind. 
The  house  was  in  a  state  of  great  confusion  ;  every 
single  thing  was  taken  out,  and  the  floor  resembled 
a  London  grocery  shop.  A  box  containing  two  gross 
of  safety  matches  had  been  detained,  for  some  reason, 
by  the  Russian  Customs,  who  promised  to  forward  it 
after  examination  to  Barnaoul.  We  found  it  there 
on  our  return  journey  !  The  next  day  was  devoted  to 
similar  occupation,  and  on  the  morning  of  May  24th, 
everything  being  ready,  we  left  Taguil  at  1 1  a.m. 
The  weather  was  quite  settled,  and  we  soon  found 
it  warmer  than  we  liked.  Four  hours  brought  us 
to  Ekaterinburg,  from  which  place  we  branched  off 
due  south  through  the  most  important  mining  dis- 
tricts of  the  Ural  Mountains,  reaching  Tcheliabinsk 
early  next  morning.  From  this  place  the  Western 
Siberian  Railway  starts,  and  here  begins  the  dreary, 
monotonous  view  of  Siberian  steppes  and  marshes, 
which  we  had  to  contemplate  for  three  long  days. 
The  sun  was  scorching-  hot  as  we  crawled  along  at 
the  rate  of  twelve  miles  an  hour  through  these 
immense  fiat  plains.  We  found  villages  very  scarce  ; 
Kourgan,  Petnopavloosk,  Omak,  and  Kainsk  were 
the  only  large  towns  en  route.  At  the  stations 
hardly  any  provisions  were  to  be  got,  and  we  had 
to    rely    entirely    upon    our    own    stores.       Now    and 


?4 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


then,  outside  the  station-house,  we  saw  long  wooden 
planks  set  up,  on  which  the  peasants  of  the  neigh- 
bouring villages  had  placed  chickens,  bread,  or  fish, 
sometimes  water  melons,  to  sell.  A  few  kopecks 
was    the    utmost    one    could    spend.      I    must    confess 


TATION-HOUSE    WE    SAW    LONG    WOODEN    I'LANKS    SET    UP.  ' 


that  melons  were  greatly  appreciated  by   our  party, 
owing  to  the  intense  heat. 

We  saw  great  numbers  of  ducks  in  the  marshy 
steppes  round  Kainsk  ;  at  other  places,  where  the 
soil  was  dry,  it  was  cultivated.  The  Akmolinsk  and 
Semiretchensk  countries  are  supposed  to  be  the 
granaries    of     Siberia    and     Russia,    where    wheat    is 


GENERAL   150LDYREFF  25 

largely  imported,  especially  in  time  of  famine.  Trees 
were  to  be  seen  here  and  there,  mostly  birch,  but 
hardly  close  enough  to  form  woods.  In  fact,  it  may 
be  said  that  the  whole  tract  of  land  between  the 
Ural  Mountains  and  the  Ob  is  practically  bare. 
The  exceedingly  slow  pace  at  which  we  advanced 
was  most  trying.  In  confirmation  of  this  statement 
I  may  refer  to  a  lively  scene  of  which  we  were 
witnesses.  The  train  on  quitting  a  station  had  left 
behind  some  of  the  passengers,  who  had  gone  out 
into  the  fields  to  pick  flowers.  At  the  next  station, 
where  we  halted  a  long  time,  we  saw  our  wretched 
fellow-travellers  who  had  been  dropped  running 
breathless  along  the  line,  and  eventually  overtaking 
the  train   with   frantic  yells  and  waving  of  caps. 

On  the  28th  of  May  we  reached  the  Ob  River, 
and  were  heartily  greeted  by  General  Lomatchevsky, 
Governor  of  Tomsk,  to  whom  I  had  sent  a  letter 
of  introduction,  and  General  Boldyreff,  chief  of  the 
Altai  district,  whose  headquarters  were  at  Barnaoul, 
and  who  received  us  in  a  most  hospitable  manner. 
These  gentlemen  informed  us  that  we  should  find 
it  a  very  difficult  job  to  follow  the  Tchouia  Valley 
up  to  Kosh-Agatch,  especially  with  ladies,  the  path 
being  in  places  exceedingly  narrow.  No  repre- 
sentatives of  the   female  sex  had  ever  tried   it,  save 


26  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

a  few  native  Kalmuk  matrons.  As  for  ladies'  saddles, 
they  seemed  to  think  that  they  were  entirely  out  of 
question.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  Ispravnik 
(chief  police  officer)  of  the  Barnaoul  district,  to 
whom  I  was  then  introduced,  and  who  was  appointed 
by  Genera]  Lomatchevsky  to  accompany  us  to  the 
Siberian  frontier.  Being"  a  true  Siberian  citizen  and 
native  of  the  Altai,  the  Ispravnik  gave  us  a  deal 
of  information  on  the  country,  and  strongly  urged 
us  not  to  proceed  into  Mongolia,  where,  he  said, 
our  Kalmuk  staff  would  probably  refuse  to  follow 
us,  fearing  that  their  horses  might  be  stolen  by  the 
native  Mongols  and  Kirghiz.  He  was  an  honest, 
straightforward  man,  but  somewhat  rough  with  his 
subordinates,  a  failing  which  later  on  caused  not  a 
few  misunderstandings. 

The  Governor  of  Tomsk  was  as  civil  as  possible  to 
us,  and  told  us  that  he  was,  at  that  moment,  working 
out  a  plan  of  converting  the  Tchouia  path  into  a  road 
for  the  tea  caravans,  which  would  undoubtedly  in  that 
case  adopt  this  route  from  China,  through  Ulias- 
soutai  and  Kobdo,  in  preference  to  the  ancient  road 
through  Kiachta,  which  was  much  longer.  In  fact, 
one  of  the  leading  Russian  tea  merchants  said  he 
had  already  received  great  quantities  of  tea  through 
Kosh-Agatch,  and   had   found    it   far   more   profitable, 


"FATHER   THEODOR"  27 

notwithstanding  that  he  had  had  to  reload  his  goods 
from  camels  to  horses.  The  Russian  Government, 
however,  did  not  then  seem  inclined  to  spend  a 
large  sum  in  carrying  out  the  submitted  scheme, 
and  an  engineer  was  commissioned  to  report  on  the 
probable  cost.  According  to  my  observations  a 
good  deal  of  dynamite  would  be  wanted,  sheer 
rocky  falls  into  the  river  being  numerous.  It  was 
here,  while  lunching  on  board  the  small  steamer 
that  was  to  convey  us  and  our  fortunes  up  the  Ob, 
that,  for  the  first  time,  I  was  given  a  full  account 
of  the  legend  of  the  so-called  "Father  Theodor " 
by  our  friend  the  Ispravnik,  who  was  a  young  police 
officer  at  Tomsk  at  the  time  of  Father  Theodor's 
death  in  the  sixties.  I  had  always  considered  this 
legend  as  one  of  the  most  curious  and  interesting-, 
and  it  may  be  worth  while  to  relate  the  facts  round 
which  an  impenetrable  mystery  still  hovers. 

In  almost  all  Siberian  villages  there  is  scarcely  a 
house  which  does  not  contain  the  portrait  of  an  old 
man  known  as  "  Father  Theodor,"  whose  memory, 
as  a  saint,  will  outlive  many  generations  throughout 
the  country.  About  the  year  1830,  it  is  said,  a  man 
appeared  at  Tomsk  under  the  name  of  Theodor.  No 
one  knew  whence  he  came  or  who  he  was.  The 
only  fact  that  had  been  confirmed  was  that  he  had 


2<S  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

been  caught  by  the  police  without  a  passport  on  the 
Ural  borders  of  Siberia,  and  after  due  punishment 
for  refusing  to  disclose  his  identity  (at  that  time  the 
penalty  was  the  knout)  had  been  transferred  as  a 
settler  for  life  to  Tomsk.  There  everyone  was  struck 
by  his  cultivated  manner,  his  wonderful  knowledge 
of  languages  (for  besides  Russian  he  spoke  English 
and  French  perfectly),  his  gentle  bearing,  noble 
features,  and  quiet  mode  of  life.  In  a  few  years 
his  fame  spread  throughout  the  whole  of  Siberia. 
The  common  people  began  to  consider  him  a  saint, 
and  would  gather  in  crowds  around  his  cell  in  order 
to  receive  his  blessing.  He  lived  in  a  small  room 
in  the  house  of  a  rich  merchant  named  Somoff,  who 
had  given  him  hospitality,  but  he  refused  all  comfort 
and  luxury,  took  very  little  food,  and  prayed  con- 
stantly. One  thing  he  never  refused  to  do,  viz.  to 
teach  children,  and  it  was  noticed  that  his  favourite 
subject  was  Napoleon's  invasion  of  Russia  in  1812. 
He  was  acquainted  with  every  detail  of  the  war, 
seemed  to  know  every  general  who  had  taken  part 
in  it,  and  could  describe  every  battle  with  precision. 
He  taught  the  children  to  love  Russia  and  honour 
the  memory  of  Alexander  I.  the  Beloved.  In  this 
manner  he  lived  over  thirty  years  at  Tomsk,  ever 
silent  about  his  own  personality,  and  sowing  the  seeds 


"FATHER   THEODOR"  29 

of  religion  and  instruction  throughout  the  whole 
district.  He  died  in  extreme  old  age,  as  he  had 
lived,  with  the  stoicism  and  calmness  which  faith 
alone  can  afford.  It  is  said  that  he  confided  to  his 
host  on  his  death-bed  who  he  was,  under  oath  of 
secrecy,  and  the  papers  which  were  found  in  his 
possession  were  despatched  by  Somoff  by  special 
messenger  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  it  is  supposed 
they  were  destroyed  by  order  of  the  Emperor 
Nicholas.  Rumours  began  to  spread  over  the 
country  that  he  was  no  other  than  the  Tsar 
Alexander  I.,  and  a  consideration  of  the  facts  of  the 
desire  of  that  monarch  to  abdicate  ;  his  supposed 
death  at  Taganrog  after  a  short  and  mysterious 
illness  ;  his  coffin  not  having  been  opened  in  Moscow, 
according  to  the  Russian  custom,  in  order  that  the 
people  might  see  the  body  of  their  deceased 
sovereign  ;  the  coincidence  of  dates  when  Theodor 
was  arrested  as  a  vagabond  ;  his  education,  patriotism, 
and  full  knowledge  of  the  French  invasion  ;  his  stately 
figure  and  noble  features,  resembling,  it  was  said, 
those  of  Alexander's — all  these  facts,  I  repeat,  only 
helped  to  strengthen  the  conclusions  of  the  people. 
Moreover,  by  the  care  of  his  friend  Somoff  a  cross  had 
been  placed  over  his  tomb,  in  the  cemetery  at  Tomsk, 
bearing   the    initials  £.      The    Ispravnik   who  related 


3o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  story  to  us  had  been  an  eye-witness  of  this  curious 
circumstance,  and  had  been  himself  commissioned 
to  take  off  this  cross  by  night  so  as  not  to  create 
a  disturbance  in  the  town.  These  are  the  facts,  which 
need  no  comment.  I  give  them  as  I  heard  them, 
and  I  think  it  doubtful  whether  history  will  ever 
unravel  the  mystery. 

General  Lomatchevsky  gave  us  some  interesting- 
accounts  of  convicts.  Amongst  others  he  told  us 
that    a   few   years   ago   there   appeared   at   Tomsk    a 

man  who   gave   himself   out  as    Prince  •,   saying 

that  he  was  travelling  for  his  own  pleasure.  The 
General  asked  him  to  dinner,  and  found  him  a 
delightful  companion.  Some  days  later  came  a 
report  that  a  dangerous  convict  had  escaped  from 
the  galleys,  and  the  visitor  on  being  summoned  to 
produce  his  passport  confessed  that  he  could  no 
longer  conceal  his  identity,  and  that  he  was  the 
convict  of  whom  the  police  were  in  search,  but  that 
he  considered  himself  amply  rewarded  by  the 
Governor's  excellent  dinner ! 

At  2  p.m.  we  parted  with  General  Lomatchevsky, 
who  wished  us  success,  and  the  steamer  began 
advancing  slowly  up  the  Ob.  We  passed  under  the 
magnificent  railway  bridge  over  the  broad  river, 
leaving  to  our  left  the  village  of  Nikolaevsky.      This 


UP   THE   OB  31 

village,  owing-  to  its  geographical  position,  had  grown 
in  a  few  months  to  considerable  dimensions.  Where 
a  year  ago  there  were  only  a  few  stray  huts,  nearly 
20,000  inhabitants,  chiefly  colonists,  had  now  taken 
up    their    abode,    and    the    Government    was    on   the 


BRIDGE    OVER    THE    OB. 


point  of  converting  the  place  into  a  town.  General 
Boldyreff  and  the  Ispravnik  entertained  us  most 
agreeably  during  the  journey  to  Barnaoul,  where 
we  were  due  early  on    May   30th. 

The  banks  of  the  Ob  presented  on  either  side  low 
rolling  steppes,  mostly  bare  and  cultivated  land,  but 
as  we  entered  the  vast  Altai  district  pine  forests  and 


32  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

cedar  woods  were  to  be  seen,  and  grew  denser  as 
we  advanced.  Villages  were  extremely  scarce,  the 
steamer  calling  only  at  four  or  five  landing-places 
during  the  forty  hours  we  were  on  board.  The 
distance  by  land  is  much  shorter,  and  takes  about 
sixteen  hours  with  good  horses,  but  owing  to  the 
wide  zigzags  of  the  river  and  the  comparatively  slow 
pace  at  which  we  went  against '  the  strong-  current, 
we  could  hardly  expect  to  reach  our  destination 
sooner.  At  the  few  stations  where  the  steamer  halted 
I  was  struck  by  the  beautiful  sight  of  rock-cherry 
bushes  in  full  bloom  ;  the  banks  were  literally  covered 
with  snowy  -  white  flowers,  in  which  numbers  of 
nightingales  sang  in  praise  of  spring.  The  weather 
was  cloudless,  and  added  to  the  enjoyment  of  the 
wild  scenery.  In  addition  to  this,  the  General  and 
the  Ispravnik  gave  highly  interesting  descriptions  of 
the  regions  we  were  about  to  visit,  with  valuable 
information  on  the  Kalmuks  and  their  ways,  inter- 
mingling their  accounts  with  many  Siberian  tales  and 
anecdotes.  High  were  our  expectations,  and  every 
sportsman  will  understand  the  feelings  we  expe- 
rienced in  anticipation  of  the  sport  to  which  we  so 
keenly  looked  forward.  We  did  our  best  in  trans- 
lating to  share  these  accounts  with  the  Littledales, 
who   were   under   the   same   spell   as   ourselves. 


BARNAOUL  33 

On  May  30th,  at  8.30,  we  came  in  sight  of  Bar- 
naoul, and  landed  safely  at  nine.  General  Boldyreff 
had  most  obligingly  placed  his  house  at  our  disposal, 
thus  giving  us  a  new  proof  of  Eastern  hospitality, 
and,  gratefully  accepting  his  invitation,  we  drove  to 
his  residence.  Barnaoul  is  the  largest  and  practically 
the  only  town  of  the  Altai  district  which  belongs 
personally  to  the  Emperor.  It  was  given  to  the 
Empress  Elizabeth  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century  by  one  of  my  ancestors,  whose  monument 
stands  in  one  of  the  squares  of  Barnaoul,  and  has 
been  ever  since  a  private  estate  of  the  Crown. 

The  whole  area  of  the  Government  is  over  200 
square  miles  of  wooded  country,  containing  silver 
mines,  iron -works,  and  coal.  Madame  Boldyreff 
received  us  with  the  greatest  kindness,  and  housed 
us  in  most  luxurious  rooms.  Having  packed  up  a 
few  more  supplies,  we  carted  our  luggage  next  day 
(in  order  not  to  be  delayed  by  it)  for  Bisk,  a  small 
town  lying  on  the  junction  of  the  Ob  and  Bia  rivers, 
and  thence  to  Ongudai,  where  we  would  have  to  load 
it  on  ponies,  and  sent  it  on  with  Joseph  and  our  cook 
to  accompany  the  twelve  heavy  cart  loads.  The 
Littledales  were  to  start  on  the  following  day  by 
short  stages. 

We  postponed  our  departure  until  the  3rd  of  June, 


34  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

intending   to    travel    straight    through    to    Ongudai, 

where  we  expected  to   find  our  companions  and  the 
baggage  safely  arrived. 

The  weather  was  cold  and  rainy  during  the  whole 
time  we  remained  at  Barnaoul.  On  the  whole  the 
climate  is  very  severe,  being"  extremely  continental, 
and  winter  is  long  and  dreary.  No  fruit  grows  in 
the  district,  not  even  apples.  In  the  meantime  we 
visited  the  town  under  General  Boldyreff's  super- 
vision. We  found  an  interesting  museum,  with 
specimens  of  stuffed  animals  of  the  district  :  Wild 
Sheep,  Ibex,  Maral,  and,  to  my  great  astonishment, 
a  Tiger,  which  I  was  told  had  been  shot  many  years 
before  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Barnaoul.  This 
appeared  to  me  very  unlikely,  though  not  impossible. 
In  the  museum  we  saw  a  fine  geological  and  mineral- 
ogical  collection,  and  a  well -supplied  library,  chiefly 
containing  works  on  the  Altai,  by  Tchichatcheff,  the 
Russian  traveller,  Bunge  and  Ledebour,  the  well- 
known  botanists,  with  splendid  plates  of  the  different 
plants  of  the  district.  I  was  also  struck  by  the  active 
interest  which  the  authorities  at  Barnaoul  take  in  the 
welfare  and  education  of  the  common  people,  an 
interest  which  seemed  to  me  to  be  much  above  the 
average  in  comparison  with  that  of  European  Russia. 
For   instance,    there   is  a  special    hall,    with   a  garden 


DEPARTURE  FROM  BARNAOUL        35 

attached  to  it,  converted  into  a  public  reading-room. 
A  committee  has  been  formed  with  the  view  of 
encouraging  theatrical  performances  for  the  common 
people,  and  several  elementary  schools  are  kept  and 
maintained  by  this  association. 

After  having  bade  adieu  to  our  hosts,  we  left 
Barnaoul,  as  we  had  decided,  early  on  June  3rd, 
provided  with  detailed  maps  through  General  Boldy- 
reff's  kind  attention,  and  in  his  own  comfortable 
carriage,   which  he  lent  us  till  we  reached  Ongudai. 


ARRIVAL    AT    KOSH-AGATCH. 


CHAPTER    II. 


From  Barnaoul  through  Bisk  and  Ongudai  to  Kosh-Agatch  (Siberian 
frontier) — Tarantass — Bad  Roads  — Bisk — First  sight  of  the  Altai 
Mountains — The  "  Maralnik,"  or  Deer  Park  at  Shebalina — Kalmuks 
— Ongudai — Russian  Police  Official,  M.  Meyer — Preparations  at 
Ongudai — Tchouia  Valley — Singular  Performance  of  Native  Priest 
— Kosh-Agatch—  Customs  Official  —  Zaissan  Semion  —  Taba  —  Duck 
Shooting. 

The  distance  between  Barnaoul  and  Bisk  is  150 
versts,  or  about  120  miles.  The  country  presents 
the  aspect  of  low,  rolling,  grassy  steppes,  through 
which  wind  the  two  great  tributaries  of  the  Ob, 
the  Bia  and  the  Katoun,  the  former  flowing  out 
of  Lake  Teletzkoie  (the  largest  lake  in  the  Altai 
district),  the  latter  drawing  its  sources  from  the 
36 


SOURCE    OF    THE    KATOl'N. 


FERRY-BOATS 


39 


Bielukha  gla- 
ciers on  the 
Chinese  bor- 
ders. Though 
the  road  was  as  bad  as  it  could  be,  we  managed  to 
reach  Bisk  late  in  the  evening-.  Soon  after  quitting 
Barnaoul  we  had  to  cross  two  branches  of  the  Ob 
in  ferry-boats,  there  being  no  bridges  in  sight. 
These  ferry-boats  were  worked  in  the  most  primitive 
fashion  by  horses  tied  to  two  cross-posts  ;  they  were 
made  to  turn  round  and  round,  thus  bringing  into 
motion  a  huge  capstan.  Planks  were  placed  across 
so    as    to    enable    our    tarantasses   to   embark,    which 


4o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

was  by  no  means  an  easy  matter,  one  of  the  planks 
breaking  down  under  our  weight,  and  if  it  had  not 
been  for  the  timely  impulse  given  by  the  driver's 
whip  we  should  certainly  have  taken  an  involuntary 
bath.  The  water  at  that  time  of  year  was  very 
high,  owing  to  melting  snows  in  the  mountains,  while 


the  current  was  very  strong.  No  further  accident 
occurred,  however,  and  we  were  safely  landed  on 
the  opposite  side. 

Pursuant  to  the  Ispravnik's  orders,  horses  awaited 
us  at  every  post-house,  which  helped  considerably  to 
lessen  the  delay.  The  eight  or  ten  villages  through 
which   we   passed   were  literally  drowned   in   mud  ;   at 


BAD    ROADS  41 

places  our  wheels  were  hidden  from  view,  and  it 
required  much  persuasion  on  the  part  of  our  driver 
to  make  the  wretched  ponies  struggle  through.  The 
villages  struck  me  by  their  size,  and  the  inhabitants 
seemed  fairly  well  off. 

Most  of  the  peasants  here  are  descendants  of 
Russian  colonists  who  had  emigrated  and  acquired 
a  certain  prosperity,  owing  to  a  liberal  allotment 
of  ground  such  as  is  unknown  in  European  Russia. 
Their  ways  and  manners  are  entirely  different  from 
those  of  the  peasants  in  Central  Russia.  Here  one 
observes  a  stronger  spirit  of  independence  and  sense 
of  personal  freedom.  Labour  and  intelligence  are 
the  striking  features  ;  common  people  do  not  kneel 
down  before  officials  or  noblemen,  but  consider  it 
more  natural  to  shake  hands.  Carefully  tended 
education,  and  residence  at  a  distance  from  all- 
centralising  authorities  have  done  more  to  civilise 
the  country  than  any  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
Government.  Further  colonisation,  however,  of 
these  parts  has  been  stopped,  and  emigrants  from 
Russia  are  now  being  directed  eastwards,  where 
large  tracts  of  land  still  await  human  hands  and 
cultivation.  Another  reason  for  the  welfare  of  the 
country  is,  I  believe,  the  absence  of  common 
property    which    exists    in    most    parts    of    European 


42  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

Russia,  where  peasants  arc  only  tenants  oi  the 
land,  and  are  shifted  by  decisions  of  the  community 
from  one  hit  of  ground  to  another  ;  the  result  being 
that  they  never  care  to  improve  ground  which  next 
year    may    be   taken   away   and   allotted   to    someone 


else.       Here    every    peasant    is    a    small    proprietor, 
and  the  Government  land  tax  is  cheerfully  paid. 

In  one  of  the  villages  our  tarantass  wheels  at 
last  succumbed  to  the  overwhelming  mud,  and 
caused  a  long  delay.  The  mud,  indeed,  was  so 
deep  that  all  traffic  was  stopped,  and  the  inhabitants 
had  great  difficulty  in  wading  from  one  side  of  the 
street  to  the  other.      We  reached   Bisk   in   the  dark, 


MARMOT    HUNTING  45 

and  there  found  a  similar  state  of  things.  It  took 
lis  a  long  time  to  reach  the  merchant's  house  where 
rooms  had  been  prepared  for  us. 

The  Littledales  had  already  passed  on  their  way 
to  Ongudai,  for  which  place  we  decided  to  start 
the  next  morning".  We  found  the  authorities  most 
hospitable  and  kind,  and  the  police  officials  were 
placed  at  our  disposal  in  case  we  needed  anything. 
Bisk  is  the  second  largest  town  of  the  district,  and 
is  situated  on  the  junction  of  the  Bia  and  Katoun, 
which  rivers  unite  to  form  the  Ob  a  little  further 
down.  The  impression  conveyed  to  my  mind  was 
that  of  a  large  dirty  village.  It  is  the  last  town  of 
any  importance  before  reaching-  the  Siberian  frontier, 
and  is  inhabited  by  many  Russian  merchants  who 
own  the  best  houses  and  are  well  off,  owing  to  their 
successful  trade  in  tea  and  furs.  Of  late  years  Sable 
has  become  exceedingly  scarce,  but  Marmots  are 
found  in  great  numbers  in  the  Altai  Mountains,  and 
constitute  a  large  source  of  revenue  to  these  merchants, 
who  buy  the  skins  of  these  animals  by  thousands  at 
a  low  price  (10  to  20  kopecks  each)  and  send  them 
through  the  Irbit  annual  fair  to  Europe,  where  they 
are  dyed  and  sold  at  great  profit.  Kalmuk  natives 
shoot  these  Marmots  in  a  curious  manner  ;  they  go 
out  after  them  with  a  fox's  brush,  which  they  carry 


46 


AFTER    WIT. I)   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


MARMOT    HUNTING. 


slung  to  their  girdle.  As  soon  as  they  see  a  Marmot 
sitting  outside  its  hole  they  begin  to  wave  this 
brush  ;  the  Marmot  from  curiosity  remains  motion- 
less, watching  the  peculiar  proceedings,  whilst  the 
hunter  gradually  approaches  and  shoots  it  at  the 
distance  of  a  few  yards.  We  saw  large  numbers 
of  these  animals  on  the  hills  as  well  as  of  a  smaller 
kind  of  rodent — Mus  citilus. 


HOT   SPRINGS  47 

At  Bisk  we  were  most  comfortably  entertained  at 
one  of  the  merchant's  houses,  and,  though  rather 
tired,  started  early  next  morning  for  Ongudai.  The 
distance  from  Bisk  to  this  village  was  about  220 
versts,  or  190  miles.  By  means  of  ferry-boats  we 
crossed  the  two  tributaries  of  the  Ob,  Bia  and 
Katoun,  without  accident,  and  were  soon  trotting 
along  the  steppes.  We  could  now  plainly  dis- 
tinguish ahead  of  us,  through  a  dim  blue  haze,  the 
first  outlines  of  the  Altai  peaks.  At  first  the  country 
presented  a  similar  appearance  to  that  between 
Barnaoul  and  Bisk,  but  as  we  approached  the 
mountains,  woods  began  to  appear  on  all  sides, 
principally  cedar  and  larch.  The  villages  we  passed 
bore  the  same  aspect  as  those  we  had  seen  before. 
Deep  mud  prevailed  everywhere,  especially  at  a  place 
called  Bielokourikha,  where  in  some  places  people 
were  unable  to  leave  their  houses  in  consequence 
of  it.  There  were  said  to  be  hot  springs  around 
the  village,  and  perhaps  a  mud  bath  might  have 
cured  our  aching  limbs.  Its  curative  powers  at  all 
events  had  been  tried  by  people  from  Tomsk,  who, 
we  were  told,  had  succeeded  in  getting  rid  of  their 
rheumatism. 

We  left  this  Siberian  Franzensbad,  however,  after 
a  hard  struggle,  and  succeeded  in   reaching  a  village 


48  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

called  Altaiskoie  about  4  p.m.,  having  covered  eighty 
long  versts.  We  were  now  entering  the  mountains, 
and  although  the  Ispravnik  warned  us  that  we  had 
better  spend  the  night  here,  there  being-  a  difficult 
pass  to  cross  in  the  present  state  of  the  roads,  and 
a  distance  of  fifty  versts  separated  us  from  Tcherga, 
where  we  intended  to  halt,  we  disregarded  his  advice, 
and  continued  our  journey.  We  were  sorry  after- 
wards for  our  rashness.  On  leaving  Altaiskoie,  after 
a  quick  change  of  horses,  we  began  the  ascent 
through  a  small  valley,  overhung  on  either  side 
with  rocky  boulders.  The  country  was  well  wooded 
with  larch,  pine,  and  cedar,  and  at  places  we  passed 
large  tracts  of  charred  wood,  giving  evidence  of 
numerous  fires.  The  advance  was  very  slow,  and 
we  soon  found  that  we  should  have  to  grope  our 
way  in  the  dark.  Towards  9  p.m.  the  road  grew 
steeper  as  we  began  to  ascend  the  Komar  pass. 
The  road  was  swampy  and  very  trying  for  the 
horses,  the  mud  in  places  being  deep  and  sticky. 
In  addition  to  this  it  was  a  moonless  night,  and 
our  tarantass,  though  more  comfortable,  was  a  heavy 
weight  to  drag.  Thus  heavily  handicapped  we  soon 
struggled  behind,  our  friend  the  Ispravnik  having 
caught  us  up  in  the  dark,  on  his  lighter  vehicle, 
and    gone    on     in    front.       Finally,    at    1  1     p.m.,    our 


A    "MARALNIK"  49 

horses  refused  to  proceed  further.  The  last  jerk 
aroused  us  from  our  pleasant  slumber,  to  find  our- 
selves stuck  half-way  up  a  long  muddy  slope.  It 
was  a  cold  night,  and  the  rain  began  drizzling  down 
as  our  driver  descended  from  his  box,  and  told  us 
that  unless  we  had  fresh  horses  it  was  impossible 
to  advance  further.  Nothing  was  to  be  done  but 
to  send  him  back  to  the  village  for  men  and  horses, 
and  to  await  his  return.  In  this  piteous  condition 
we  remained  Jour  hours,  until  about  3  a.m.  we 
welcomed  our  liberators,  who  after  many  efforts 
dragged  the  tarantass  out  of  this  awkward  hole. 
Another  hour  brought  us  to  the  top  of  the  pass, 
where  we  met  about  thirty  men  on  horseback  sent 
from  Tcherga  by  the  Ispravnik,  who  could  not  under- 
stand what  had  happened  to  us.  We  reached  the 
village  at  6  a.m.  much  exhausted  after  twenty  hours' 
driving,  and  took  a  well-earned  rest.  We  had  now 
fairly  penetrated  the  low  Altai  country. 

In  the  afternoon  we  started  for  the  next  village, 
Shebalina,  distant  about  forty  versts.  Here  the  road 
was  infinitely  better,  the  hills  slightly  higher,  and  the 
scenery  wilder,  though  presenting  the  same  features. 
We  were  installed  in  a  nice  clean  house  beloncrino- 
to  a  Russian  merchant  trading  in  maral  horns.  Close 
by  was  a  large   "maralnik,"  or  enclosure  for   Maral, 


5° 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


with  a  stream  trickling  down  the  grassy  slope.  Here 
about  1,50.  Maral,  both  stags  and  hinds,  were  con- 
fined, enabling  us  to  contemplate  them  at  our  leisure. 
It  was  a  sight  worth  seeing;  these  fine  deer  fed 
quietly  near  us,  and,  knowing  their  master's  call, 
would    gather    round   him   and   take    bread   and  oats 


DEKK    PARK    AT    SHEBALINA. 


from  his  hands.  Some  of  the  stags  carried  good 
horns — in  velvet  at  that  time  of  year.  The  hinds 
appeared  tamer  than  the  stags,  which  (as  the 
merchant  told  us)  seemed  to  become  wilder  as  the 
time  approached  for  the  painful  operation  of  cutting 
the  horns  while  in  the  velvet,  generally  towards  the 
middle    of    June.      Some    of    the    animals    had    been 


A    "MARALNIK 


53 


bred  in  the  enclosure,  others  had  been  caught  in 
the  woods,  when  young,  by  native  Kalmuks  with 
dogs,  in  winter,  when  deep  snows  render  this  task 
easier.      The    proprietor    told    us    that    one    of    these 


MAKAI.    HIND. 


stags  had  sought  freedom  by  clearing  the  seven- 
foot  wooden  fence,  and  had  remained  several  months 
in  the  hills,  returning  eventually  in  the  same  sporting 
way.  There  are  many  similar  enclosures  in  the  Altai 
district,  especially  in  the  eastern  parts,  and  statistics 
show    that    about    6,000    deer    are    thus    enclosed    in 

E    2 


54  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

parks,  constituting  one  of  the  most  important  trades 
of  the  country  with  China.  The  stags'  horns,  while 
still  "in  velvet,"  are  sawn  off  before  they  reach 
their  full  growth.  For  this  purpose  there  is  con- 
structed in  one  corner  of  the  park  a  small  wooden 
enclosure,  with  a  narrow  passage  sunk  in  the  ground 
to  a  depth  corresponding"  to  the  animal's  height.  The 
stag  is  driven  into  this  until  he  can  neither  turn  nor 
move  forward  ;  then  a  strong  bar  is  fastened  behind 
his  neck,  so  that  he  is  entirely  disabled,  his  head 
alone  appearing  above  the  level  of  the  ground.  Idle 
horns,  having  been  cut  off,  are  carefully  dried  and 
sent  to  China,  where  they  are  sold  at  high  |>rices. 
An  average  head  fetches  from  ioo  to  120  roubles 
(/,io  to  £12),  at  fifteen  roubles  per  pound.  Our 
host  told  us  that  the  largest  sum  obtained  for  one 
pair  of  horns  was  180  roubles.  Naturally  such  a 
price  being  a  fortune  for  a  wretched  Kalmuk,  the 
Maral  is  becoming  exterminated  in  the  Altai,  and 
lately  the  Government  has  been  taking  strong 
measures  for  the  preservation  of  this  magnificent 
animal  by  strictly  prohibiting"  its  being  shot  in  the 
district.  Unfortunately  the  means  of  enforcing"  this 
law  are  very  limited  owing  to  the  want  of  a 
sufficient  number  of  officials,  and  the  wide  extent 
of    this    animal's    range.       As    will    appear    later,    we 


MARAL    HORNS  55 

spent  three  weeks  in  search  of  it.  Littledale  saw- 
only  one  fine  stag  during  the  whole  time  he  was 
in  the  country,  and  I  only  came  across  two  hinds 
and  a  couple  of  young  stags. 

In  China  they  crush  the  horns  into  powder,  which 
is  used  as  a  medicine,  mostly  for  women's  diseases, 
and  I  have  been  told  that  in  rich  Chinese  families 
there  is  scarcely  any  dowry  that  does  not  contain 
"maral-horn  powder."  On  our  return  journey  we 
met  several  caravans  of  this  precious  substance,  and 
our  host  himself  had  often  been  to  Kobdo  and 
Uliassoutai  with  many  pony  loads  of  horns,  the 
latter  towns  being  well  -  known  markets  for  them. 
A  Maral  park  is  a  most  profitable  enterprise,  en- 
tailing very  little  expense.  A  tract  of  ground  bought 
or  rented  from  the  village  at  a  low  price,  and  the 
cost  of  a  wooden  fence,  represent  all  the  capital  one 
has  to  put  into  the  business. 

We  spent  the  night  at  Shebalina,  and  started  at 
6  a.m.  next  morning  for  Ongudai.  We  were  glad 
to  hear  from  the  merchant  that  the  road  was  good, 
a  statement  which  proved  to  be  correct,  and  that  the 
ninety  remaining"  versts  would  bring  us  early  that 
same  evening  to   Ongudai. 

Shortly  after  leaving  the  village  we  came  to  a  very 
steep   ascent,    but   luckily    it    proved   to    be    as   short 


56  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

as  it  was  steep,  and  the  horses  carried  us  over 
smartly.  This  was  our  last  difficult  pass,  and  the 
road  now  led  through  a  flat  plateau  with  hills  on 
both  sides.  About  thirty  versts  before  reaching  our 
destination  we  entered  the  Kalmuk  country.  At  one 
of  the  last  stations  we  were  met  by  a  deputation  of 
"pig-tailed"  Kalmuks,  who  produced  a  written  order 
from  the  Ispravnik  of  Bisk  to  the  local  "dutchina" 
(Kalmuk  community)  to  give  me  every  assistance 
as  regards  shooting.  They  had  accordingly  prepared 
a  programme  for  the  day  :  Roe-deer  drives  in  the 
morning,  and  fishing  in  the  Tenga  lake  in  the  after- 
noon. I  thanked  them,  through  our  Ispravnik,  for 
the  trouble  they  had  taken  ;  but  being  anxious  to 
reach  Ongudai,  told  them  I  would  probably  take 
advantage  of  their  proposals  on  my  return  journey. 
The  Kalmuks  are  a  very  hospitable  race.  Their 
numbers,  as  I  was  told,  are  gradually  decreasing  in 
the  Altai,  where,  according  to  statistics,  only  six  or 
seven  thousand  remain.  They  are  at  a  very  low  ebb 
of  civilisation,  and  worship  spirits.  Like  Mongols 
and  Chinese,  they  shave  their  heads  and  wear  pig- 
tails. Those  that  have  been  christened  by  Russian 
missionaries  carry  the  usual  head-dress.  On  the 
whole,  they  are  very  indifferent  to  religion,  and  in 
many  cases  some  members  of  a  family  are  converts 


KALMUKS 


57 


to  the  Greek  Church,  while  the  others  remain 
heathen,  such  division  creating  no  misunderstandings 
whatever   amongst   them.      They  are  mostly  nomads 


and  live  in  "yourts,"  or  felt-covered  tents,  with  wicker 
frames,  which  they  shift  from  place  to  place  accord- 
ing to  the  time  of  year  and  the  abundance  of  grass 
available    for   their   cattle.      As   regards    their    intelli- 


AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


gence,  I  can  only  say  that  I  found  them  a  good  deal 
inferior  to  the  Kirghiz,  who  are  usually  clever  and 
cunning.  The  Kirghiz  being  Mohammedans,  this 
difference  of  religion  may  have  contributed  to  this 
result.  The  Kalmuks  are  governed  by  Zaissans,  or 
elected  native  chiefs  (formerly  hereditary  chiefs  of 
tribes),  who  are  responsible  before  the  Government 
for  the  periodical  collection  of  taxes.  Each  Zaissan 
rules  over  several  "dutchinas,"  or  communes,  each 
of  whom  in  turn  has  a  demitcha  at  the  head  of 
affairs.  The  "dutchinas,"  or  communes,  have  to 
keep  at  their  own  expense  a  Russian  official,  or 
clerk,  who  acts  as  secretary,  and  writes  in  Russian 
all  the  necessary  papers  for  the  "dutchina."  This 
clerk  gradually  takes  the  whole  of  the  commune  into 
his  hands.  Being  entirely  uncontrolled  he  writes 
whatever-  he  chooses,  and  becomes  ipso  facto  a  petty 
tyrant  to  the  wretched  Kalmuks,  who  live  in  constant 
fear  of  him,  and  make  him  presents  to  avert  his 
wrath. 

The  Government  official  lives  at  Ongudai,  and  is 
called  Altaisky  Zassedatel.  At  the  time  of  our 
visit  this  important  post  was  held  by  a  Mr.  Meyer, 
who  seemed  a  very  energetic  gentleman.  He 
accompanied  us  to  the  Siberian  frontier,  and  proved 
most    useful    in    procuring    horses    for    us    at     Kosh- 


KALMUKS 


59 


Agatch,  and  sending  us  provisions  from  Ongudai. 
The  Kalmuks  dress  in  a  very  peculiar  manner  ;  they 
wear,    winter    and    summer,    a    large    sheepskin    coat 


KALMUK    ZAISSAN. 


confined  round  the  body  by  a  leather  strap  ;  in 
summer  they  let  the  upper  part  of  it  drop,  thus  going 
about  naked  to  the  waist.  Rich  Kalmuks  wear  a 
soft   shirt    underneath.      A    fur   cap    is    their   ordinary 


ho  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

headgear,  and  long  boots  of  soft  leather,  often  of 
a  bright  red  colour,  constitute  their  footgear.  Some 
Kalmuks  are  comparatively  wealthy  and  own  several 
thousand  horses.  They  feed  on  "koumiss,"  or  fer- 
mented mare's  milk,  from  which  also  they  distil  a 
feeble  alcoholic  beverage.  Their  language  seemed 
to  me  to  resemble  the  Turki  dialect,  though  a  great 
many  words  have  nothing  in  common  with  the  latter. 
Thus  good  and\bad  is  Iakski  and  Taman;  water,  sou; 
white  and  black,  ak  and  kara ;  rock,  task ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  wind  is  salkhyn  ;  big  horn,  jahn  muss, 
which  differs  from  the  equivalent  terms  in  Turki. 
The  name  which  the  Kalmuks  apply  to  a  wild  ram 
(Kotckkor)  bears  no  resemblance  to  the  Kirghiz 
Gultcka,  but  the  ewes  are  known  in  both  languages 
as  Arkhar.  Thus  the  two  dialects  seem  here  and 
there  to  fuse. 

A  few  versts  before  reaching  Ongudai  we  passed 
the  Tenga  lake  and  saw  a  great  many  Cranes, 
Ducks,  and  Brahminy  Geese  on  the  marshes  round 
it.  Our  Ispravnik  told  us  at  the  station  where 
we  halted  that  once,  when  a  police  official  in  the 
district,  he  had  been  assaulted  by  500  Kalmuks, 
and  had  to  seek  refuge  from  them  in  a  boat  on 
this  very  lake.  The  reason  of  this  was  that  he 
had      been      given      orders     to     announce      to     the 


ONGUDAI  61 

Kalmuks  a  decree  augmenting  Government  taxes. 
This  news  was  so  unwelcome,  and  had  rendered 
them  so  furious,  that  they  would  have  killed  him  if 
he  had  not  succeeded  in  escaping  to  Bisk. 

The  ground  as  we  proceeded  became  sandy  and 
barren  ;  on  either  side  of  the  road,  which  was  now 
in  good  order,  were  the  same  low  hills  covered  with 
larch  and  cedar  woods,  the  latter  being  priceless  for 
the  inhabitants,  who,  in  autumn,  gather  large  quan- 
tities of  cedar  nuts  and  sell  them  to  merchants  who 
come  for  that  purpose. 

On  our  way  back  we  found  most  of  the  villages 
empty,  everyone  being  "in  the  cedars,"  as  the  few 
peasants  we  met  told  us.  At  4  p.m.  we  reached 
Ongudai  and  found  the  Littledales  in  fairly  good 
quarters.  As  for  us,  rooms  had  been  prepared  in 
a  house  belonging  to  a  christened  Kalmuk.  The 
baggage  had  arrived  safely  with  Joseph  and  the  cook, 
and  our  next  step  was  to  secure  ponies,  saddle-bags, 
and  stores,  such  as  potatoes,  for  sugar  and  flour  had 
been  bought  at  Barnaoul.  Here  the  road  ended, 
and  henceforward  everything  had  to  be  carried  on 
horseback. 

Ongudai  is  a  small  village,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  hills,  somewhat  higher  than  those  we  had 
passed  on  our  way,  and  inhabited  by  a  few  Russian 


62 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


officials,  merchants,  and  converted  Kalmuks.  Here 
I  made  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Meyer,  the  chief  police 
official  of  the  district.  He  told  us  that  horses  would 
be  ready  on  the  following  day,  which  was  spent 
entirely  in  inspecting  the  ponies  and  dividing  the 
packages   in   one    month's  stores,   as   we    intended    to 


fc- 

:j|y-|             i  '■'""'-■! 

imsafttfg/£?\ 

THE    LAST    STATION. 


leave  the  remaining  supplies  at  Kosh-Agatch,  sending 
Joseph  for  them  when  needed.  We  also  hired,  for 
three  roubles  a  pair,  from  the  natives  a  large  number 
of  leather  saddle-bags,  into  which  we  placed  our 
provisions.  The  ponies  were  carefully  picked,  espe- 
cially our  "mounts,"  and  the  start  was  fixed  for  the 
morning  of  the  following  day,  June  8th. 


ONGUDAI  65 

In  the  evening-  we  received  a  visit  from  the  local 
priest,  Father  Constantine.  He  had  spent  about 
thirty  years  at  Ongudai  and  in  the  Kalmuk  country, 
having  been  exiled  to  this  place  in  his  early  days  for 
some  political  offence.  He  was  most  interesting  in 
his  conversation,  having  thoroughly  studied  the  Kal- 
muks,  their  language  and  ways,  and  having  converted 
many  to  Christianity.  He  gave  me  a  Russian- 
Kalmuk  dictionary  which  he  had  compiled  himself, 
and  from  which  I  extracted  my  available  means  of 
conversation.  He  had  crowned  his  studies  by 
marrying  a  Kalmuk  girl,  and  was  spending  the  few 
years  that  were  left  to  him  in  educating  his  wife 
and  father-in-law,  who  lived  in  his  house. 

The  same  evening  we  secured  the  services,  for 
twenty  roubles  a  month,  of  a  Russian,  Nicholas  by 
name,  who  was  to  act  as  interpreter,  and  whom  we 
found  useful  in  every  emergency.  A  distance  of 
over  200  miles  separated  us  yet  from  the  Siberian 
frontier — a  distance  which  we  covered  in  six  days. 
We  started  from  Ongudai  at  9  a.m.  on  the  8th  of 
June,  on  horseback.  The  ladies  drove  about  twelve 
miles  in  a  cart,  after  which  they  also  had  to  mount 
the  ponies  which  had  been  prepared  for  them. 
Everyone  said  it  would  be  impossible  for  ladies' 
saddles  to  pass  along  the  narrow  Tchouia  path,  where 


66  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  native  women  ride  astride  like  men.  We  risked 
it,  however,  and  found  it  much  easier  than  we 
anticipated.  The  weather  had  become  quite  settled 
again.  Our  caravan  consisted  of  fifty  pack  and  ten 
mount  ponies.  Mr.  Meyer  accompanied  us  to  the 
frontier.  Our  first  march  (about  thirty-five  versts) 
brought  us  about  4  p.m.  to  the  banks  of  the  river 
Katoun,  where  we  camped  for  the  first  time.  The 
current  was  very  strong-  here,  especially  in  June,  and 
the  river  fairly  broad.  On  our  way  we  met  several 
stray  Kalmuk  "yourts."  The  sun  was  exceedingly  hot, 
and  clouds  of  dust  covered  us  as  we  trotted  along  the 
path.  We  followed  for  some  time  the  Urusoul  River, 
on  which  stands  Ongudai.  The  aspect  of  the  country 
presented  no  perceptible  change,  and  appeared  to  us 
somewhat  monotonous  :  the  same  rolling  hills,  the 
same  vegetation,  the  same  trees,  giving  evidence  of 
occasional  forest  fires,  probably  caused  by  the  care- 
lessness of  the  Kalmuks.  Our  tents  were  soon 
pitched  on  a  grassy  plain  overlooking  the  Katoun. 
A  "yourt"  had  been  put  up  for  our  friends,  M.  Meyer 
and  the  Ispravnik,  who  both  partook  of  our  frugal 
supper  from  the  hands  of  Yassili,  our  cook.  The 
night  was  fresh,  and  it  was  freezing  when  we  started 
next  morning. 

Towards  6  a.m.  we  crossed   the    Katoun  with  our 


CROSSING    THE    KATOUN 


67 


luggage  on  a  raft.  As  for  the  ponies,  they  were 
pushed  into  the  river,  and  made  to  swim  across.  It 
was  a  curious  sight  to  watch  them  paddling  away 
in  mid-stream  and  landing  on  the  opposite  side  about 
200  yards  lower  down.  In  the  water  they  look  twice 
as  lono-   with  their  tails  floating  on  the  surface  behind 


CROSSING    THE    KATOUN. 


them.  This  operation  presented  no  difficulty,  how- 
ever, and  it  took  hardly  an  hour  to  reload  the  ponies 
and  make  a  fresh  start.  We  followed  the  river  up 
its  right  bank  for  some  time,  and  here  first  made 
acquaintance  with  the  so-called  "bomas,"  the  dangers 
of  which  had  been  so  much  exaggerated.  This 
curious  term  signifies  a  place  where  the  path  becomes 


68  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

narrow  and  leads  over  steep  rocks  overhanging  the 
stream.  ( )ur  ponies  seemed  to  be  well  accustomed 
to  this  sort  of  climbing,  and  carried  us  through 
without  the  slightest  hitch  ;  as  for  the  ladies,  they 
did  not  even  dismount.  We  soon  turned  off  to  our 
left  and  began  ascending"  a  long  steep  slope  leading 
to  the  Saldjar  pass  (5,500  feet),  from  which  we  would 
be  able  to  distinguish  the  higher  mountains  in  the 
distance.  At  1  p.m.  we  reached  the  "saddle,"  and 
a  beautiful  view  met  our  eyes.  Snow-clad  peaks 
about  a  hundred  miles  off  raised  their  lofty  heads 
against  the  light  blue  sky.  The  horizon  was  cloud- 
less. To  our  right  stood  the  grand,  massive,  snowy- 
white  Bialukha  range,  the  highest  in  the  Siberian 
Altai,  with  glaciers  streaming  down  its  sides ;  we 
could  just  distinguish  them  with  the  help  of  our 
glasses.  To  the  left  appeared  the  Kurai  hills,  like- 
wise buried  beneath  eternal  snow,  below  which  flows 
the  Tchouia,  and  close  to  which  lay  our  way  to  Kosh- 
Agatch.  Here  we  halted  for  some  time,  in  order 
to  let  the  ponies  rest.  Round  us  were  scattered 
innumerable  Alpine  flowers  and  rhododendrons,  to 
which  were  tied  bits  of  white  and  red  ribbons.  On 
my  inquiring  the  meaning  of  this,  I  was  told  that 
this  was  the  manner  in  which  Kalmuks  honour  and 
sacrifice  to  local  spirits  ;  we  afterwards  found  similar 


KALMUK   OFFERINGS  71 

ribbons  on  almost  every  pass  we  crossed.  A  steep 
descent  awaited  us.  The  heat  was  intolerable,  and 
the  slow  pace  at  which  we  were  obliged  to  advance 
was  very  trying.  At  4  p.m.  we  reached  the  banks 
of  the  river  Inia,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Katoun, 
where    we    pitched   camp   after  a  thirty-verst  march. 


^■H 

1             "  "IF* 

-    . 

KALMUKS   BETWEEN   ONGUDAI   AND    KOSH-AGATCH. 

Here  we  first  came  across  Kalmuk  offerings  to  their 
gods.  Two  or  three  poles  were  put  up  in  the  middle 
of  a  field,  in  a  slanting  position  from  the  ground  ; 
at  the  end  of  these  poles  hung  skins  of  horses  and 
goats  ;  the  wretched  animals  had  been  torn  to  pieces 
alive  as  a  peace  offering  to  the  spirits.  After  two 
trees  are  hewn  down  the  animal  is  tied,  his  fore  feet 
to  one  and  hind  lees  to  the  other,  and  the  trees  are 


72 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


released.      It  was,  indeed,  a  ghastly  sight.     Towards 
evening  the    wind    began    blowing,  and    waving    the 

legs  of  the  skins  to  and  fro,  gave  them  an  appearance 
of  dancing  at  the  end  of  long  poles. 

Early  next  morning  we   lifted   camp,   reaching  the 


KALMUK   OFKERIN 


junction  of  the  Tchouia  River  and  the  Katoun  at 
about  10  a.m.  We  branched  off  up  the  former 
river,  which  we  now  had  to  follow  to  Kosh-Agatch. 
As  we  advanced,  the  country  gradually  grew  wilder  ; 
here  and  there  the  river  ran  through  narrow  gorges, 
and   the   path   became   more  difficult    for  the    horses. 


AS    WE    ADVANCED,   THE   COUNTRY    GREW    WILDER. 


TCHOUIA   VALLEY 


75 


There  were  no  more  signs  of  villages  ;  only  a  few 
"  yourts "  witnessed  the  presence  of  human  beings, 
and  the  occupants  of  these  were  so  frightened  at 
the  sight  of  us  that  they  would  rush  off  and  hide 
under  the   rocks  until  our  caravan  had  passed.       At 


"waving  the  legs  ok  the  skins  to  and  fro." 

4  p.m.  we  reached  a  place  called  Iodro,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tchouia,  where  we  camped  for  the 
night,  the  ponies  having  had  a  march  of  forty 
versts.  Here  the  Ispravnik  promised  us  a  curious 
sight.  He  sent  for  a  Kalmuk  priest  who  lived  in 
his  yourt   in   the   neighbourhood,   and  on   the   latter's 


76 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


arrival  with  his  officiating  implements,  ordered  him 
to  perform  before  us.  Kalmuks  are  greatly  under 
the  influence  of  their  priests  or  "kaams,"  who  are 
supposed  to  live  in  close  communion  with  spirits 
whom  they  invoke,  and  through  whose  power  they 
receive  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  invocation  or 
"  Kamlanie "   which    we   witnessed    that    evening",    as 


KAI.MUK     "YOUKT. 


we  sat  in  a  circle  round  the  kaam,  consisted  of 
the  following"  strange  display.  The  priest  knelt 
down,  holding"  up  a  tambourine  on  which  was 
roughly  carved  in  wood  a  diabolical  figure,  repre- 
senting the  spirit  he  usually  invoked  ;  from  this 
instrument  depended  a  quantity  of  coloured  ribbons, 
similar  to  those  we  saw  attached  to  bushes  and 
odd-shaped  trees.  When  wishful  to  consult  a  spirit 
the    Kalmuks    generally    attach    a    bit    of    ribbon    to 


A    GOOD    OMEN  77 

the  kaam's  tambourine,  who  then  begins  his  per- 
formance, ending-  in  his  announcing  an  order  from 
the  god  to  give  him  a  horse,  cow,  or  goat, 
according  as  a  particular  animal  in  the  Kalmuk's 
possession  has  taken  his  fancy.  This  is  supposed 
to  appease  the  spirit's  wrath.  Such  is  the  constant 
deception  to  which  the  wretched  natives  are  sub- 
jected. It  was  a  strange  sight  to  see  the  man 
beating  his  tambourine,  slowly  at  first,  uttering 
incomprehensible  and  savage  sounds  into  the  spirit's 
ear,  then  louder  and  louder  till  he  got  into  a  state 
of  ecstasy,  under  the  magic  spell  of  his  familiar 
deity.  Finally,  he  gave  a  loud  yell,  and  I  was 
told  that  the  spirit  was  ready  to  answer  my 
questions.  I  asked  (of  course  through  the  in- 
terpreter) whether  I  should  kill  many  wild  sheep ; 
the  reply  came,  in  a  hollow  voice,  that  a  "  Kotchko  " 
(wild  sheep)  with  white  patches  on  him  would  be 
hurled  down  a  precipice.  I  took  this  as  a  g'ood 
omen,  and  rewarded  the  old  rascal  with  a  couple 
of  roubles.  Mr.  Meyer  told  me  that  a  few  years 
ago  there  were  two  well-known  rival  kaams  in  the 
district,  and  that  they  once  quarrelled  on  the  question 
whose  spirit  was  the  stronger.  Both  began  invoking 
their  god  in  the  manner  just  described.  It  was  said 
to  have  been  an  exciting  scene,  for  they  reached  such 


78  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

a  pitch  of  exaltation  after  a  few  hours  that  one  of 
them  fell  senseless  to  the  ground,  and  died  shortly 
afterwards.  The  other  kaam  was  thereupon  re- 
garded as  the  conqueror,  and  crowds  of  Kalmuks 
used  to  throng  round  his  "  yourt  "  to  consult  his  spirit. 
Kalmuks  do  not  bury  their  dead,  but  place  the 
corpse  on  wooden  planks  strewn  with  branches, 
where  it  is  left  at  the  disposal  of  vultures  and 
other  animals  of  prey.  Mongols  consider  it  a 
profanation  of  the  soil  to  bury  their  dead,  and 
simply  leave  them  on  the  spot  where  they  died  ; 
they  do  not  even  allow  bodies  of  Russian  merchants 
who  happen  to  die  in  Mongolia  to  be  buried,  but 
sometimes  remove  the  corpse  into  Russian  territory. 
The  Government  has  lately  taken  measures  to  prevent 
this  in  the  Altai,  as  well  as  the  inhuman  treatment 
of  animals  ;  but  these  ancient  customs  still  prevail 
in  the  remoter  parts  of  the  country. 

We  spent  the  whole  of  the  following  day  (June 
nth)  in  marching  up  the  valley  of  the  Tchouia, 
whose  muddy  waters  flowed  rapidly  beneath  us. 
Here  also  we  had  to  pass  frequent  "bomas,"  which 
rather  delayed  our  journey,  ponies  refusing  at  places 
to  advance  over  the  steep  craggy  path.  We  managed, 
however,  to  reach  our  destination  that  night,  after 
having  covered  another  fifty   versts,   and  camped   by 


rASSING   A   "BOMA. 


THE    "KURAI    STEPPE"  Si 

the  side  of  a  small  tributary  of  the  Tchouia,  the 
Tchibit.  Here  the  scenery  changed  as  we  neared 
the  Kosh-Agatch  plateau.  The  mountains  grew 
loftier  on  either  side,  and  we  could  plainly  dis- 
tinguish snowy  peaks  in  the  distance. 

Next  day  we  made  our  customary  start  at  5  a.m. 


Wf'-V  jjtf^.''  ,,^^Jfc^^™ 

WB  ■!£''  * 

UI'   THE   VALLEY   OF    THE    TCHOUIA. 


The  weather  was  much  cooler,  owing,  probably,  to 
greater  altitude.  We  now  passed  the  "  Kurai  steppe," 
a  plateau  of  about  twelve  miles  in  length,  bordered 
on  our  right  hand  by  the  Kurai  snow-clad  range 
(Kuraiskie  belki),  which  we  had  seen  for  the  first 
time  from  the  crest  of  the  Saldjar  pass.  The 
mighty    crags    reared    their    lofty    heads    in    the    sky 


82  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

just    above    us,    as    we    followed,    for    several    hours, 

the  path  at  their  foot.  That  day  1  nearly  fell  a 
victim  to  my  vicious  Kalmuk  pony.  As  I  was 
dismounting,  in  order  to  tighten  the  girths  of  my 
saddle,  the  horse  suddenly  kicked  and  bolted.  I 
was  unable  to  disengage  my  foot  from  the  stirrup, 
owing  to  my  nailed  boots,  and  was  dragged  along 
in  the  most  awkward  position  some  fifty  yards, 
when  the  brute  luckily  stopped.  I  got  out  of  this 
with   severe   bruises  on   head  and  arms. 

We  reached  Kouickhtonar,  the  last  camp  before 
Kosh-Agatch,  towards  6  p.m.,  after  a  march  of  sixty 
versts,  or  about  forty-five  miles.  High  mountains 
surrounded  us  on  all  sides,  and  the  Kalmuks  all 
asserted  that  there  were  many  "bouns,"  i.e.  Ibex 
(Capra  sibirica),  in  these  hills.  As  we  were  chiefly 
anxious,  however,  to  make  acquaintance  with  the 
Wild  Sheep,  we  decided  to  try  for  Ibex  on  our 
return  journey. 

At  7  a.m.  on  June  13th  we  were  again  on  the 
move,  and  towards  noon  entered  at  last  the  Kosh- 
Agatch  plateau.  The  plateau  is  a  wide  steppe,  a 
little  under  6,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea, 
stretching  about  sixty  versts  in  length  by  forty  in 
width,  bordered  on  all  sides  by  fairly  high  moun- 
tains,  especially   to    the   south    and    west.      The   river 


SWANS,    GEESE,   AND    DUCKS  83 

Tchouia  Hows  through  it  together  with  several  of  its 
smaller  tributaries,  of  which  the  Tchagan-Burgaza 
is  the  largest.  Numerous  lakes,  ponds,  and  marshes 
are  scattered  about  on  the  steppe,  and  afford  good 
breeding-places  for  Swans,  Geese,  and   Ducks  of  all 


KOSH-AGATCH 


kinds  which  swarmed  there.  It  was  here  that  I 
thought  I  might  get  a  chance  to  secure  the  duck 
which  Mr.  Alpheraki  was  so  eager  to  obtain.  The 
birds  seemed  very  tame,  and  we  passed  quite  close 
to  several  lots.  A  couple  of  Swans  only  swam  away 
a  few  yards  at  our  approach.  The  steppe  over  which 
we  were  now  advancing  had  probably  been  one  huge 


84  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

lake  in  former  days  ;  a  well-defined  line  along  the 
surrounding"  hills  some  hundreds  of  feet  above  its 
level  seemed  to  be  the  ancient  watermark,  and 
appeared  to  confirm  this  supposition.  In  fact,  almost 
all  the  mountains  round  Mongolian  and  Tibetan 
plateaus  bear  this  mark  at  different  heights,  denoting 
the  gradual  drying-up  of  these  regions.  The  ground 
was  sandy  and  barren  with  patches  of  alkali  here 
and  there,  and  grass  scarce,  affording  poor  grazing' 
for  the  ponies. 

One  could  distinguish  from  afar  the  beds  of 
streams  by  the  greener  grass  and  a  few  shrubs 
growing  beside  them.  We  now  had  a  good  view 
of  the  hills  to  the  south,  where  we  expected  to  find 
the  glorious  Wild  Sheep,  and  were  told  that  a  couple 
of  days  from  Kosh-Agatch  would  bring-  us  to  the 
Promised  Land.  At  2  p.m.  we  found  ourselves 
opposite  the  few  wooden  huts  which  were  to  be  our 
destination,  but  the  Tchouia  had  to  be  crossed  ;  so 
near  and  yet  so  far,  as  there  was  no  sign  of  a  boat. 
The  river  was  broad,  and  no  ford  existed  for  miles 
above,  especially  at  this  season  of  the  year,  when 
rivers  are  generally  swollen  by  melting  snows. 
Strange  to  say,  Russian  merchants  have  not  yet 
attempted  to  build  a  bridge  at  this  place,  though 
tea  caravans  are  becoming  more  and  more  frequent. 


ZAISSAN    SEMION  85 

Owing  to  this  want  of  bridges,  goods  are  often 
carried  away  and  lost  in  the  river.  A  small  raft  was 
soon  ready,  the  Ispravnik  having  warned  us  of  the 
difficulty,  and  sent  orders  in  front  to  bring'  down 
to  the  river  all  the  timber  that  could  be  found.  Our 
crossing  was  effected  without  accident.  As  for  the 
luggage,  it  was  brought  in  late  in  the  evening", 
thoroughly  damped.  The  village  consists  of  a  few 
wooden  buildings  used  as  shelter  for  goods,  of  two 
or  three  houses,  one  of  which  was  inhabited  by  a 
Russian  Customs  official,  and  of  a  small  missionary 
church.  We  were  put  up  in  a  fair  room.  Weather 
cold  and  rainy.  The  whole  of  the  next  day  was 
spent  in  drying  our  baggage  and  stores.  The 
custom-house  yard  presented  a  curious  sight.  It  was 
strewn  all  over  with  our  wet  clothes,  bedding,  rope, 
flour,  potatoes,  salt — everything"  drying  in  the  sun, 
which  luckily  peeped  out  at  the  right  moment.  Here 
we  made  acquaintance  with  the  Zaissan  Semion,  an 
energetic  Kalmuk  chief,  who  had  been  summoned 
by  Mr.  Meyer  in  order  to  superintend  our  expedition 
in  procuring  for  us  the  best  horses  he  could  muster 
in  the  country,  and  the  most  reliable  men.  He  was 
a  christened  native,  and  a  great  deal  above  the 
average  of  Kalmuk  intelligence.  As  I  have  said 
before,    the    Zaissan,    the   elected  chief  of  a  tribe,    is 


86  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

almost  omnipotent  in  his  district,  and  generally  rules 
over  his  subjects  in  a  most  arbitrary  fashion,  Govern- 
ment control  amounting  to  very  little,  and  the  in- 
habitants being  at  the  lowest  possible  decree  of 
civilisation,   if  such  it  may  be  called. 

We   were  several    times  witnesses   of  punishments 
inflicted  on  Kalmuks  by  the  Zaissan's  orders  for  slight 


Mfcgi  •  %^fcL  -^M 

u 

I'ATL'HINC    HokSKs. 


attempts  at  disobedience,  and  occasionally  had  to  put 
a  stop  to  them.  The  usual  mode  of  punishment  con- 
sists in  flogging  the  wretched  culprit  in  a  most  merci- 
less way,  till  he  sometimes  loses  consciousness.  We 
happened  to  be  present  at  a  milder  example  of  this 
performance  on  the  following  day,  when  the  Zaissan 
found  one  of  the  Kalmuks  not  helping  to  catch  the 
ponies  for  the  start.      He  followed  him  on  horseback 


TAB  A  87 

sonic  hundred  yards,  beating  him  as  hard  as  he  could 
with  his  knotted  whip.  In  the  afternoon  we  sent 
for  the  hunters.  Four  dismal  creatures  presented 
themselves,  stating-  they  were  willing  to  accompany 
us,  and  that  they  knew  the  ground  up  to  the  frontier. 
We  kept  hearing  the  words  " Kotchkor  bar"  which 
our  interpreter  translated  "There  are  wild  sheep." 
Taba  was  one  of  the  four  men.  I  was  very  anxious 
to  secure  him,  having  been  told  that  Major  Cumber- 
land had  employed  him  the  previous  year,  and  had 
found     him     exceedingly     useful.      We     certainly     all 


PUNISHING    A    KALMUK. 


88  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

agreed  that  he  was  by  far  the  keenest  and  cleverest 
of  them  all.  Poor  little  fellow,  I  have  lately  heard 
that  he  died  soon  after  we  left.  He  was  as  sharp 
as  a  monkey,  and  kept  urging  us  to  take  him  to 
Europe,    where    I    am  afraid  he  would  have   become 


;om  kosh-a<;a'i 


a  dreadful  scoundrel,  though  in  his  own  sphere  he 
was  well  enough,  and  at  times  witty  and  amusing. 
He  spoke  a  few  words  of  English,  which  he  used 
to  pronounce  with  his  native  accent,  and  nothing  was 
more  funny  than  to  hear  him  go  through  his  short 
vocabulary    of    the    Anglo-Saxon    dialect.      Towards 


DUCK   SHOOTING  89 

evening  Littledale  and  I  went  out  after  ducks,  and 
brought  back  half  a  dozen  Eared  Grebes  and  a 
couple  of  Geese.  There  were  said  to  be  Antelopes 
(A.  gittturosa)  on  the  steppe,  but  we  saw  none.  On 
our  way  back,  however,  we  came  across  large  herds, 
and  shot  a  few.  We  settled  for  the  prices  with 
our  friend  the  Zaissan,  allowing  each  man  a  rouble 
a  day  with  the  promise  of  a  small  present  at  the  end 
of  the  journey.  As  for  the  ponies,  we  agreed  at  the 
rate  of  100  roubles  for  ten  horses  a  month.  They 
all  seemed  quite  content  with  this  bargain,  and  we 
decided  to  set  forth  on  the  following  morning, 
Zaissan  Semion  accompanying  us  to  our  first  shooting 
camp  at  two  days'  march  from  Kosh-Agatch. 


-    . 


CHAPTER    III. 

Strut  from  Kosh-Agatch — Steppe — Camp — Up  Tchagan-Burgaza  Valley 
—  First  sight  of  Wild  Sheep — Kotchkor  —  Arkhar  —  Snow  Bridge 
— Pitching  Camp — First  Shooting  Camp  —  Kalmuk  Vocabulary — 
Cold  Nights— Stalks— The  Happy  Valley  {Bain-Tchagan) — More 
Stalks— Snow  and  Wind. 


Haying  concluded  all  our  preparations  at  Kosh- 
Agatch,  dried  our  baggage,  and  placed  two  months' 
stores  under  lock  and  key  in  the  Customs  warehouse 
(taking  with  us  provisions  for  a  month),  we  started 
at  noon  on  June  15th.  Early  that  morning  the  place 
presented  an  unusual  sight.  Our  Kalmuks,  presided 
over  by  the  Zaissan,  began  catching  the  horses, 
which  were  quartered  in  a  large  wooded  enclosure, 
with  lassos,  Littledale  and  myself  picking  out  those 
we  considered  the  best.  Although  the  natives  were 
skilful  enough  in  the  art  of  lassoing,  this  job  took 
a  couple  of  hours,  numerous  misses  being  scored,  and 

after  a   miss   the   ponies  having  to  be  driven   round 
90 


START    FROM    KOSH-AGATCH  91 

again  into  the  fatal  corner,  when  the  deadly  noose 
was  to  be  hurled  round  the  neck  of  the  one  we  had 
pointed  out.  Our  baggage,  ready  to  be  loaded,  was 
scattered  about  on  the  ground  round  the  enclosure, 
and  as  soon  as  a  horse  was  caught  he  was  instantly 
hobbled  and  converted  into  a  pack-pony.  Many 
refused  energetically  this  degrading  work,  and  began 
jumping  and  kicking  for  all  they  were  worth  till  they 
got  rid  of  their  unaccustomed  burden.  Renewed 
trials  often  brought  similar  results,  and  the  horse  had 
to  be  abandoned.  All  this  delayed  our  departure 
until  midday,  when  at  last  success  crowned  our  efforts. 
1  must  acknowledge  that  the  very  process  of  loading 
seemed  to  be  familiar  to  the  Kalmuks,  and  was 
carried  through  in  a  masterly  way.  Our  interpreter, 
Nicholas,  was  also  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
job,  probably  owing  to  his  practice  with  the  numerous 
caravans  which  pass  through  the  country.  I  was 
struck  by  this,  in  comparison  with  previous  ex- 
periences in  other  regions,  the  Caucasus,  for  instance, 
where  the  art  of  loading  a  horse  for  a  long  march 
and  economising  rope  is  far  inferior. 

We  bade  farewell  to  the  Ispravnik  and  Mr.  Meyer, 
who  both  kept  urging  us  not  to  cross  the  Mongolian 

loo  o 

frontier,  where,  we  were  assured,  our  escort  would 
refuse  to  follow  us,  and  began  advancing  slowly  to- 


92  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

wards  the  hills  due  south.  Our  caravan  consisted  of 
our  four  selves  (the  Littledales,  my  wife,  and  myself), 
Dr.  Newsky,  Cristo  and  Gabriel,  Vassili  the  cook, 
Joseph  Abbas,  and  Nicholas  the  interpreter,  fifty  pack 
and    mount    ponies,    ten    Kalmuks    with    a    demitclia 


.OADINC.    A    HORSE. 


at  their  head,  our  four  hunters,  and  the  Zaissan 
Semion.  This  was,  indeed,  an  imposing  party,  more 
likely  to  be  destined  for  the  conquest  of  China  than 
for  shooting  sheep.  It  was  with  sore  hearts  that  we 
gradually  saw  our  numbers  growing  to  such  an  extent, 
but  everyone  seemed   to  be  wanted,  and  we  had  to 


OUR   CAMP  93 

put  up  with  it.  Our  way  lay  through  the  Mat  steppe 
for  about  twenty  miles,  and,  having  started  so  late 
in  the  day,  we  decided  to  pitch  camp  at  the  foot  of 
the  hills.  The  sun  was  very  warm,  the  ground  dry 
and  barren.  We  passed  several  small  lakes,  and 
soon  found  ourselves  on  the  banks  of  the  Tchagan- 
Burgaza  stream,  which  we  followed  up  till  the 
evening.  I  was  greatly  struck  by  how  one  is  de- 
ceived by  distances  on  those  plateaus.  The  hills 
seemed  quite  close  at  hand,  and  I  could  hardly 
believe  that  twenty  miles  separated  us  from  them. 
However,  as  we  took  about  five  hours  to  reach  our 
destination,  at  the  pace  of  about  four  miles  an  hour, 
there  could  be  no  mistake.  We  camped  that  night 
on  the  riverside,  at  a  spot  where  the  stream  flows  out 
of  a  narrow  valley,  at  the  head  of  which  we  could 
distinguish  snowy  peaks.  Our  Zaissan  had  brought 
his  tent  with  him,  and  we  were  interested  in  watching 
the  way  in  which  he  kept  ordering  his  Kalmuks 
about,  to  pitch  his  tent,  prepare  his  food,  etc.,  as  he 
lay  quietly  on  his  back  indulging  in  pleasant  dreams, 
or  sweet  slumber.  In  fact,  they  paid  much  more 
attention  to  him  than  they  did  to  us,  and  I  must  own 
that  we  sincerely  hoped  he  would  return  home  as 
soon  as  possible,  which  he  luckily  did,  though  he 
had    been    appointed    to    accompany    us    the    whole 


94 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


journey.  It  was  in  a  welcome  mood  that  we  met  him 
next  evening,  as  he  explained  to  us  that  official  duties 
required  his  presence  in  his  own  district,  and  that  he 
would  join  us  on  our  way  back.  He  promised  to 
supply  us  every  month  with  fresh  ponies  and  men, 
to  which  we  readily  agreed,  especially  with  regard 
to  ponies,  which,  being  unshod,  would  soon  become 
footsore  with  constant  travelling  over  rocky  ground, 
and  so  be  useless  for  our  purpose. 

Yakoub,  the  demitcha,  who  was  practically  our 
caravan- baski,  was  a  kind-hearted  Kalmuk,  rather 
too  weak  to  keep  the  men  in  good  order  and  disci- 
pline. He  explained  to  us  that  it  was  most  risky 
to  cross  the  frontier  into  Mongolia,  and  that  our  staff 
would,  in  that  case,  strongly  object  and  possibly 
desert  us.  We  thought  he,  too,  was  distinctly 
opposed  to  quitting  "his  happy  home,"  and  left  the 
question  open  for  the  present.  Early  on  the  following- 
morning,  June  1 6th,  we  struck  camp  and  entered  the 
valley  of  the  Tchagan-Burgaza.  The  slopes  on 
either  side  grew  steeper  as  we  advanced,  and  the 
ground  barer.  Here  and  there  were  to  be  seen 
occasional  clumps  of  fir  trees,  principally  larch,  and 
by  the  river-bed  rows  of  willow  bushes.  The  path 
led  along  the  right  bank  of  the  stream,  now  and 
then  ascending  the  rocks  and  affording  a  heavy  pull 


"KOTCHKOR"   AND    "ARKHAR"  95 

to  the  pack-ponies,  at  other  times  descending  to  the 
very  bottom  of  the  valley.  As  we  came  to  higher 
ground  we  found  the  slopes  covered  with  fine  grass, 
resembling  Alpine  pastures,  and  fauna  similar  to  that 
of  the  Alps,  as  far  as  I  could  judge.  Here  also 
we  came  across  horns  and  skulls  of  Wild  Sheep 
scattered  about  on  the  bed  of  the  stream.  Some 
of  them  measured  well,  and  made  our  hearts  leap 
as  we  entered  at  last  the  Ovis  country.  In  fact, 
Taba  seemed  to  assure  us  that  we  would  see  a  herd 
or  two  on  the  slopes  before  evening.  Towards  3  p.m. 
we  caught  sight  with  our  glasses  of  some  specks  just 
below  a  high  ridge  on  the  opposite  side.  We  made 
them  out  to  be  ewes  and  young  sheep  quietly 
grazing.  There  was  an  unusual  movement  among 
the  Kalmuks,  who  began  pointing  at  the  herd,  and 
the  words  Kotchkor  and  Arkhar  predominated  in 
their  lively  conversation.  As  we  came  nearer  the 
light  grey  specks  became  more  conspicuous.  They 
soon  discovered  our  caravan  ;  all  the  heads  were  up 
in  a  second,  and  a  moment  after  the  whole  herd 
trotted  over  the  ridge.  Unlike  their  Sardinian  kins- 
men, the  ewes  carried  horns  from  ten  to  twelve 
inches  long,  and  their  bodies  were  of  course  much 
larger.  We  were  very  anxious  to  see  the  rams,  but 
unfortunately  no  other  animals  came  in  sight  that  day. 


96  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

We  passed  many  more  horns  lying  on  the  ground, 
some  of  which  taped  over  fifty  inches  along  the 
curve  and  over  eighteen  in  girth,  and  great  were  our 
expectations  for  the  morrow.  At  a  place  where  the 
path  turned  to  the  right  we  were  obliged  to  cross  the 
stream  over  a  large  snow-bridge,  which  was  now 
melting  fast.  We  could  see  the  swollen  river  rushing 
furiously  underneath  and  gradually  wearing  away  the 
whole  fabric.  It  was  a  dangerous  crossing.  Luckily, 
the  snow  was  just  strong  enough  to  carry  the  weight 
of  the  ponies,  and  we  all  got  over  safely.  The  next 
day  a  Kalmuk,  who  had  been  sent  back  for  fuel, 
found  the  bridge  gone,  and  no  more  signs  of  snow. 
A  little  beyond  this  spot  the  river  made  a  sharp  turn 
westwards,  and  we  now  followed  up  its  left  bank  for 
a  few  miles  till  we  reached  a  suitable  camping  place, 
which,  our  hunters  said,  was  to  be  the  centre  of  our 
shooting  operations,  and  pitched  our  tents  at  a  few 
hundred  yards  from  the  stream,  after  a  twenty-five 
mile  march.  From  here  the  country  presented  a 
totally  different  aspect  to  what  we  had  seen  before. 
We  were  camped  on  a  small  grassy  tableland,  sur- 
rounded on  all  sides  by  hills.  The  valley  of  the 
Tchagan-Burgaza  here  made  a  bend  southwards  ami 
continued  for  a  few  miles  to  the  sources  of  the  stream, 
enclosed  between  two  craggy  ridges,  on  which  a  good 


"THE    HAPPY   VALLEY"  97 

deal  of  snow  was  still  left.  A  small  torrent  flowed 
down  from  westwards  close  by  our  tents,  whilst  steep 
rocks  of  a  reddish  hue  closed  in  behind  us  from  the 
north.  Eastwards  flowed  the  main  stream,  effecting 
its  junction,  a  couple  of  miles  down,  with  its  tributary 


M 

HfcfL 

^-jr- 

frffr!-^,,. 

j^-*~^     . 

'  V   "' 

A   SNOW-BRIDG 


the  Bain-Tchagan,  the  latter  flowing  through  a  large 
valley,  with  fine  rocks  and  grassy  slopes,  which  we 
christened  later  on  "The  Happy  Valley,"  on  account 
of  the  sport  we  obtained  there  ;  the  saddle  at  the 
head  of  this  valley  was  the  Russo-Chinese  divide. 
Opposite    our    camp    stood    fairly    high    rolling    hills, 


c;S  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

which  formed  a  marshy  plateau,  over  which  we  used 
to  ride  on  our  way  to  the  "  happy  valley."  The 
ground  was  stony  and  barren,  with  patches  of  grass 
here  and  there,  and  no  trees  were  to  be  seen  any- 
where. One  could  not  imagine  a  more  favourable 
country  for  the  haunts  of  the  glorious  sheep,  though 
our  actual  camping-  ground  might  have  been  better 
chosen.  Its  altitude,  according  to  my  aneroid,  was 
7,800  feet  above  sea-level.  The  only  fuel  we  could 
get  was  Tezek,  dry  horsedung,  which  henceforward 
was  our  main  resource,  and  which  our  Kalmuks 
used  to  gather  all  day  and  bring  back  in  the  large 
leather  bags  we  had  hired  at  Ongudai. 

We  had  taken  a  "  yourt  "  with  us,  which  was  placed 
at  poor  Vassili's  disposal  for  the  kitchen  and  his 
cooking  utensils.  I  must  own  his  task  was  not  an 
easy  one,  though  he  never  grumbled  once,  or  showed 
any  sign  of  dissatisfaction.  The  weather  was  cloud- 
less, and  towards  evening-  the  thermometer  descended 
below  freezing  point.  That  night  I  slept  badly. 
Visions  of  sheep  kept  constantly  hovering  round 
me,  and  I  was  wide  awake  when  Cristo  came  into 
our  tent  at  3  a.m.,  as  we  had  decided  to  start  as 
early  as  possible  on  our  first  field-day,  hoping,  if 
fortune  favoured,  to  find  and  stalk  the  rams  while 
they  were  enjoying  their  morning  grass. 


KALMUK    VOCABULARY 


99 


After  a  frugal  breakfast,  consisting  of  porridge  and 
bacon,  we  drew  lots,  Littledale  and  I.  Fortune  gave 
me  the  eastern  side  towards  the  Chinese  frontier,  whilst 
Littledale  got  the  ground  north  and  west  of  camp. 
We  divided  the  hunters  between  us,  each  of  us 
taking  two  of  them  in   order  to  try  their  capacities, 


OUR    KITCHKX. 


and  see  if  they  would  answer  their  purpose.  I  had 
scribbled  down  on  a  piece  of  paper  a  hundred  of 
the  most  necessary  Kalmuk  words,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  converse  with  my  two  companions,  and  very  soon 
got  on  friendly  terms  with  them.  It  was  still  chilly 
when  we  started,  but  from  the  look  of  the  sky  we 
were  entitled  to  expect  a  fine  day.      We  crossed  the 


ioo  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

river,  quite  shallow  here,  on  horseback,  and  rode 
some  way  clown  the  stream,  striking  off  to  the  right 
at  its  junction  with  the  Bain-Tchagan,  and  following 
up  the  latter.  Man)-  old  heads  lay  about  on  the 
river-bed,  betraying"  at  least  former  presence  of 
"  Kotchkor."  We  came  across  quantities  of  Hares 
and  Marmots,  which  kept  darting  off  in  front  of  us 
as  we  passed  like  shadows  in  the  morning  twilight. 
No  sound  was  to  be  heard  save,  now  and  then,  the 
shrill  whistle  of  a  Marmot  regaining"  its  hole. 

The  Promised  Land  at  last!  It  was  with  throbbing" 
heart  that  I  repeated  to  myself  those  two  magic 
words,  though  I  still  felt  rather  sceptical  as  to  the 
presence  of  old  rams  on  the  rolling  hillocks,  which 
I  could  now  plainly  distinguish  before  us.  We  must 
cross  over  into  Mongolia,  thought  I,  where  hills 
are  higher,  and  the  country  wilder,  to  find  the 
old  patriarch's  haunts  ;  but  my  hunters  seemed  to 
be  confident  of  success,  for  they  kept  saying, 
"Kotchkor  ba"  ("There  are  sheep").  Moreover, 
Joseph,  who  was  our  principal  guide,  confirmed  the 
statement  that  Cumberland  had  found  sheep  in  the 
vicinity  of  camp,  and  had  not  considered  it  worth 
while  to  cross  the  frontier  at  all.  Fortunately  I  was 
soon  to  be  mistaken. 

After  a  couple  of  hours'  ride   I   discovered  a  herd 


"HURRAH!    KOTCHKOR!"  101 

of  ewes  and  young  ones  feeding  on  the  slopes  to  my 
right.  They  were  about  fifty  in  number,  quietly  grazing 
uphill.  We  immediately  dismounted,  and  having 
hobbled  the  ponies,  left  them  round  a  corner  on  the 
river-bed.  Here  began  a  steep  ascent  for  us.  Keeping- 
well  out  of  sight  of  the  herd,  we  made  for  a  boulder 
above  us,  from  which  I  could  command  a  good  view 
of  the  country.  Just  before  reaching  the  top,  as  I 
peeped  cautiously  over  a  ridge,  my  glass  showed  me 
two  or  three  specks  on  the  opposite  side  of  a  wide 
ravine,  and  in  a  second  I  made  them  out  to  be  rams. 
Hurrah!  Kotchkor!  I  shall  never  forget  this  first 
acquaintance  with  the  grand  Altai  sheep  as  long  as 
I  live.  Although  they  had  large,  strong  bodies,  the 
horns  seemed  to  be  their  main  bulk,  and  every  part 
of  the  beasts  seemed  to  be  concentrated  in  the 
mighty  heads  they  carried.  They  were  feeding 
slowly  away,  now  and  then  lifting  up  suddenly  their 
massive  sweeping  horns,  as  if  conscious  of  impending 
danger,  or  was  it  to  evoke  admiration  and  respect 
of  other  animals  by  their  commanding  beauty  and 
strength  ?  Then  they  would  feed  again,  entirely 
unsuspicious,  showing  their  dark  grey  coats,  with 
patches  of  longer  winter  clothing  on  their  backs 
and  withers,  their  lighter  coloured  rumps,  Roman 
nose,   and  leers.       For   some  time   I   was  lost  in  con- 


:o2  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

templation,  till  one  of  my  Kalmuks,  who  had  squatted 
down  behind  me,  touched  my  arm  and  whispered, 
"Adar  kotchkor  "  ("Kill  sheep").  This  reminded 
me  of  my  object,  and  I  decided  to  get  above  them 
as  quickly  as  possible,  and  wait  till  they  fed  into 
favourable  ground. 

The  wind  appeared  to  be  steady,  so,  leaving  my 
hunters,  I  started  back  in  a  crouching  position,  and 
in  an  hour's  fast  walking  got  round  to  a  place  which 
I  thought  was  about  300  yards  above  the  slope  where 
I  had  located  the  sheep.  Here  I  advanced  with  the 
utmost  precaution,  expecting  to  see  my  coveted  prey 
at  every  moment.  But,  alas  !  there  was  no  sign  of 
my  animals.  I  began  to  think  that  they  had  dis- 
covered either  my  men  or  myself,  when  on  reaching 
a  ridge  overlooking  a  narrow  transversal  gully  there 
they  stood,  the  grand  old  fellows,  within  1 20  yards 
in  front  of  me,  half-way  up  the  slope.  Off  went 
my  "  Purdey "  at  the  largest,  which  staggered,  and, 
recovering  instantly,  made  off,  followed  by  a  dozen 
others  I  had  failed  to  see  before,  and  which  jumped 
up  like  lightning".  Again  I  fired  at  another,  and 
distinctly  heard  the  fatal  thud  of  my  bullet  into 
flesh.  They  all  disappeared,  however,  making  me 
feel  dismally  low.  Reloading  my  rifle  I  was  off  in 
a  second  at  their  heels,  or  rather  some   hundreds  of 


STALKING  103 

yards  behind,  their  pace  equalling"  that  of  the  "  Flying 
Scotchman."  Luckily  for  me  several  long  snow- 
patches  lay  across  the  slanting  hillsides  in  the 
direction  they  had  taken,  and  this  enabled  me  to 
follow  up  their  tracks  for  a  good  mile,  till  1 
reached  a  steep,  rocky  nullah,  which,  according"  to 
my  observations,  they  must  have  crossed.  At  its 
bottom  flowed  a  precipitous  torrent  into  the  Bain- 
Tchag'an,  whose  bed  I  could  distinguish  a  long"  way 
below  me.  I  was  now  fairly  done,  and  sat  down 
to  spy  the  opposite  side.  A  faint  hope  of  finding 
my  wounded  rams  in  the  ravine  still  remained,  as 
I  had  come  across  two  distinct  blood-tracks  on  my 
way.  On  looking  up  there  I  saw  the  herd  about 
a  mile  above  me,  standing  motionless  on  the  sky- 
line, but,  to  my  great  disappointment,  saw  no 
staggerers  behind !  My  only  chance  was  now  to 
inspect  carefully  the  whole  of  the  intervening  ground 
and  every  corner  of  the  nullah.  For  a  good  half- 
hour  I  peered  into  every  recess,  spied  every  ledge 
of  rock  on  the  opposite  side,  but  without  result, 
till  I  finally  found  a  blood-stained  stone,  and  follow- 
ing with  my  glass  the  probable  direction  which  the 
ram  must  have  taken,  there  I  spotted  him  lying, 
very  sick,  on  a  cornice  just  above  the  bottom  of 
the    stream.      "He    is    mine    now,"   thought    I,    as    I 


io4  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN   THE    ALTAI 

scrambled  noiselessly  down  amongst  the  crags  ;  but 
my  troubles  were  not  yet  over,  for  as  I  reached 
a  steep  descent  with  rolling  stones  one  of  these 
lost  its  balance  and  went  crashing  down  the  hill. 
To  my  great  disgust  I  saw  the  ram  slowly  get  up, 
look  round  two  or  three  times,  and  walk  away.  I 
was  too  far  to  shoot,  so,  making  up  my  mind, 
I  darted  down  the  slope  as  hard  as  I  could  tear, 
filling  my  boots  with  earth  and  stones,  and  hoping 
to  get  within  range  of  the  animal  before  he  would 
be  out  of  sight.  A  few  minutes  brought  me  to  the 
place  where  he  had  lain  down.  I  now  found  he 
had  crossed  the  stream,  and  was  making  his  way 
up  the  opposite  side  at  a  steady  pace,  which  he 
had  probably  increased  owing  to  the  noise  I  made 
in  my  desperate  rush.  He  was  about  200  yards 
from  me  in  a  straight  line,  and  I  saw  that  all  would 
be  over  if  I  did  not  take  my  chance  then  and  there  ; 
so,  placing  myself  in  a  comfortable  position,  and 
putting  up  the  200  yards  sight,  1  took  a  long  aim 
and,  confident  in  my  "  Purdey,"  fired.  The  bullet 
told,  and  down  he  rolled  to  the  very  bed  of  the  stream, 
stone  dead.  As  I  was  on  my  way  to  have  a  look 
at  my  well-earned  prize  I  was  startled  by  shouts 
from  above.  There  were  my  two  Kalmuks  stand- 
ing on  the  ridge    I    had  just  left,    waving   their   caps 


TWO    FINE    HEADS  105 

frantically,  and  pointing  in  the  direction  to  their 
right.  I  thought  at  first  that  this  was  their  manner 
of  congratulating  me,  and  that  they  had  witnessed  all 
my  proceedings,  especially  as  I  could  not  understand 
a  word  they  uttered.  As  they  continued,  however, 
this  wild  mode  of  telegraphy,  I  began  to  think  of 
my  other  wounded  beast,  and  on  looking  in  the 
direction  they  indicated,  there,  like  a  statue,  stood 
a  beautiful  old  ram  on  an  overhanging  ledge  of  rock. 
He  had  evidently  discovered  me,  for  he  kept  staring 
intently  down  on  the  place  where  I  stood  ;  then  he 
would  turn  his  head  up  slowly  and  watch  the  hunters. 
There  was  no  possible  hiding,  so  I  simply  followed 
up  the  bottom  of  the  nullah  within  full  sight  of  the 
animal,  which,  curiously  enough,  never  moved  an  inch 
till  1  got  within  150  yards  of  him,  and,  taking  a 
steady  aim,  shot  him  through  the  heart.  He  also 
rolled  down  the  cliffs  and  stuck  on  a  crag,  from 
which  I  dragged  him  down  by  his  horns.  I  im- 
mediately saw  he  was  the  largest  of  the  two.  My 
first  bullet  had  shattered  his  hind-quarters  to  pieces, 
and  he  had  probably  been  bleeding  so  hard  that  he 
had  no  more  strength  to  move.  The  measurements 
of  the  two  heads  were  the  following  : — 


Length  along  curve. 

Girth. 

Tip  to  tip. 

:hes       .     52 

19 

39 

.     49-*-       ... 

in      ■ 

•         33* 

io6  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

My  two  hunters  came  down  presently,  and  seemed 
to  be  greatly  rejoiced  at  the  day's  success.  They 
kept  saying  "  J  akshi  "  ("Well  done"),  "Jahn  Muss" 
("large  horn"),  and  engaged  in  a  wild  conversation 
between  each  other,  which  I  was  at  a  loss  to  under- 
stand. I  could  hardly  judge  of  their  hunting 
capacities  by  this  first  experience,  though  I  was 
now  able  to  assert  that  they  both  possessed  good 
eyesight.  We  sat  down  to  lunch  close  by  the 
stream,  after  having  dragged  the  two  dead  sheep 
to  a  comfortable  spot.  Their  size  was  about  that 
of  a  Scotch  red-deer  hind,  and  I  should  say  they 
measured  nearly  four  feet  at  the  shoulders.  Their 
coats  were  of  a  darkish  brown  colour,  with  patches 
of  long  thick  hair,  darker  than  the  rest — remains 
of  their  winter  coating.  Their  legs  and  rumps 
were  of  a  lighter  colour,  and,  as  we  grallocked 
them,  I  found  they  were  exceedingly  lean.  We 
left  the  bodies,  taking  only  the  heads  and  skins 
with  us,  which  my  Kalmuks  tied  to  their  saddles, 
intending  to  send  back  later  on  for  the  meat.  It 
was  a  difficult  scramble  down  for  the  ponies,  which 
one  of  the  men  had  gone  to  fetch  and  had  recklessly 
brought  down,  the  stones  at  the  bottom  of  the  gully 
rolling  away  at  every  moment  from  under  their  feet. 

When  we  reached  the  main  stream  below,  we  found 


THE    HAPPY    VALLEY  107 

ourselves  at  the  entrance  of  a  beautiful  valley,  en- 
closed between  steep  grassy  slopes  and  rocky  pinnacles 
above,  bearing  every  quality  of  sheep  ground.  Out 
of  it  flowed  the  Bain-Tchagan  River.  At  the  very 
entrance  of  this  valley  stood  several  lower  buttress- 
like hillocks,  which  seemed  to  afford  capital  stalking 
ground.  At  the  head  of  it,  a  few  miles  off,  I  could 
just  discern  a  fairly  high  pass,  which,  as  my  hunters 
told  me,  was  on  the  very  frontier  of  Mongolia.  This 
was  the  "  Happy  Valley  "  I  have  before  mentioned. 
Later  on  neither  Littledale  nor  myself  hardly  ever 
returned  from  the  place  empty  -  handed.  Seeing 
no  more  signs  of  sheep,  I  decided  to  return  to 
camp,  though  it  was  only  about  midday,  but  quite 
satisfied  with  my  first  day's  work.  We  followed 
down  the  stream  to  the  spot  where  we  had  left  the 
horses,  and  covering  the  same  ground  as  in  the 
morning,  reached  the  tents  towards  2  p.m.  Here 
the  ladies  welcomed  us  heartily,  as  they  caught 
sight  of  my  trophies.  Littledale  soon  came  in  with 
Taba  and  his  other  hunter  from  the  opposite  direction, 
and  what  was  our  amazement  when  we  saw  five  heads 
hung  to  their  saddles  !  We  had  evidently  struck  a 
golden  vein.  Two  of  his  trophies  measured  well. 
He  had  come  across  a  large  herd  of  rams  who  had 
failed  to  locate  the  first  shot,  and  had  thus  afforded 


io8  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

him  several  chances  of  which  he  had  availed  himself. 
Seven  animals  the  first  day  seemed  promising  for 
the  future,  and  merry  was  our  dinner  that  night  as 
we  gave  the  ladies  an  account  of  our  experiences. 
We  had  both  found  the  sheep  at  an  altitude  of  about 
9,000  feet,  and  had  each  only  seen  one  lot  of  rams, 
though  probabilities  were  great  that  the  surrounding- 
country  was  a  favourite  resort  of  theirs.  We  decided 
to  acquire  a  thorough  knowledge  of  our  ground 
before  crossing  into  Mongolia,  and  started  on  the 
following  morning,  June  18th,  at  3  a.m.,  Littledale 
going  in  the  direction  westwards,  where  a  long- 
valley,  with  steep  crags  on  either  side,  led  towards 
the  Tarkhaty  River,  whilst  I  was  to  follow  up  the 
main  Tchagan  -  Burgaza  stream  from  camp  to  its 
sources.  It  was  still  pitch  dark  when  we  mounted 
our  steeds,  but  the  sky  was  again  cloudless,  and 
there  was  every  prospect  of  fine  weather.  We 
crossed  the  river,  my  hunters  and  I,  and  trotting 
along  up  the  bed  of  the  stream  for  a  good  hour, 
soon  began  spying  both  sides.  On  our  way  we 
saw  several  pairs  of  Brahminy  Geese,  which  we 
startled  out  of  the  rocks  where  they  were  breeding. 
Animal  life  seemed  very  scarce.  Two  or  three 
Eagles  soared  over  our  heads,  and  it  was  only  to- 
wards 6  a.m.   that   I   saw  a  herd   of  four  ewes  feeding 


A    HERD    OF   TWENTY 


iog 


on  the  slopes  above  us  to  our  left.  Further  on 
another  herd  of  twenty  head  came  in  view,  but 
again  they  were  ewes  and  young"  ones.  At  noon 
we  had  not  found  a  single  ram,  clouds  were  gathering 


OUR    FIRST    DAY  S    BAG. 


fast  from  the  west,  and  a  strong  wind  began  blow- 
ing. \Ye  could  see  the  snow  get  up  and  turn  in 
whirlwinds  on  the  tops,  and  Taba,  who  accompanied 
me,  seemed  to  think  that  there  was  no  good  to  be 
done  that  day.  We  went  on,  however,  spying  care- 
fully,   and    reached    the    sources   of    the    river.       The 


no  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

country  was  wild  and  desolate.  Now  and  then 
we  would  come  across  fine  pasture  grounds  with 
rich  grass,  such  as  one  meets  on  the  Pamir  steppes, 
and  dark  green  patches  here  and  there  denoting- 
marshy  grounds,  which  our  ponies  would  persistently 
avoid.  Fine  rocks  suggestive  of  Ibex  now  stood  on 
all  sides,  but  not  a  sign  of  a  beast  anywhere.  In 
the  afternoon  we  returned  to  camp  rather  disgusted, 
especially  after  the  previous  day's  success,  and 
Littledale  soon  came  in  with  a  similar  report.  He 
had  found  several  herds  of  ewes  and  Ibex,  and 
had  seen  a  couple  of  Maral  hinds,  but  of  the  stronger 
sex  there  was  no  trace.  This  was  indeed  an  ewe 
day !  Our  minds  were  now  turned  towards  the 
Mongolian  side,  which  we  thought  the  old  rams 
mioht  have  chosen  for  their  summer  resort,  though 
we  decided  to  have  a  more  careful  survey  of  the 
surrounding  country  before  shifting  camp  into  the 
unknown. 

We  were  up  at  3  a.m.,  as  usual,  on  the  following 
morning,  but  found  heavy  clouds  rolling  in  the  sky, 
and  a  strong  south-west  wind  blowing.  The  barometer 
was  low,  so  we  thought  it  was  no  use  going  out.  At 
6  a.m.  all  the  ground  round  our  tents  was  under 
snow,  several  inches  thick,  and  the  wind  turned  into 
a  gale,   raging   furiously   the   whole   day.      This  was 


BITTERLY   COLD  m 

a  most  disappointing  waste  of  time,  and  we  felt 
highly  disheartened  as  we  sat  under  our  canvas, 
which  was,  at  every  moment,  on  the  verge  of  being 
torn  to  pieces,  or  carried  off  by  the  sweeping  gusts 
of  the  hurricane.  It  was  bitterly  cold  too,  and  all 
our  warmer  outfit  was  badly  wanted. 


OUR    CAMP    UNDER    SNOW. 


By  evening  the  snow  round  the  camp  had  melted, 
but  the  storm  still  raged,  lasting  all  night,  and  as 
we  got  up  at  3  a.m.  the  wind  was  still  blowing 
steadily  from  the  west.  The  cold  was  intense  and 
the  ground  frozen  hard.  In  hopes  of  finding  sheep 
at   a   lower   altitude   we   decided   to  have  a   try,   and 


ii2  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

started  accordingly.  My  lot  fell  upon  the  country 
eastwards,  up  the  Bain  -  Tchagan  stream,  where  I 
had  secured  my  first  two  trophies.  Taba  came 
with  me  this  time,  and  kept  assuring  me  that  such 
weather  was  far  more  favourable  for  approaching 
sheep,  the  latter  being'  less  on  their  guard,  and 
altogether  less  suspicious.  We  rode  a  couple  of 
hours  without  seeing  anything,  till  we  reached  the 
small  buttresses  at  the  entrance  of  the  Happy 
Valley  ;  here  I  spied  a  herd  of  ewes  feeding  quite 
low  down  on  the  slopes  opposite.  The  wind  seemed 
very  shifty,  and  I  felt  rather  glad  they  were  not 
rams,  for  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  to 
approach  them.  Here  we  dismounted,  leaving  the 
ponies  hobbled  on  the  river-bed. 

Taba  seemed  confident  we  should  find  more 
sheep  up  the  valley,  and  soon  pointed  out  some- 
thing moving  about  400  yards  in  front  of  us.  As 
I  put  up  my  glasses  the  beasts  moved  into  a  dip. 
"  Kotchkor  ba,  arkhar  ba?"  I  asked  him.  "  Belbess  " 
was  his  answer,  ("I  do  not  know").  So  we  advanced 
cautiously,  crawling  at  times,  and  chancing  the 
wind.  On  reaching  a  small  saddle,  there  stood  two 
old  ewes  amongst  some  rocks  at  a  few  yards  from 
where  we  lay.  By  extraordinary  luck  they  had 
not    winded    us.       Back    wre    went    on    all  -  fours    in 


A    GOOD    STALK  113 

order  not  to  disturb  them,  and,  making  a  long 
detour,  continued  up  the  main  valley,  where  we  soon 
caught  sight  of  another  lot  of  ewes,  who  this  time 
had  evidently  got  our  wind,  for  they  suddenly  all 
lifted  up  their  heads  and  galloped  away,  disappear- 
ing over  a  boulder.  As  I  watched  them  make  off 
my  Zeiss  distinctly  spotted  a  fair  ram  among  them. 
1  thought  they  might  not  go  far,  as  they  could  not 
have  actually  seen  us,  and  decided  to  wait  till  they 
settled  down  again.  Taba  seemed  to  share  my 
opinion,  and  after  a  short  halt  off  we  started  in 
their  direction,  following  up  the  narrow  ravines  be- 
tween the  low  rolling  hillocks,  and  carefully  choosing 
the  best  hiding-places.  The  wind  here  blew  in  our 
faces,  and  the  rocky  pinnacles  with  small  ridges 
joining  them  afforded  capital  stalking,  if  only  the 
sheep  had  not  shifted  to  higher  slopes.  We  were 
cautiously  advancing  in  this  manner,  like  Red-Indians 
on  the  war-trail,  inspecting  every  corner  of  ground 
below  us  from  every  crag  we  came  across  on  our 
way,  when  finally  Taba,  who  had  gone  on  to  my 
right  in  order  to  look  over  an  intervening  ridge, 
suddenly  took  off  his  cap  and  beckoned  to  me  to 
come.  So  I  crept  up  to  where  he  lay  motionless, 
and  peeping  over  a  ledge  of  rock  caught  sight  of 
a  fine  old   ram,   quietly  enjoying   his  morning  siesta 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


4^ 


ENJOYING    HIS    MORNING    SIESTA." 


and  chewing  his  cud,  about  eighty  yards  below  us. 
Others  were  probably  indulging  in  a  similar  process 
further  down,  but  I  could  only  see  the  one  animal, 
and  was  unable  to  resist  temptation.  Moreover, 
as  I  was  at  comparatively  close  quarters  and  the 
wind  being  strong,  he  might  suspect  something  at 
every  moment,  and  dash  off  without  giving  me  a 
chance.  Feeling  sufficient  excuse,  I  took  a  steady 
aim  and  fired.  The  beast  rolled  over  dead,  and, 
as  I  expected,  other  rams  jumped  up  from  under 
the   rocks   and   were   out   of    sight    in   a   second,    the 


PASS    INTO    MONGOLIA  115 

ground  presenting  a  sheer  dip  at  that  place.  They 
all  appeared  again  several  hundred  yards  beneath 
us  and  crossed  the  stream,  making  for  the  opposite 
side.  I  counted  eighteen  altogether,  as  I  watched 
them  climbing  up  the  left  slopes  of  the  nullah. 
They  presently  joined  with  a  herd  of  ewes,  and 
continued  in  one  lot  up  the  hill.  Some  of  the 
rams  carried  beautiful  heads,  though  the  one  I 
had  bagged  seemed  as  good  as  any  of  them.  Un- 
luckily, owing  to  the  conformation  of  the  ground, 
I  had  failed  to  get  a  second  shot.  I  found  my 
animal  had  rolled  down  some  way,  and  had  been 
stopped  by  his  horns  catching  on  a  ledge  of  rock. 
I  taped  them  on  the  spot;  they  measured  55  inches 
along  the  curve  by  17^  inches  girth,  39^  inches  from 
tip  to  tip.  As  my  hunters  grallocked  him,  I  sat 
down  to  watch  the  herd  that  had  now  halted  half-way 
up  the  slopes  and  were  examining  our  proceedings 
with  the  utmost  curiosity,  but,  scared  as  they  were, 
they  soon  trotted  away  and  disappeared  over  the 
main  ridge.  As  for  us,  we  continued  up  the  valley 
with  the  intention  of  finding  a  favourable  pass  into 
Mongolia,  none  of  our  Kalmuks  having  ever  passed 
the  frontier. 

As  we  advanced,  the  valley  became  narrower  and 
rocks  more   frequent ;    as  for  the   dividing   saddle,   it 


nG  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

seemed  to  me  impossible  to  attempt  crossing  it  with 
pack-ponies,  though  I  could  only  judge  from  a  distance 
of  some  miles,  there  being  no  time  to  inspect  the  place 
thoroughly  that  day.  On  our  way  we  came  across 
numerous  horns  of  Maral  (Cervus  canadensis  asiaticus 
or  Ccrvus  eustephanus)  that  had  been  evidently  shed 
many  years  before,  white  and  weather-worn  as  they 
appeared.  My  hunters  told  me  that  the  country 
abounded  in  Maral  ten  or  twelve  years  ago,  but  that 
they  had  nearly  all  been  shot  for  the  sake  of  their 
precious  antlers,  and  that  the  few  that  remained  had 
taken  refuge  in  the  wooded  districts  on  the  Siberian 
side.  We  also  saw  a  great  number  of  sheep  horns  in 
the  bed  of  the  stream,  whose  owners  had  probably 
been  killed  by  wolves,  or  had  been  starved  to  death 
by  severe  winters  and  heavy  snowfalls.  The  country 
bore  altogether  a  touch  of  wildness  and  desolation. 
Towards  noon  we  were  caught  in  a  dreadful  hail- 
storm, and  returned  to  camp  at  3  p.m.  with  my 
well  -  deserved  trophy.  I  found  Littledale  in  low 
spirits  ;  his  hunters  had  taken  him  by  mistake  to 
my  ground,  and  he  had  convinced  himself  of  the 
error  by  discovering  our  party  as  we  were  entering 
the   Happy  Valley. 

That     evening    Vassili,     the     cook,     produced     for 
dinner     roast     fillet     of    kotc/ikor,     which     we     found 


A    FRESH    START 


117 


excellent.  As  for  the  broth,  it  was  quite  good,  and 
henceforward  replaced  Maggi's  cousommd,  which  we 
had  been  constantly  using.  Later  on  in  the  season, 
when  the  animals  became  fatter,  we  had  to  abandon 
their  meat,  owing  to  their  strong  sheepy  flavour,  for 


RETURNING   TO   CAMP. 


that  of  their  domestic  kinsmen,  where  stray  Kirghiz 
procured  us  the  latter.  On  the  following  morning, 
June  21st,  the  wind  had  not  abated,  and  it  was  not 
till  7  a.m.  that  we  left  camp.  This  time  Littledale 
went  towards  my  old  nullah  where  I  had  twice  been 
successful.  As  for  myself,  I  started  with  Taba  in 
the     direction     of    the     valley     westwards.       It    was 


n8  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

certainly  not  a  promising  day,  and  we  rode  a  long 
way  without  even  expecting  to  see  anything.  The 
valley  was  a  wider  one  than  that  of  Bain-Tchagan, 
with  more  overhanging  crags  on  either  side  and 
no  nice  boulders  with  fresh  grass  between.  At  the 
bottom  flowed  a  small,  nameless  stream,  forming 
here  and  there  small  lakes  and  swamps.  We  spied 
an  immense  side-corry  to  our  left,  but  saw  nothing 
but  rocks  and  snow.  A  little  further  I  discovered 
a  herd  of  female  Ibex  on  the  opposite  side,  probably 
the  same  which  Littledale  had  seen  two  days  pre- 
viously, but  no  signs  of  males  ;  in  fact,  the  place 
did  not  in  the  least  appeal  to  my  imagination  as 
being  likely  ground  for  sheep.  There  wrere  no 
rolling  hills  with  suitable  pastures,  and,  should  we 
have  found  game,  it  would  have  been  a  difficult  job 
to  approach  it.  At  a  spot  where  a  long  gully  came 
down  to  the  main  valley  I  spied  a  large  herd  of  sheep, 
apparently  all  ewes,  far  above  us.  Further  on  we 
crossed  a  low  divide,  and  followed  down  another 
stream  for  two  or  three  miles  till  another  herd  came 
in  sight  some  800  yards  in  front  of  us,  feeding  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  right  slopes.  My  telescope  soon 
told  me  that  they  too  were  ewes,  together  with  what 
seemed  to  me  to  be  fair  rams,  though  1  was  unable 
to    distinguish    them    well    owing    to    the    bad    light. 


A    LARGE    HERD    OF    SHEEP,    APPARENTLY    ALL    EWES." 


AN    UNSUCCESSFUL   STALK  121 

Taba  thought  they  were  worth  approaching,  so  we 
dismounted,  and  began  making  our  plans  for  the 
stalk.  There  was  no  question  of  continuing  down 
the  valley  towards  them,  there  being  no  possible 
hiding.  The  only  way  was  to  ascend  a  steep  hill 
to   our   right,    follow   the   ridge,   and  come  down   the 


THE    HAPPY    VALLEY. 


nearest  lateral  ravine  to  a  place  which  I  considered 
was  about  200  yards  from  where  they  fed.  The 
wind,  I  thought,  blew  uphill,  so  off  we  started,  with 
Taba's  approval.  We  left  the  ponies  with  my  other 
hunter,  who  was  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out  over  the 
movements  of  the  animals,  and  signal  to  us  in  case 
they   shifted   to    other  ground.       It    was   fated,    how- 


122  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

ever,  that  the  day  was  not  to  prove  a  success.  The 
ascent  was  dreadfully  steep,  and  it  took  us  a  good 
hour  and  a  half  to  get  near  the  summit.  In  the 
meantime  heavy  clouds  had  been  gathering,  and  the 
wind  blew  stronger  every  moment  as  we  struggled 
up  the  precipitous  cliffs.  Presently  light  became 
more  and  more  dim  and  a  regular  blizzard  came  on, 
covering  us  up  with  snow.  In  less  than  five  minutes 
everything  was  white  around  us,  and  the  cold  so 
intense  that  we  were  nearly  frozen  as  we  lay  amongst 
the  rocks  waiting  for  the  storm  to  pass.  In  this 
dilemma  Taba  suggested  that  we  had  better  go  back 
to  lower  ground,  there  seeming  to  be  no  chance  of 
the  weather  clearing  up  that  day.  Go  back  !  This 
was  easier  said  than  done.  The  descent  at  places 
had  to  be  worked  backwards  on  all-fours.  Moreover, 
such  was  the  force  of  the  gale  that  we  had  to  cling 
hard  to  the  rocks  in  order  not  to  be  blown  off  our 
feet ;  snow  and  hail  simply  blinded  us,  preventing 
us  from  securing  a  firm  foothold  on  the  few  pro- 
truding ledges.  We  took  a  couple  of  hours  to  reach 
the  horses,  and  that  only  thanks  to  Taba's  skill,  who 
somehow  succeeded  in  groping  his  way  down  in 
absolute  darkness.  We  returned  to  camp  half  frozen 
and  thoroughly  drenched.  As  for  Littledale,  he  had 
failed   in   his  stalk  owing  to  uncertain  wind,  but  had 


A   STORM 


123 


managed  to  kill  a  young  sheep,  whose  meat  he  had 
brought  back  for  the  pot.  These  constant  gales 
from  the  west  lasted  during  almost  the  whole  week 
we  spent  at  this  camp.  I  must  own  that  we  were 
pitched     most     unfavourably     with     regard     to     this  ; 


yvtf 


WAITING    FOR    THE    STORM    TO    PASS. 


sweeping  gusts  would  come  down  the  narrow  gully 
westwards  and  meet  those  from  the  main  valley  just 
at  the  place  where  we  had  camped,  thus  joining  on 
our  housetops  from  two  different  directions.  This 
and  other  considerations  prompted  us  strongly  to 
shift    camp     into     Mongolia,     where,     moreover,    we 


i24  AFTER    WILD   SJIEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

hoped  to  come  across  unmolested  herds  of  old 
rams  on  higher  ground.  But  a  pass  had  to  be 
found  for  the  pack-horses,  and  our  Kalmuks  either 
knew  nothing"  about  the  country  over  the  frontier, 
or,  if  they  had  been  in  Chinese  territory,  which  was 
doubtful,  would  in  no  way  help  us  in  the  matter, 
fearing"  that  their  horses  would  be  stolen  by  stray 
Kirghiz  or  Mongol  nomadic  tribes. 

In  this  uncertainty  we  decided,  Littledale  and 
I,  to  start  together  on  the  following  morning",  June 
22nd,  towards  the  head  of  the  Happy  Valley,  with 
the  intention  of  seeing  for  ourselves  if  an  easy  pass 
could  be  discovered.  Before  entering  the  nullah, 
Littledale  branched  off  to  the  left,  where  hills  seemed 
lower  and  the  ground  more  suitable  for  our  purpose, 
whilst  I  was  to  reconnoitre  the  head  of  the  Bain- 
Tchagan  valley  and  see  if  the  pass  was  as  inhos- 
pitable for  unshod  hoofs  as  it  appeared  to  be  from 
a  distance.  But  my  exploring  designs  were  soon  to 
be  checked  by  sight  of  game,  for  as  we  approached 
the  well-known  buttresses  I  spied  a  ram  feeding 
a  few  hundred  yards  to  our  left.  YYe  quickly  dis- 
mounted, and  leaving  the  horses  in  a  small  hollow, 
made  a  long  detour  to  get  above  the  animal ;  but  the 
wind,  as  usual,  was  shifty,  and  when  I  found  myself 
within   what    1    thought   was    1 50   yards    of  my   prey, 


A    FINE    HERD  125 

the  beast  had  already  become  slightly  suspicious  and 
was  moving  slowly  away.  I  had  to  take  a  hurried 
shot,  resulting  in  a  clean  miss.  "  Never  mind,"  said 
confident  little  Taba,  "  we  will  find  others  further 
up."  In  fact,  I  had  hardly  reloaded  my  rifle  when 
more  sheep  walked  into  view  by  the  bed  of  the 
stream.  To  my  amazement,  they  had  not  been 
frightened  by  the  report  of  my  shot,  and  were  busily 
engaged  in  their  early  breakfast.  Unfortunately 
they  proved  to  be  ewes  and  young  ones.  They 
were  feeding  towards  us,  on  our  very  way  to  the 
happy  hunting  grounds,  and  cutting  us  off  from  the 
coveted  direction.  We  had  no  end  of  trouble  in 
avoiding  discovery,  and  had  to  go  round  a  couple 
of  miles,  crawling  now  and  then  in  full  sight  of 
them.  We  managed,  however,  to  get  round  with- 
out disturbing  them,  and  resumed  our  journey  up 
the  valley  under  cover  of  my  favourite  boulders. 
We  had  not  gone  far  when  Taba  suddenly  stopped 
me,  pointing  towards  the  river-bed  below  us.  There 
lay  a  fine  herd  of  fifteen  sheep,  all  rams  this  time. 
There  was  no  possible  approach  to  within  less  than 
500  yards  from  the  spot  they  had  chosen  for  their 
siesta,  so  we  crouched  down  and  waited.  I  had  now 
entirely  abandoned  my  good  intentions  of  making 
myself  useful  by  finding  a  favourable  pass  over   the 


126 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


frontier,  and  devoted  all  my  attention  to  the  mighty 
old  sheep  beneath  us.  I  must  acknowledge  this 
weakness,    but     the     sight     of    the     quarry    was    too 


WATCHING. 


tempting.  Should  the  animals  shift  a  couple  of 
hundred  yards  towards  us  I  felt  sure  of  success, 
and  the  heads  some  of  them  carried  were  well  worth 
trying  for.  We  had  not  been  an  hour  watching 
them    when,    to   my   joy,    they   all    got    up    one   after 


GREATLY    DISAPPOINTED  129 

the  other,  and  crossed  the  stream  in  our  direction. 
Taba  had  foretold  this,  saying  that  the  grazing  was 
better  on  our  side.  For  some  time  we  lay  low,  till 
the  whole  herd  disappeared  below  us ;  then  we 
rushed  down,  hiding  behind  every  rock,  and  pre- 
sently found  ourselves  within  250  yards  of  the 
animals,  whom  we  now  saw  feeding  on  the  slopes 
under  us.  I  was  just  on  the  point  of  starting 
towards  a  small  pinnacle,  writhin  easy  rifle  range  of 
the  herd,  when  I  noticed  that  they  all  of  a  sudden 
had  become  suspicious.  A  whiff  of  wind  had  pro- 
bably reached  them,  and  in  an  instant  they  were 
off,  making  back  to  the  opposite  side.  Cruel  luck, 
thought  I,  as  I  lowered  my  -303  and  fired  at  the 
nearest  one.  It  was  a  long  shot,  but  the  chance  had 
to  be  taken.  He  staggered  for  a  moment,  then  con- 
tinued with  the  others.  As  they  crossed  the  stream 
at  full  gallop  I  fired  several  more  shots  into  the 
midst  of  the  herd — there  being  no  question  of  picking- 
out  the  largest — and  saw  one  of  them  fall,  whilst  two 
others  remained  behind  the  main  bulk,  struggling 
up  the  steep  slopes  and  looking  very  sick.  We 
waited  a  little,  marking  the  direction  taken  by  the 
two  wounded  ones,  and  started  as  soon  as  they  had 
gone  over  a  ridge.  I  was  greatly  disappointed  when 
I  came  up  to  the  dead  beast,  though  I  felt  I  had  only 


130  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN     THE    ALTAI 

got  what  I  deserved  by  "  pumping  the  lead  in  "  in 
such  a  reckless  manner.  His  measurements  were 
35  inches  along  the  curve  by  17  girth.  Taba 
grallocked  him  on  the  spot,  whilst  I  followed  the 
other  two  with  hopes  of  a  better  result.  On  reaching 
the  ridge  where  we  had  seen  them  last,  after  a  steep 
scramble,  I  found  one  of  the  beasts  lying  dead  on 
the  opposite  bank  of  a  deep  ravine  ;  the  third  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen.  So  I  continued  along  a  pre- 
cipitous slope,  covered  with  rolling  stones.  I  could 
see  the  blood-tracks  here  and  there,  but  was  unable 
to  judge  whether  they  belonged  to  the  dead  one, 
or  to  the  animal  I  was  still  following.  To  my 
disgust,  a  hail-storm  came  on  at  that  exciting  moment 
of  the  chase,  but  I  was  not  going  to  be  beaten. 
Taba  now  came  up,  and  soon  spotted  my  beast  lying 
on  the  stones  about  200  yards  off,  with  his  head 
towards  us.  We  crouched  down  and  lay  motionless 
for  about  twenty  minutes,  which  seemed  two  long 
hours  to  me.  There  was  no  hiding-place  round 
us,  and  as  I  was  trying  to  creep  up  nearer  to  finish 
him,  the  brute  saw  me  and  started  off.  By  this  time 
I  was  fairly  soaked  by  the  snow,  which  had  by  now- 
turned  into  sleet,  and  thought  of  abandoning  further 
pursuit  ;  but  Taba  was  as  keen  as  ever,  and  we 
continued  on  the  slippery  rocks  for  some  time  straight 


SNOW    AND    WIND  131 

uphill.  A  good  hour  brought  us  to  the  head  of 
the  side- valley.  Here  we  found  our  wounded  fellow 
again  lying  half-way  up  the  slope.  I  made  a 
desperate  scramble  to  get  above  him,  and  shot  him 
through  the  heart  just  as  he  was  preparing  to  make 
off.  The  two  carried  average  heads  :  48^  by  1  j\ 
and  39  by  17  inches.  I  returned  to  camp  with  my 
light  trophies,  exhausted,  in  a  regular  blizzard. 
Littledale  had  come  back,  saying  he  had  seen  no 
sheep,  but  had  come  across  easy  ground  for  the 
ponies  to  cross  into  Mongolia.  He  had  gone  out 
again  up  the  main  valley,  and  presently  returned  with 
the  report  that  he  had  wounded  the  finest  ram  he 
had  as  yet  seen,  but  that  he  had  been  unable  to 
follow  the  blood-tracks  owing  to  their  having  been 
covered  up  with  snow,  which  now  lay  thick  round 
our  tents.      As  for  the  wind,   it  still  blew  as  strong 


CHAPTER    IV. 

Last  days  on  the  Tchagan-Burgaza — Pass  over  the  Frontier— Shift 
Camp  into  Mongolia — A  Blizzard — Major  Cumberland's  Camp — 
The  Start— Map  unreliable- Meet  Chinese— Great  numbers  of 
Sheep  Heads  —  Karaoul  Suok  —  Chinese  Governor  —  Passports  — 
Chinese  Officials — Interpreters — Joseph  returns  with  fresh  Stores- 
Start  for  Bain-Khairkhan   Hills. 

On   the  morning  of  June   23rd  the  weather  had  not 

changed    in    our   favour.      We    had    decided    to   shift 

camp  over  the  low  pass  north  of  the   Happy  Valley, 

and    everything    had    been    prepared    for    the    start. 

Unfortunately    no    long  march   could   be   undertaken 

that  day,  and  it  was  agreed  that  we  should  wait  for  a 

better  chance.      Though  dark  clouds  covered  the  sky 

and  the  wind  blew  persistently,  Littledale  went  out  at 

4  a.m.  with  hopes  of  coming  across  his  wounded  ram, 

whose  pursuit  he  had  had  to  abandon  on  the  previous 

day,  and  whose  tracks  he  had  lost  owing  to  the  heavy 

snowfall.      As  for  myself,    I   thought   it  hardly  worth 

while     to    attempt    a    stalk,    and    remained    in    bed. 

Towards  noon,  the  weather  clearing  up,  we  went  out, 

my  wife  and   I,  with  our  smooth-bores  after  Willow 
132 


A    HERD   OF   RAMS  133 

Grouse  around  the  camp.  We  found  some  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  brought  back  a  brace.  These 
grouse  were  not  shy,  and  kept  running  before  us  even 
after  the  shot.  Littledale  returned  at  6  p.m.  with 
the  head  of  a  fair  ram,  which  he  had  secured  out 
of  a  herd  of  ten,  probably  the  same  herd  he  had  spied 
before  on  the  slopes  of  the  main  valley.  He  had 
failed  to  find  any  sign  of  the  wounded  one,  and  I 
was  astonished  that  he  got  anything  at  all,  con- 
sidering the  gale  that  never  ceased  blowing  all  day. 

On  the  following  day,  the  weather  not  being  settled 
enough  for  shifting  camp,  and  my  wife  being  very 
keen  to  see  the  wild  sheep  in  their  haunts,  we  started 
together  as  early  as  possible  in  the  direction  of  the 
Happy  Valley,  taking  with  us  Taba  and  another 
hunter.  Littledale  had  kindly  conceded  to  me  the 
monopoly  of  Taba,  who  was  undoubtedly  the  best 
man  we  had,  contenting  himself  with  Lepet,  whom 
he  considered  next  best.  We  crossed  the  same 
ground  well  known  to  me,  and  as  we  were  following 
up  the  bed  of  the  stream  a  herd  of  rams,  about  sixteen 
in  number,  came  into  view.  They  had  lain  clown 
a  mile  ahead  of  us  in  a  place  which  we  could  not 
possibly  approach.  The  buttresses  at  the  entrance  of 
the  nullah  were  too  distant,  and  further  advance  was 
impracticable,  for  the  animals  had  full  command  of  the 


i34  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

lower  ground.  We  therefore  turned  back  in  order 
to  make  a  detour  round  a  boulder  to  our  left,  and, 
keeping  under  cover,  followed  up  a  ridge,  which  joined 
eventually  with  the  right  slopes  of  the  valley.  This 
strategical  operation  took  about  an  hour  and  a  half 
to  perform,  there  being  deep  stony  gullies  on  the  way, 
which  presented  a  series  of  obstacles  to  our  wretched 
horses.  Finally  we  got  on  grass  again,  and  having 
dismounted,  managed  to  reach  some  rocks,  from  which 
we  could  plainly  see  the  herd,  about  500  yards  off, 
lying  on  the  river-bed.  I  never  imagined  that  the 
spot  where  we  now  found  ourselves  was  to  be  our 
observatory  for  the  next  eight  hours.  Taba  as  usual 
kept  repeating  that  the  sheep  were  sure  to  move 
in  our  direction  as  soon  as  they  commenced  feeding, 
the  grazing  on  our  side  being  better.  No  further 
advance  was  possible,  so  we  settled  down  at  8  a.m., 
watching  our  quarry  with  the  telescope,  which  I  had 
firmly  fixed  between  two  ledges  of  rock  for  my  wife 
to  have  a  good  view  of  the  sheep.  She  was  highly 
interested  in  their  proceedings,  and  said  that  there 
were  three  first-class  old  rams  amongst  them,  ten 
average-sized  heads  and  three  young  ones,  which 
statement  I  readily  confirmed.  It  was  quite  probable 
that  this  was  the  herd  out  of  which  I  had  secured 
three  on  the  22nd,  and  which  we  now  found  almost 


GALLOPED  OFF 


137 


exactly  in  the  same  place  ;  moreover,  it  was  as  likely 
that  they  would  choose,  according  to  previous 
experience,  the  slopes  beneath  us  for  their  evening- 
meal,  which  fact  would  greatly  facilitate  our  work. 
We  therefore  eagerly  waited  for  the  animals  to  get 


up  and  afford  us  amusement.  But  fate  had  decided 
otherwise.  At  10  a.m.,  just  as  we  were  picking- 
out  the  one  which  we  thought  would  constitute  a 
worthy  trophy,  up  they  all  jumped,  scared  without  any 
apparent  cause,  and  galloped  off  towards  the  opposite 
slopes.      For  some  time  we  could  not  make  out  what 


i38  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

had  frightened  them  in  this  manner,  when,  on  looking 
down  the  valley,  there  was  one  of  our  Kalmuks 
with  two  ponies  ascending  the  hill  in  full  view ! 
If  he  had  been  nearer  at  that  moment  I  really  think 
I  should  have  wilfully  mistaken  him  for  a  kotcJikor ! 
Taba  also  showed  signs  of  fury  in  his  peculiar  way. 
He  explained  to  us  that  this  was  the  hunter  who 
had  been  sent  from  camp  to  bring  the  meat  of  the 
sheep  killed  by  Littledale  on  the  previous  clay.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  exhortations  given  him  to  take 
the  greatest  precautions,  and  by  no  means  to  start 
before  evening,  he  had  been  tired  of  waiting,  and  in 
this  reckless  way  had  spoilt  our  chance.  And  this 
was  one  of  our  hunters  !  Great  was  our  consternation 
and  disappointment.  Nothing,  however,  could  be 
done  ;  so  we  kept  watching  the  herd,  and  decided 
to  wait  in  hope  of  seeing  the  animals  come  down 
again  in  the  afternoon.  We  saw  them  stop  half-way 
up  the  hill  and  settle  down  on  the  slopes.  To  stalk 
them  where  they  now  lay  meant  certain  failure,  to 
say  nothing  of  three  or  four  hours'  hard  climbing. 
Unfortunately  our  expectations  were  all  to  be  baffled 
that  day.  Nothing  would  induce  the  sheep  to  shift 
their  quarters  again  in  our  direction,  though  we 
persevered  in  our  crouching  position  till  4  p.m., 
suffering   acutely   from    "pins   and  needles."     Finally 


UNWILLING    KALMUKS  139 

we  gave  it  up,  thoroughly  disgusted,  and  returned 
to  camp  under  the  scornful  looks  of  the  rams,  which 
did  not  even  honour  us  by  getting  up  as  we  departed. 
At  6  p.m.  we  were  under  canvas  again,  indulging 
in  a  roast  fillet  of  sheep  which  had  caused  us  many 
a  bitter  hour.  Littledale  had  also  been  unsuccessful, 
and  it  was  decided  that  we  should  under  no  pretext 
whatever  "linger  any  longer,"  but  shift  camp  on  the 
following  day  across  the  frontier.  On  June  25th, 
after  a  stay  of  eight  days,  we  finally  quitted  our 
first  hunting  grounds  for  the  unknown  Mongolian 
plateaux  in  search  of  fortune.  The  start  was  to 
take  place  as  early  as  possible,  but  it  was  not  till 
9  a.m.  that  the  ponies  were  loaded,  a  desperate 
chase  after  several  stray  ones  having  lasted  not  less 
than  three  hours.  Our  Kalmuks  being  extremely 
unwilling  to  visit  foreign  countries,  lazy  in  ordinary 
times,  accentuated  as  much  as  they  could  this  defect 
of  theirs.  Poor  Yakoub,  the  demitcha,  was  at  a  loss 
to  enforce  his  orders,  and,  though  several  incidents 
occurred  in  which  the  whip  played  a  great  part,  it 
was  principally  owing  to  the  energetic  demonstrations 
of  Nicholas,  Cristo,  and  Gabriel  that  we  eventually 
formed  anything  like  a  caravan.  We  started  down 
the  main  river,  and,  crossing  it,  began  following  up 
one   of    the   small    tributaries    of    the    Bain-Tchagan 


i4o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

stream  in  a  south-easterly  direction.  I  rode  in  front 
with  the  ladies,  whilst  Littledale  stayed  behind  in 
order  to  see  that  the  pack-ponies  were  not  led  back 
to  Kosh-Agatch  and  home,  as  our  Kalmuks  so 
eagerly  desired.  As  we  advanced  in  slow  procession, 
the  hills  seemed  to  become  lower,  excepting  due 
south  of  us,  where  the  Happy  Valley,  parallel 
to  which  we  were  now  going,  was  concealed  from 
view  by  the  towering  ridges  and  peaks  on  either 
side  of  it.  Around  us  were  low,  grassy,  rolling 
boulders,  with  small  ordinary  ravines,  probably  the 
winter  resorts  of  sheep ;  for,  though  we  saw  none, 
many  skulls  and  horns  strewed  the  ground  on  our 
way.  The  slopes  were  covered  with  lovely  spring- 
flowers,  such  as  crocuses,  buttercups,  and  Edelweiss. 
Towards  1 1  a.m.  we  were  caught  in  a  hailstorm 
which  lasted  an  hour,  and  eventually  turned  into 
rain.  As  we  were  entirely  ignorant  of  our  way,  I 
halted  with  the  ladies  at  a  place  where  someone 
had  evidently  camped,  in  order  to  wait  for  Littledale 
and  the  rest  of  our  caravan.  Taba  presently  galloped 
up,  and  explained  to  us  that  he  had  spent  a  fortnight 
the  year  before  on  this  very  spot  with  Major  Cumber- 
land ;  he  also  gave  us  the  good  news  that  the  pack- 
ponies  were  following  up  at  a  short  distance.  Towards 
noon   we   were    in   sight  of   the  dividing  pass  at  the 


TREACHEROUS   SOIL  141 

head  of  the  small  valley  along  which  we  were 
marching.  A  long  slanting  slope  still  separated  us 
from  Chinese  territory,  and  the  pass  appeared  to 
be  easily  negotiable  for  the  horses.  Another  hour 
brought  us  to  the  top.  Here  we  were  met  by  a 
strong  gale  blowing  in  our  faces  and  sweeping 
furiously  along  the  dreary  plateau  before  us.  The 
hills  in  the  foreground  were  of  no  great  height, 
but  we  could  distinguish  in  the  dim  background 
the  snow  -  clad  mountain  peaks  of  the  Mongolian 
Altai.  We  now  stood  at  an  altitude  of  about  9,000 
feet ;  in  front  of  us  lay  a  marshy  tableland,  which 
we  had  to  cross  in  order  to  reach  a  valley  running 
eastward,  under  whose  slopes  we  hoped  to  find 
shelter  from  the  tiresome  cold  wind,  as  well  as  a 
suitable  place  for  pitching  camp.  Unfortunately 
this  plateau  proved  by  no  means  light  work  for 
the  horses,  for  it  consisted  of  patches  of  grass 
intermingled  with  shingle,  soaked  through  either 
by  freshly  melted  snow  or  by  springs,  thus  afford- 
ing no  resistance  to  our  horses'  feet,  who  sank  knee- 
deep  at  every  moment  into  the  treacherous  soil.  I 
say  treacherous  because  to  all  appearance  it  was 
perfectly  firm  and  safe.  There  was  no  avoiding 
it,  however,  and  it  took  us  a  long  time  to  get  over 
the    swamps.       As    for    the    pack -ponies    behind,    I 


142  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

cannot  conceive  how  they  managed  with  their 
heavy  loads  to  overcome  the  difficulty.  This  first 
acquaintance  with  China  was  hardly  a  satisfactory 
one,  and  we  felt  entitled  to  hope  that  the  discovery 
of  undisturbed  herds  of  sheep  would  amply  make 
up  for  it.  The  ladies,  who  had  been  placed  under 
my  care,  were  persistently  confident  of  success,  and 
greatly  contributed  to  uphold  the  level  of  cheerful- 
ness through  the  hardships  of  this  first  march  into 
unknown  country.  They  proved  most  useful  more- 
over in  finding  a  favourable  spot  for  camp  as  we 
reached  the  valley,  through  which  flowed  a  small 
stream  known  on  my  forty-verst  Russian  map  as 
the  Boro  -  Burgassy,  whilst  I  stood  on  a  ridge 
watching  our  caravan  struggling  through  the  marsh, 
and  signalling  to  Littledale  in  order  to  let  him 
know  the  direction  which  was  to  be  taken.  I  must 
own  that  the  map,  which  had  hitherto  been  our 
principal  guide,  now  seemed  hardly  reliable,  and 
this  became  more  and  more  evident  as  we  advanced 
into  Mongolia.  The  stream  on  the  banks  of  which 
we  camped  was  known  to  the  natives  under  an  en- 
tirely different  name.  It  flowed  into  the  Suok 
River,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Kobdo,  in 
whose  watershed  we  now  found  ourselves.  I  cannot 
pass   unnoticed   the   way  in   which    Mongols   christen 


RIVER    NOMENCLATURE  143 

their  rivers.  These  are  divided  into  two  classes 
according  to  the  colour  of  their  water.  If  it  is 
clear,  the  stream  is  called  Kara- sou  (black  water)  ; 
if  dirty  or  milky,  Ak-soti  or  Tchagan-sou  (white 
water).  These  two  rubrics  include  nearly  every 
river.  The  spot  chosen  for  our  camp  was  quite  a 
comfortable  one,  close  to  the  stream,  and  sheltered 
by  the  left  bank  from  the  bitterly  cold  wind.  Patches 
of  snow  here  and  there  reminded  us  of  the  fairly 
high  altitude  (about  8,800  feet).  East  and  north 
of  us  were  low  rolling  boulders,  whilst  towering" 
snowy  summits  glistened  in  the  distance.  We  could 
locate  the  Happy  Valley  by  a  long  ridge  of  crags 
a  few  miles  off,  now  due  westwards.  This  rocky 
spine  extended  eastwards  for  several  miles,  sinking 
gradually  lower  into  grassy  hillocks  down  to  the 
Suok  River,  into  which  flowed  the  stream  on  whose 
banks  we  were  now  camped. 

The  night  was  a  very  frosty  one,  and  when  Cristo 
came  in  to  wake  me  up  on  the  following  morning 
(June  26th)  at  3  a.m.  I  found  it  very  trying  to  get 
out  of  my  blankets.  During  the  night  a  pack  of 
wolves  had  attacked  some  of  our  ponies  and  scared 
them  to  such  an  extent  that  our  Kalmuks  found  it 
a  difficult  job  to  secure  them.  Some  of  the  horses 
had   unhobbled   themselves,   and   travelled  great   dis- 


144  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

tances  towards  our  last  camp.  This  delayed  our 
start  until  about  5  a.m.,  when  we  finally  managed 
to  muster  the  steeds  we  required.  The  ground  al- 
lotted to  me  lay  due  south,  whilst  Littledale  got 
the  Happy  Valley,  which  he  would  now  have  to 
enter  from  the  Chinese  side,  over  the  pass  we  had 
failed  to  reconnoitre  previously.  The  weather  seemed 
to  have  cleared  up  again,  and  it  was  in  the  best  of 
spirits  that  I  left  camp  with  Taba  in  order  to  visit 
"fresh  fields  and  pastures  new."  We  rode  some 
time  before  reaching  likely  sheep  ground.  About 
an  hour  brought  us  to  a  small  lake  surrounded  by 
higher  crests  of  hills ;  on  its  shores  lay  quantities 
of  sheep  horns,  though  none  of  them  were  of  great 
size.  On  the  slopes  of  loose  red  shingle  round  it 
we  found  transverse  paths  and  numerous  tracks  of 
game.  We  were  now  exploring  entirely  new  ground, 
where  my  guide  Taba  had  never  been,  but  it  struck 
me  that  this  was,  according  to  all  probabilities,  a 
winter  resort  of  sheep,  for  it  was  low  and  sheltered 
from  the  bitter  north  wind.  A  stiff  climb  over 
rolling  stones  now  awaited  the  ponies,  and  we  finally 
attained  a  ridge  from  which  we  were  able  to  spy 
the  opposite  slopes  of  a  long  deep  nullah  running- 
eastwards,  and  affording-  splendid  grazing,  conse- 
quently  a   most   likely  spot  for   the  sheep's   morning 


'HOM                                       ■■«■ 

M 

KJi^^l 

t  H[ 

m^yl 

■£  j^|  s                             v  \  v 

^£&*  \m 

i  Jyj 

i      mM 

1  ^iB^wS^r5^ 

~a» 

■PL  v_.» 

9  J^K 

A   CURIOUS   ASPECT  147 

meal.  My  glass  soon  confirmed  our  suppositions. 
Seven  sheep  were  feeding  quietly  on  the  other  side  of 
the  valley  ;  Taba,  who  was  using  my  telescope,  said, 
" Kitchinek  kotckkor"  which  meant  "Young  rams," 
a  highly  disappointing  statement,  which  was  never- 
theless correct.  It  was  a  herd  of  two  and  three  year 
old  animals,  together  with  some  ewes,  at  first  un- 
noticed. We  immediately  left  the  ponies  in  charge 
of  "the  understudy"  and  started  off  as  cautiously 
as  possible,  Taba  and  myself,  towards  the  next  ridge 
in  order  to  get  a  good  view  of  the  far  side  of  the 
valley.  Unfortunately  there  was  no  hiding,  and  the 
rams  presently  caught  sight  of  us,  and  darted  off, 
followed  by  a  troop  of  ewes,  which  jumped  up  from 
some  lateral  ravine.  When  we  found  ourselves  on 
the  opposite  crest  an  hour  later  we  of  course  did 
not  expect  to  see  anything  in  the  valley  we  had 
just  crossed,  but  began  spying  the  grounds  beyond. 
The  sun  was  now  high  and  exceedingly  hot.  The 
country  before  us  presented  a  curious  aspect  of  low 
volcanic-shaped  hillocks  ;  the  soil  was  arid  and  red. 
I  could  distinguish  Suok  River  in  the  distance, 
flowing  through  a  wide  steppe,  and  on  the  other 
side,  due  south  of  us,  stood  a  higher  range,  which 
my  map  showed  me  to  be  the  "  Bain-Khairkhan " 
hills.      Several   fine-lookine   corries    in    that   direction 


i48  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

seemed  to  promise  happy  hunting  grounds,  and 
patches  of  snow  here  and  there  gave  me  the  im- 
pression of  the  right  altitude  for  sheep  at  that  time 
of  year.  Eastwards  ran  the  main  ridge  of  the 
Mongolian  Altai  with  its  lofty  peaks  of  everlasting 
snow.  I  thought  it  was  hardly  worth  while  to  visit 
the  lower  boulders  beneath  us,  when  Taba  suddenly 
squatted  down  and  pointed  out  a  couple  of  rams 
some  800  yards  below.  They  were  making  their 
way  up  from  the  dry  rocky  ground  towards  the 
pastures  above.  As  they  were  advancing  slowly, 
and  seemed  to  carry  very  fair  horns,  we  decided  to 
try  and  cut  them  off  from  the  higher  ground.  A 
steep  ridge  ran  down  from  where  we  lay,  both  sides 
of  which  were  covered  with  loose  shingle ;  so  we 
ran  down  the  slope,  under  cover  of  this  ridge,  as 
fast  as  we  could  lay  our  feet  to  the  ground,  till  we 
reached  a  saddle,  which  we  expected  the  animals 
would  cross.  Had  they  done  so  at  that  moment  I 
certainly  should  have  been  unable  to  shoot,  for  the 
pace  at  which  we  had  gone  rendered  me  breathless 
for  the  next  five  minutes.  We  waited  some  time, 
and,  seeing  no  sign  of  the  sheep,  moved  cautiously 
over  the  ridge  commanding  a  view  of  the  whole 
corrie.  Though  we  spied  every  ledge  of  rock  as 
carefully  as  we  could  there  was  not  a  beast  in  sight. 


TABA   AT   A    LOSS 


>4<> 


The  wind  had  been  favourable  during  our  manoeuvres, 
and  Taba  was  at  a  loss  to  find  a  clue  to  the  mystery. 
Many  tracks  and  droppings  showed  us  that  the  place 
was  by  no  means  uninhabited  by  sheep,  though  the 
dryness  of  the  soil  seemed  to  render  it  unattractive 


"WE    RAN 
DOWN    THE    SLOPE. 


i5o  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

to  them.  A  long  climb  back  now  awaited  us.  It 
took  us  about  an  hour  under  a  tropical  sun  to  cover 
the  distance  which  had  taken  us  ten  minutes  downhill. 
I  know  nothing  more  disappointing"  than  a  climb  back 
after  an  unsuccessful  stalk,  and  I  daresay  that  every 
sportsman  will  share  the  feelings  I  experienced. 
Taba  gave  me,  as  usual,  a  bit  of  his  mind  in  English  ; 
poor  little  fellow,  he  was  the  keenest  hunter  I  ever 
came  across. 

We  reached  the  spot  from  which  we  had  sighted 
the  two  vanished  rams,  and  on  halting  in  order  to 
inspect  the  other  corries  I  spied  a  herd  of  six  sheep 
in  the  distance,  about  a  mile  lower  down.  "Taba, 
Kotchka^  said  I.  " lok"  that  is,  "No,"  was  the 
answer  ;  "djeran"  as  he  carefully  replaced  the  telescope 
on  the  grass.  Now  djeran  is  a  term  I  have  often 
heard  in  the  Caucasus  and  in  Asia.  In  the  former  the 
natives  use  it  to  express  either  Chamois  or  Antelope  ; 
in  the  eastern  Russian  steppes  Kalmuks  and  Kirghiz 
apply  it  to  the  Saiga  antelope,  the  same  for  Russian 
Turkestan,  where  both  the  Saiga  and  the  Antilope 
guthwosa  are  to  be  found.  I  therefore  concluded 
that  we  were  in  the  presence  of  antelope,  but  being 
too  far  off  was  unable  to  identify  the  animals.  Later 
on,  during  our  return  journey,  we  came  across  large 
herds  of  Antilope guttiirosa  on  the  Kosh-Agatch  plain, 


THE    SAIGA  151 

and  secured  several.  Littledale  was  very  anxious  to 
know  if  the  habitat  of  the  Saiga  extended  as  far  east 
as  Mongolia,  and  being  keen  to  shoot  one,  made  it 
a  point  to  cross-examine  our  Kalmuks  on  the  subject 
on  our  return  to  camp  ;  but  no  useful  information  was 
to  be  got  from  them,  although  we  did  our  best  to 
describe  the  Saiga,  drawing  their  attention  to  the 
swelling  on  the  beast's  nose.  I  hardly  think  that  the 
Saiga  exists  in  Mongolia,  and  suppose  that  the 
animals  we  saw  must  have  been  Antilope  gutturosa. 
Seeing  that  there  was  no  sport  to  be  obtained  on 
the  low  ground,  I  suggested  to  Taba  that  we  might 
try  the  hills  to  the  westward,  and  spend  the  remainder 
of  the  day  in  inspecting  the  numerous  corries  outside 
the  Happy  Valley,  where  Littledale  was  at  work. 
So  we  struck  a  ridge,  and  in  a  couple  of  hours  found 
ourselves  at  an  elevation  of  about  11,000  feet  on 
a  stony  plateau  commanding  a  view  over  a  large 
stretch  of  rocky  country,  with  stiff  walls  of  grim- 
looking  crags  on  every  side,  and  broad  slides  of 
snow  running  down  the  steep  ravines.  A  basin  of 
hills,  two  or  three  miles  in  diameter,  especially 
attracted  my  attention  owing  to  the  occasional 
patches  of  bright  green  fresh  grass  scattered  over 
it — a  likely  place  for  sheep.  I  accordingly  sat  down 
to  spy,  and  soon  discovered  a  herd  of  rams  feeding 


1 52  AFTER    WILT)    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

slowly  up  the  opposite  slopes.  Neither  Taba  nor  I 
could  distinguish  the  size  of  their  horns,  nor  estimate 
at  that  distance  the  feasibility  of  a  stalk.  We 
decided,  however,  unanimously  to  try  our  fortune, 
and  started  downhill  without  delay,  neither  of  us 
knowing  anything-  about  the  ground,  and  trusting  in 
Providence  to  get  safely  back  to  camp.  Taba  led 
the  way  over  the  rocks  and  loose  shingle,  and  though 
we  went  at  a  good  pace  we  took  over  an  hour  to 
reach  the  bottom  of  the  valley. 

My  companion's  primitive  leather  mocassins  scored 
off  my  best  nailed  shooting  boots  on  these  stones,  and 
after  many  a  fall  I  finally  found  myself  in  the  bed  of  a 
dried-up  stream.  Taba's  movements  and  wonderful 
agility  struck  me  here  for  the  first  time  ;  he  would  jump 
from  one  rock  to  another,  alight  on  a  sharp  edge, 
stand  motionless  for  some  time  where  a  Chamois  would 
hesitate,  performing  marvellous  feats  of  equilibrium. 
The  force  of  gravitation  seemed  to  have  no  effect 
on  him,  and  I  found  it  a  difficult  job  to  follow  him 
over  the  steep,  broken  ground. 

Another  half- hour  brought  us  to  a  ridge  within 
400  yards  of  the  sheep,  and  my  disappointment  was 
great  when  I  saw  before  me  eight  rams,  all  four  or 
five  years  old,  but  not  one  of  them  worth  a  shot. 

"Kitchinek"   ("  small  "),   whispered    Taba.      "  Yes," 


START   FOR    THE    HAPPY   VALLEY  153 

thought  I,  "and  we  are  a  long  way  from  our  dinner." 
We  watched  the  animals  feed  over  a  boulder,  and 
started  in  the  direction  of  camp.  Here  again  Taba 
showed  himself  equal  to  his  task,  and  we  were  within 
sight  of  the  tents  just  as  it  was  getting  dark,  after 
a  hard  three  hours'  pull.  Littledale  was  back.  He 
had  failed  to  approach  two  fine  old  rams  owing  to 
shifty  wind,  so  that  we  had  neither  of  us  taken  our 
rifles  out  of  their  covers.  At  dinner  we  held  council 
with  the  ladies,  and  decided  to  send  one  of  our  men 
to  the  nearest  Chinese  post,  or  "  karaoul"  in  order  to 
secure,  if  possible,  a  guide  acquainted  with  the  country 
beyond,  none  of  our  Kalmuks  having  ever  crossed  the 
Siberian  frontier.  Moreover,  the  day's  result  having 
shown  that  our  grounds  were  not  promising  for  sport, 
and  as  we  had  both  sighted  a  fine-looking  range  of 
hills  to  the  south,  which  seemed  to  correspond  on  our 
map  with  the  Bain-Khairkhan  range,  we  thought  it 
advisable  to  shift  camp  as  soon  as  possible,  or  rather 
as  soon  as  the  Chinese  officials  would  condescend  to 
supply  us  with  the  guide  we  had  sent  for.  But  we 
could  not  expect  him  within  two  or  three  days,  a  delay 
which  had  to  be  endured,  and  which  we  spent  in 
revisiting  our  old  grounds. 

On  the   following   morning,    June    27th,    I    started 
early,    at     3.30    a.m.,    towards     the     Happy     Valley, 


i.S4  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

Littledale  taking  the  country  I  had  tried  the  previous 
day.  It  was  a  lovely  morning".  During  the  night 
there  had  been  a  hard  frost,  and  when  I  woke  up  I 
found  the  water  frozen  in  our  tent.  Unfortunately 
the  stove  was  of  no  avail,  owing  to  the  scarcity,  or 
rather  to  the  quality,  of  the  fuel,  which  consisted 
of  dried,  horse  or  camel-dung,  native  tezek,  the  smoke 
of  which  would  have  rendered  our  home  entirely  un- 
inhabitable. I  may  mention  that  the  poor  cook, 
Vassili,  was  in  despair  for  the  same  reason,  our  roast 
kotchkor  usually  bearing  a  strong  smell  of  tezek  smoke. 
It  took  us  a  long  time  to  reach  the  entrance  to  the 
valley,  our  ponies  stumbling  over  the  marshy  table- 
land we  had  to  cross,  and  only  found  ourselves 
among  the  well-known  buttresses  at  6.30.  Taba  had 
been  conceded  to  me  for  the  day,  Littledale  having 
taken  out  with  him  a  hunter  named  Lepet,  who, 
though  he  was  subject  to  eye-soreness,  yet  could  see 
as  well  as  any  man  on  our  planet,  and  discover  game 
where  telescopes  seemed  useless.  I  left  my  "second- 
horse  man"  in  charge  of  the  ponies,  and  started  up 
the  nullah  with  Taba.  We  followed  the  bed  of  the 
stream  for  some  time,  examining  carefully  the  slopes 
on  either  side,  and  stopping  now  and  then  to  spy  the 
lateral  ravines,  at  the  bottom  of  which  the  wily  old 
rams  enjoy   their  siesta,   but   there   were    no   signs    of 


A   HOPELESS    ERRAND  155 

sheep  till  we  had  gone  almost  half-way  up  the  valley. 
At  this  stage,  just  as  we  had  passed  a  sharp  turning, 
a  lot  of  about  fifteen  rams  came  into  sight  some  500 
yards  ahead  of  us.  Unfortunately  the  wind  kept 
blowing  steadily  in  our  backs,  and  there  was  no 
means  of  making  a  dttour  without  being;  discovered. 
So  we  both  lay  down,  and  waited  in  the  hope 
that  fate  might  alter  the  direction  of  the  wind. 
Naturally  it  did  nothing  of  the  sort,  and  as  we 
crawled  along  the  stones  we  saw  the  whole  herd 
get  up,  cross  the  stream,  and  trot  up  the  opposite 
slope,  till  they  all  disappeared  over  the  last  ridge. 
I  watched  them  the  whole  way  with  my  glass,  and 
found  that  two  or  three  of  them  would  have  been 
most  satisfactory  trophies.  We  were  now  at  a  loss 
how  to  proceed,  for  the  wind  kept  blowing  up  the 
valley,  and  there  was  no  time  that  day  for  a  circuit, 
which  would  have  taken  us  five  or  six  hours  to 
make.  So  we  continued  on  our  hopeless  errand, 
quite  prepared  to  see  any  sheep  that  might  still  be 
in  front  of  us  speed  mercilessly  away,  when  Taba 
suddenly  stopped  me,  pointing  towards  a  small  grassy 
boulder,  some  800  yards  ahead  of  us.  It  stood  at 
the  very  junction  of  the  two  streams  forming  the  main 
river,  which  divided  up  two  narrow  rocky  gullies.  I 
crouched  down,  and  soon  found  that  we  were  in  the 


r56  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

presence  of  another  lot  of  fifteen  rams,  but  could 
not  tell  whether  they  carried  good  heads  or  not.  In 
any  case  it  was  probably  my  last  chance  for  the 
day  ;  so  I  beckoned  to  Taba  to  follow  me  down  to  the 
bed  of  the  river,  whose  banks  at  this  place  were 
fairly  steep,  and,  as  I  thought,  might  afford  hiding 
for  another  few  hundred  yards.  In  five  minutes  we 
were  out  of  sight  of  the  herd,  and  found  as  I  had 
expected  that  we  might  advance  in  this  manner  by 
keeping  as  close  as  possible  to  the  right  bank  of  the 
stream.  In  places  we  were  obliged,  in  order  to  keep 
under  cover,  to  wade  knee-deep  in  icy-cold  water  ;  in 
others  we  had  to  crawl  over  the  stones  in  full  sight  of 
the  sheep,  but  happily  only  for  a  few  seconds,  till 
another  slope  hid  us  from  view.  The  wind  was  still 
wrong,  nevertheless  I  hoped  that  we  might  get  within 
shot  before  the  rams  suspected  anything,  as  they  were 
some  way  above  us.  We  soon  found  ourselves  within 
400  yards  of  them,  but  here  ended  the  protective 
slopes,  and  we  could  advance  no  further  without 
being  discovered.  I  took  out  my  "  Zeiss  "  to  examine 
the  herd  from  behind  the  last  corner,  and  found  that 
several  of  the  beasts  were  quite  shootable,  though 
none  of  them  carried  first-class  heads.  They  were 
quietly  grazing  towards  us,  and  I  could  see  no  other 
solution  of  the  dilemma  than  to  wait  on  the  chance 


A   TREACHEROUS    WHIFF  157 

of  their  coming  within  shot.  I  explained  my  design 
to  1  aba  as  best  I  could,  but  was  met  with  a  sceptical 
look  from  my  companion,  and  the  laconic  answer, 
"  Salkhyn  yaman"  which  meant  "Wind  bad."  I  was 
just  thinking  that  the  little  man  was  perhaps  right, 
and  that  we  might  be  scented  at  any  moment,  when 
I  saw  him  make  up  his  mind  and  creep  on  in  full 
view,  carrying  off  my  precious  rifle.  I  could  but 
follow  him. 

All  went  right  for  a  hundred  yards  or  so.  We 
crouched  motionless  every  two  or  three  steps,  watch- 
ing the  sheep  with  one  eye,  and  with  the  other  picking 
out  the  next  large  stone  for  a  halting-place.  At  last 
a  treacherous  whiff  brought  them  the  forebodings  of 
danger,  and  suddenly  lifting  their  heads  they  all  began 
gazing  intently  in  our  direction.  No  time  was  to  be 
lost.  Putting  up  the  200-yards  sight,  and  taking  a 
hurried  aim  at  the  one  which  I  took  to  be  the  oldest 
ram,    I    fired,   and   to   my  greatest   surprise   saw  him 

staoorer  for  a  second.      A  moment  after  he  had  dis- 
00 

appeared  with  the  others  over  the  nearest  ridge. 
They  gave  me,  however,  a  second  chance — though  a 
poor  one,  I  must  own — and  the  result  was  a  broken 
hind  leg  for  one  of  the  smaller  rams. 

Taba  now  wanted  to  follow  them  up  immediately, 
but   I    thought   it  wiser  to  wait,  and  not  frighten  the 


158  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

one  I  considered  I  had  wounded,  in  which  case  he 
would  separate  from  his  companions,  and  probably- 
lay  down  in  some  neighbouring  ravine,  where  we 
might  stalk  him  again.  So  I  caught  my  hunter  by 
his  coat,  and  forcing  him  to  sit  clown  by  my  side, 
tried  to  explain  my  intentions  to  the  little  man, 
who  kept  repeating  "  Baalou  iok "-—  which  meant 
"  Not  wounded."  Evidently  his  idea  was  to  get 
another  shot  at  the  animals  by  making  a  dash  to  the 
ridge  over  which  they  had  gone  ;  this  would  have 
brought  me  to  the  place  breathless  and  panting, 
entirely  unfit  to  take  aim.  Moreover,  he  had  not 
noticed  the  result  of  my  first  shot.  In  the  mean- 
while, as  I  sat  low,  the  herd  came  in  sight  about 
a  mile  in  front  of  us,  making  up  a  steep  slope  of 
shingle,  and  I  found  that  its  number  had  now  in- 
creased to  over  thirty.  Behind  came  my  three-legged 
youngster,  who  was  struggling  hard  to  keep  up  with 
the  others.  My  rifle  had  awakened  the  rumbling 
echoes  of  the  valley,  and  several  lots  of  ewes  were 
galloping  furiously  up  different  slopes. 

When  they  had  all  disappeared  from  view,  and  calm 
was  re-established,  we  started  slowly  up  the  grassy 
bank  towards  the  place  where  our  sheep  had  been 
feeding,  and  to  my  dismay  found  no  blood  -  tracks 
whatever.      My  companion's  triumphant  look  seemed 


THE    WOUNDED    RAM  159 

to  repeat  "Baalou  iok"  though  I  must  acknowledge 
that  he  did  his  best  to  prove  he  was  wrong.  I  felt 
quite  humbled  at  that  moment,  and  was  the  first  to 
give  up  the  search   for  invisible  blood-tracks. 

Calling  him  away,  we  made  for  a  small  stream  and 
sat  down  to  lunch.  Of  course  our  thoughts  turned 
upon  the  mess  I  had  made  of  the  whole  business,  and 
I  believe  we  hardly  uttered  a  word,  when  Taba,  who 
was  perpetually  on  the  qui  vive  and  constantly  looking 
round  about  him,  pointed  up  a  narrow  gulley  which 
led  down  to  the  place  where  we  sat.  I  could  only 
distinguish  stones  piled  up  one  over  the  other,  and 
presently  spotted  one  which  seemed  more  yellow  than 
the  others,  about  300  yards  off.  Up  went  my  "  Zeiss," 
followed  by  an  exclamation,  " Kotckkor /"  The  tide 
had  turned,  and  this  time  the  triumphant  looks  were 
on  my  side.  We  had  been  quietly  sitting  for  the  last 
half-hour  in  full  view  of  my  wounded  ram,  nearly 
within  shot  of  him !  The  brute  was  lying  on  the 
stones  with  his  head  towards  us,  evidently  very  sick. 
I  loaded  my  rifle  and  was  off  in  a  second  up  the  bed 
of  the  torrent,  hiding  where  I  could.  But  the  animal 
was  not  dead  yet,  and  as  I  was  about  to  fire,  got  up 
slowly  and  started  away.  I  ran  on  as  fast  as  my  legs 
could  carry  me,  just  in  time  to  see  him  disappear 
round  a  boulder.      Naturally  my  two  shots  were  of  no 


i6o  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

avail  in  the  heat  of  the  chase  and  breathless  as  I  was. 
Again  I  followed  on  over  the  rolling-  stones.  Luckily 
the  banks  were  steep  on  either  side,  and  the  beast 
could  only  go  along  the  bed  of  the  stream.  This 
headlong  pursuit  lasted  about  an  hour,  and  it  was  not 
till  I  reached  the  very  top  of  the  gully  that  I  saw  my 
ram  slacken  his  pace  and  lie  down.  Heavy  loss  of 
blood  had  greatly  weakened  him,  and  I  can  hardly  tell 
which  of  the  two  was  the  most  exhausted  when  at  last 
I  finished  him  at  close  quarters.  His  horns  taped  fairly 
well,  the  following  being  the  measurements  :  Length 
along  curve,  46  in. ;  girth  at  base,  i8f  in. ;  spread,  2 5 in. 
My  first  shot  had  smashed  his  thigh  and  entered 
the  stomach.  Absence  of  blood  from  such  wounds 
produced  by  small-bore  bullets  is  a  great  disadvantage, 
and  has  caused  me  to  lose  many  an  animal  before  now. 
Taba  proceeded  to  grallock  him,  whilst  1  went  back 
to  fetch  the  ponies,  whom  we  had  left  a  long  way 
down  the  nullah. 

I  found  my  second  hunter,  who  rejoiced  in  the 
pleasant-sounding  name  of  Takhua,  fast  asleep  and 
the  horses  gone.  He  brought  them  back,  however, 
after  an  hour's  search,  and  we  started  towards  the 
dead  sheep.  Taba  had  already  cut  up  the  animal, 
so  we  loaded  the  ponies  with  the  meat,  which  was 
badly     wanted     for    the     kitchen,     sending     Takhua 


THE   COLD    INTENSE  161 

straight  to  camp  with  our  well-earned  quarry.  As 
for  ourselves,  we  started  up  a  small  river  in  the 
direction  of  home,  and  crossing  a  pass  reached  the 
tents  at  6  p.m.  without  having  seen  any  more  game 
that  day.  Littledale,  as  I  expected,  had  found  nothing 
but  young  rams  and  arkhar,  i.e.  ewes. 

Taking  advantage  of  the  weather,  the  ladies  had 
been  busy  washing  and  drying  linen  the  whole 
morning.  In  the  afternoon  they  had  gathered 
flowers  round  camp,  pressing  them  in  the  numerous 
halfpenny  novels  we  had  brought  out  with  us  for 
the  journey.  June  28th  was  an  off-day  for  me. 
There  had  been  a  hard  frost  during  the  night,  and 
a  bitterly  cold  north  wind  was  blowing  when  Cristo 
came  in  to  wake  me  up  at  6  a.m.  Feeling  very 
tired  from  the  previous  day's  exertions,  I  decided 
to  remain  in  bed,  especially  as  the  new  ground 
eastward  did  not  promise  to  yield  sport.  More- 
over, we  intended  to  send  Joseph  to  fetch  more 
stores  from  Kosh-Aoatch,  and  I  thought  I  might 
usefully  spend  the  afternoon  in  writing  letters. 
Littledale  had  started  off  at  an  early  hour.  No 
news  had  come  from  the  Chinese  post,  and  we 
eagerly  expected  our  messenger  with  the  guide  he 
was  to  bring  back  with  him.  All  day  the  cold 
was  intense.      Our   Kalmuks  were  constantly  ordered 


M 


i62  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

about  by  the  demitcha  to  gather  tezek,  our  only  fuel, 
in  the  large  leather  bags  that  had  been  lent  to  us 
at  Ongudai  ;  unfortunately  the  precious  stuff  was 
damp,  owing  to  a  heavy  snowstorm  that  came  on, 
and  there  was  more  smoke  than  warmth  to  be  ob- 
tained from  it.  Roast  mutton  was  out  of  the 
question  that  day,  and  we  had  to  content  ourselves 
with  tinned  tongue  and  sardines.  Towards  evening 
Littledale  came  in  with  a  fair  head,  saying  he  had 
wounded  another  and  a  much  finer  ram,  but  had 
been  unable  to  follow  up  his  tracks  in  the  storm. 
The  following  day  brought  no  change  in  the  weather  ; 
my  barometer  kept  low,  and  a  regular  gale  blew  from 
the  west.  Nevertheless  I  went  out  at  8  a.m.,  return- 
ing to  camp  drenched  and  half  frozen  late  in  the 
afternoon,  having  seen  but  three  ewes  and  a  couple 
of  marmots.  Joseph  had  started  for  Kosh-Agatch 
with  four  ponies,  letters  and  instructions  to  catch  us 
up  either  at  the  Karaoul  Suok,  or  at  the  foot  of  the 
Bain-Khairkhan  range,  which  we  next  intended  to 
try  for  Ovis  Amnion.  The  ladies,  having  lit  their 
candles  to  warm  themselves,  never  left  their  tents 
during  the  whole  day.  Littledale  somehow  managed 
to  discover  his  wounded  animal's  trail,  and  brought 
in  a  most  satisfactory  head,  measuring  18^  inches 
in     «>  irth.       There     beine    still     no     news    from     the 


A   LAST   CHANCE 


163 


karaoul,  we  all  decided  to  have  one  more  day's 
outing"  at  that  place,  and,  in  the  event  of  no  one 
coming  to  our  relief,  to  continue  our  march  east- 
wards and  interview  the  Chinese  official  ourselves, 
using   my    Russian   survey   map    as    our    only   guide. 


A    DAYS    REST. 


I  went  out  accordingly  at  daybreak  next  morning, 
taking  with  me  Taba  and  one  of  the  other  hunters. 
The  night  had  been  very  cold  and  the  weather 
was  quite  settled  again.  I  intended  to  give  our 
old  ground  a  last  deciding  chance,  and  to  make 
my  way  as  far  as  possible  in  a  south-western  direc- 


i64  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

tion,  so  as  to  get  well  behind  the  Happy  Valley. 
There  was  a  large  tract  of  country  which  neither 
of  us  had  yet  explored,  and  it  was  quite  probable 
that  the  sheep,  frightened  by  our  frequent  visits  to 
the  main  nullah,  might  have  shifted  their  quarters 
over  the  ridge  southwards,  where  a  great  number 
of  ravines  would  afford  the  old  rams  the  shelter 
they  badly  required.  We  therefore  crossed  without 
dismounting,  or  even  spying  the  two  broad  valleys 
which  I  had  visited  on  the  26th,  and  where  I  had 
only  come  across  young  rams  and  ewes  (arkkar), 
and  it  was  not  before  we  had  ridden  for  three  good 
hours  that  I  considered  myself  on  the  regular  war- 
path, and  began  to  advance  cautiously.  We  now 
found  ourselves  on  a  small  tableland,  at  an  altitude 
of  about  9,000  feet,  under  the  southern  ridge  of 
the  Happy  Valley,  and  the  long  stretches  of  snow, 
melting  fast  under  the  sun's  powerful  rays,  con- 
verted the  gravelly  soil  into  muddy  swamps ;  our 
ponies,  incapable  of  much  exertion,  soon  refused  to 
work.  Leaving  them  to  the  care  of  my  Kalmuk 
gillie,  I  went  on  with  Taba,  and  presently  sat  down 
to  spy.  Numerous  stony  corries  lay  before  us,  with 
patches  of  fine  grass  below,  and  small  streams 
trickling  along  the  bottom  into  the  Suok  Valley. 
A   herd  of   sheep  soon  came   into  sight  ;    they  were 


UNSUCCESSFUL   TRIALS  165 

mostly  ewes,  feeding  on  the  slopes  of  a  deep  ravine 
some  800  yards  below  us.  Two  or  three  rams 
amongst  them  seemed  to  promise  very  fair  trophies. 
These  had  evidently  finished  their  meal,  and  were 
slumbering  in  the  open  whilst  their  spouses  kept 
watch.  At  first  I  decided  that  they  must  be  young 
rams,  the  larger  ones  generally  keeping  apart  from 
arkhar  at  that  time  of  year,  and  I  was  about 
abandoning  them,  when  my  shikari  said  they  were 
Yan  kotchkor  (big  rams),  which  statement  my 
telescope  soon  confirmed.  Little  Taba  was  seldom 
mistaken  in  his  judgment  !  Unhappily,  the  un- 
dulating slopes,  over  which  we  advanced  on  all- 
fours,  soon  broke  into  an  abrupt  descent,  and  pre- 
vented further  concealment.  We  crawled  back 
accordingly,  and,  making  a  long  dttoiir,  tried  to 
stalk  them  from  another  side  ;  but  here  again  we 
were  stopped  by  the  fiat  stretch  of  grass  leading- 
straight  down  to  the  herd.  Some  of  the  ewes 
had  fed  up  towards  us  in  the  meantime,  and  con- 
siderably interfered  with  our  approach.  Moreover, 
the  wind  veered  round  in  a  most  dangerous  way. 
After  several  unsuccessful  trials  to  get  nearer  from 
other  directions,  I  finally  convinced  myself  that  the 
only  way  was  to  lay  low  and  wait,  in  case  they 
might  come  towards   us  later  on  in  the  day  or  feed 


1 66  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

into  easier  ground.  As  I  examined  the  rams  more 
closely,  they  showed  far  better  heads  than  I  had 
thought  at  first,  and  I  was  busy  taping  them 
mentally,  when  towards  1.30  they  lazily  got  up  one 
after  the  other,  slowly  stretching  themselves,  and, 
shaking  their  bodies,  started  feeding  uphill.  This 
was  a  good  omen.  They  kept  advancing  steadily, 
looking  up  now  and  again,  ever  on  the  alert.  At 
this  stage  Taba  suggested  that  we  should  shift  our 
positions,  as  the  sheep  were  heading  to  our  left. 
So  we  crawled  back  silently  out  of  view,  and  striking 
across  a  slope  of  loose  shingle  squatted  down  some 
two  hundred  yards  lower,  in  a  small  depression,  where 
a  grassy  plot  in  front  of  me  presented  a  capital  rest 
for  my  rifle.  Here  we  both  lay  flat  on  our  stomachs 
and  waited.  Presently  the  rams  came  up  within 
range,  and  carefully  drawing  a  bead  on  the  largest 
I  let  go.  The  thud  so  well  known  to  the  sportsman's 
ear  answered  instantaneously  ;  the  animal  staggered 
for  a  moment,  but  picking  himself  up  trotted  away. 
The  other  two  rams,  strange  to  say,  abandoning  the 
rest  of  the  herd  which  pelted  away  downhill,  ran 
straight  up  towards  us — and  here  in  my  excitement 
1  fired  two  shots  at  sixty  yards,  resulting  in  two  clean 
misses.  There  was  no  time  for  reloading  again,  for 
they  soon  popped  over  a  ridge  and  disappeared.      I 


A    BROADSIDE   SHOT  167 

was  very  sick  at  this  performance,  but  as  I  felt  sure 
of  having  hit  the  first  ram,  I  rushed  off,  closely 
followed  by  Taba,  in  the  direction  he  had  taken. 
We  soon  found  blood.  The  tracks  led  up  for  some 
time  along  the  slope,  but  as  we  reached  the  foot 
of  a  small  col  dividing  the  two  corries  we  could 
find  no  more  red -stained  blades  of  grass  to  direct 
us.  Now  was  the  dilemma ;  had  he  managed  to 
scramble  over  the  ridge,  or,  being  unable  to  do  so, 
gone  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  valley  ?  I  con- 
sulted Taba,  who  was  disposed  to  favour  the  latter 
alternative ;  but  this  meant  at  least  four  hours  of 
considerable  toiling  with  a  doubtful  issue,  and  our 
camp  was  now  many  miles  off.  I  chose  the  ridge, 
and  great  was  my  delight  when  from  the  top  of 
it  I  caught  sight  of  my  ram  lying  on  the  edge  of 
a  snow-drift,  some  300  yards  below  me!  But  he 
was  still  alive.  Creeping  down  stealthily  in  full 
sight  of  him  I  succeeded  in  going  another  hundred 
yards  before  he  noticed  my  approach,  and  as  I  was 
about  to  fire,  he  got  up  slowly  and  gave  me  a 
broadside  shot  as  he  stood  in  the  snow.  Off  went 
my  Purdey,  dropping  him  stone  dead  in  his  tracks. 
As  I  had  expected,  I  found  him  to  tape  well,  the 
horn  measurements  being  52  inches  along  the  curve, 
19   inches  girth,   and   38   inches   spread.       Taba   pro- 


1 68  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

ceeded  to  cut  off  his  valuable  head,  which  we  now 
carried  by  turns  up  the  precipitous  slopes.  The 
meat  was  left  to  the  vultures,  the  place  being 
entirely  out  of  the  reach  of  ponies.  A  couple 
of  hours  brought  us  to  the  high  plateau  where 
the  horses  awaited  us.  We  now  made  for  camp, 
as  daylight  was  failing  fast,  and  heartily  greeted 
the  sight  of  our  tents  at  7  p.m.  On  our  way 
back  Taba  said  that  he  had  counted  at  least  forty 
ewes  (arkkar)  and  about  twenty  rams  (kotchkor)  in 
the  herd  we  had  come  across.  In  the  skirmish  I 
had  failed  to  count  the  deserters. 

I  found  the  ladies  in  high  spirits.  The  evening 
was  so  warm  that  we  all  dined  out  of  doors,  discussing 
the  clay's  events,  and  the  important  question  of  the 
morrow's  start.  Littledale  had  had  bad  luck,  and 
brought  in  only  a  small  head.  On  the  following 
morning,  July  1st,  our  camp  presented  a  most  lively 
aspect.  Cristo,  Gabriel,  our  Russian  interpreter 
Nicholas,  and  all  our  Kalmuks  were  busy  at  work 
from  6  a.m.  loading  the  ponies,  pulling  down  the 
tents,  and  preparing  everything  for  the  start.  Our 
demitcha,  Yakoub,  though  a  thorough  gentleman  of  his 
kind,  was  not  up  to  his  mission.  He  kept  ordering 
his  men  about,  but  these  obeyed  reluctantly,  and  we 
had  to  depend  almost   entirely   on   our  servants  and 


SKULLS   OF   SHEEP  169 

Taba,  who  made  himself  useful  all  round.     We  were 
off  at  9  a.m.,   but  the  packs  did  not  start  till    1  1. 

According  to  the  map  the  Chinese  karaoul  lay 
about  ten  miles  due  south,  but  we  soon  found  that 
it  was  much  further  than  we  had  expected,  so  did 
the  horses,  for  it  was  not  until  3  p.m.  that  we  caught 
sight  of  the  Kha's  yourts  (Kha  is  the  title  given 
to  the  Governor  of  a  karaoul),  after  a  march  of  about 
twenty-five  versts  (sixteen  miles).  Our  route  led 
down  the  Boro-Burgassy  Valley  almost  the  whole 
way.  The  country  was  rocky  and  barren.  Pre- 
cipitous cliffs  with  grassy  tablelands  above  stood  up 
on  either  side,  growing  gradually  lower  as  we 
advanced,  and  turning  eventually  into  an  undulating 
steppe,  through  which,  a  few  miles  beyond  the  karaoul, 
flows  the  Suok  River.  That  day  we  came  across 
numerous  skulls  of  sheep  strewing  the  ground,  and 
now  and  again  piled  up  in  heaps,  for  what  purpose 
we  could  not  imagine.  Perhaps  they  were  meant 
as  an  offering  to  the  gods,  corresponding  to  the 
coloured  ribbons  hanging  on  trees  in  the  Kalmuk 
region.  None  of  these  heads  were  worth  picking  up. 
We  spied  several  ewes  on  the  surrounding  slopes, 
but  saw  no  rams.  The  weather  was  lovely,  the  sun 
scorching  hot,  and  I  believe  this  was  the  warmest 
march  we  had  during  the  entire  trip.      A  few  miles 


i7o 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 


before  reaching  the  karaoul  we  were  met  by  half 
a  dozen  Chinamen  on  horseback,  all  in  the  most 
picturesque  costumes.  We  understood  that  they  had 
been  sent  by  the  head  official,  or  Kha,  to  welcome 
us  in  Chinese  territory.  They  wore  sheepskin-lined 
coats   of  different   colours,    by  no   means  tight-fitting 


SKULLS    OF    SHEEP    TILED    UP    IN    HEAPS. 


breeches  entering  into  Russian  leather  embroidered 
top-boots  with  turned-up  points  at  the  toes,  and 
various-shaped  caps,  over  which  coral  beads  denoted 
their  respective  ranks  in  Chinese  hierarchy.  One  of 
these  men,  who  appeared  to  be  in  command,  wore 
a  silver  belt  around  his  waist  with  numerous  trinkets 
attached   to    it,    such  as   a   pipe-case,    a   small  box,   a 


THE    "KARAOUL"  171 

bit  of  flint,  etc.,  all  silver  mounted.  This  belt  was 
destined  later  on  to  form  the  subject  of  long  and 
unsuccessful  bargaining  between  the  Littledales  and  its 
owner.  The  others  also  carried  belts  of  lesser  value. 
Their  rifles,  slung  on  their  shoulders,  were  primitive 
flint-locks.  The  length  of  their  pig-tails  was  also  in 
proportion  to  their  rank.  Naturally  our  conversation 
was  of  the  briefest  description,  though  I  several  times 
put  questions  about  kotchkor,  of  which  they  seemed 
to  be  entirely  ignorant.  We  now  soon  reached  the 
karaoul.  It  consisted  of  a  few  yotirts  scattered  here 
and  there  along  the  banks  of  the  stream.  At  the 
further  end  of  the  village  stood  a  more  respectable- 
looking  yourt,  surrounded  by  a  wooden  palisade, 
into  which  were  stuck  several  red  and  yellow  flags. 
This  was  the  Kha's  palace.  We  decided  to  pitch  our 
camp  some  two  hundred  yards  away  from  the  yourts, 
so  as  to  avoid  the  close  neighbourhood  of  unwelcome 
insect  pests  that  would  be  only  too  delighted  to 
make  acquaintance  with  European  blood.  Our  pack- 
ponies  not  having  yet  arrived,  I  went  with  my  wife 
to  inspect  the  native  dwellings,  and  found  them  even 
dirtier  than  we  had  anticipated.  A  few  ragged 
Chinamen  sat  smoking  their  long  pipes  round  the 
fireplace,  and  the  combined  smoke  rendered  the  air 
stifling.      They    all    seemed    very    astonished    at    the 


172  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

sight  of  us,  and  made  a  circle  round  us,  examining 
us  closely,  fingering-  our  clothes,  and  paying  special 
attention  above  all  things  to  my  wife's  riding  crop. 
We  had  to  rely  entirely  on  our  pantomimic  powers  to 
explain  the  use  of  the  different  articles  they  were 
interested  in.  Needless  to  say  that  we  shortened  our 
visit,  especially  as  we  understood  from  their  signs 
that  the  head  official  was  about  to  come  and  greet 
the  distinguished  white  foreigners.  Our  tents  were 
hardly  up,  when  we  saw  the  procession  approach. 
At  the  head  of  it  walked  the  Kha  in  his  Chinese 
uniform,  with  the  traditional  peacock  feather  in 
his  cap  as  an  emblem  of  his  governorship.  By  his 
side  came  a  small  boy  (who  turned  out  to  be  his 
interpreter),  carrying  his  pipe  and  tobacco  ;  the 
followers,  in  whom  we  recognised  our  old  friends 
who  had  been  sent  to  meet  us,  marched  behind. 
The  sight  promised  quite  an  imposing  interview. 
After  the  preliminary  bows  and  tacit  expressions 
of  friendship  we  found  that,  with  regard  to  conversa- 
tion between  his  interpreter  and  ours,  there  was  a 
missing  link,  viz.  from  Kalmuk  to  Chinese.  Luckily 
this  gap  was  soon  filled  by  a  Kalmuk  who  happened 
to  be  at  the  karaoul  at  the  time,  and  who  was 
acquainted  with  both  languages,  having  had  frequent 
dealings    with    the     Kobdo    merchants.       His    name 


EXCHANGE    OF   CIVILITIES 


i73 


was  Daniel,  and  we  forthwith  engaged  his  services 
for  the  Mongolian  journey  at  the  rate  of  twenty 
roubles  per  month.  In  this  manner  our  exchange 
of  civilities  went  through  four  stages  before  it  was 
finally  comprehended  on  both  sides  ;    thus   Littledale 


jfeu*ai 


"we  were  met  by  half  a  dozen  chinamen." 

spoke  to  me  in  English,  which  I  translated  into 
Russian  for  Nicholas,  who  turned  it  into  Kalmuk 
for  Daniel,  who  next  translated  it  into  Mongolian 
Chinese  for  the  boy,  who  eventually  brought  it  to 
the  comprehension  of  the  Kha  in  pure  Pekin  idiom. 
Every  sentence  took  about  half  an  hour  to  go  round, 
which    considerably  lengthened    the    interview.      Our 


174  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

main  object  was  to  obtain  a  reliable  guide  for  the 
country  we  intended  to  explore,  but  the  old  man  kept 
avoiding-  the  question,  and  on  being  summoned  to 
give  a  definite  answer  said  he  was  unable  to  comply 
with  our  wishes  without  having  previously  received 
orders  from  the  authorities  of  Kobdo.  On  the  other 
hand  he  gave  us  a  most  lamentable  description  of  his 
private  misfortunes,  saying  that  he  had  been  sent 
to  this  distant  post  through  the  intrigues  of  jealous 
compatriots,  and  that  he  had  had  to  leave  his  wife 
and  children  at  Pekin.  Finally  he  rose  and  departed, 
though  not  before  having  asked  us  to  produce  our 
passports. 

Towards  evening  Littledale  and  I  returned  his 
visit.  Bringing  with  us  the  precious  passports,  which 
had  been  duly  visdd  by  the  Chinese  Legations  in 
London  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  followed  by  our 
interpreters,  we  solemnly  entered  the  Governor's 
yourt.  Our  firm  intention  was  to  insist  upon  being- 
supplied  with  a  native  guide  ;  but  here  again  we 
received  evasive  answers,  and  none  of  the  suite 
knowing  anything  about  the  country  or  the  game  that 
was  to  be  found,  we  had  to  rely  on  our  personal 
inspiration.  The  Kha's  yourt  into  which  we  were 
introduced  was  larger  and  more  comfortable  than  the 
others.       It   was    hermetically   closed   by   felt,   strewn 


DANIEL  175 

with  carpets,  and  the  furniture  consisted  of  a  small 
writing-desk,  two  or  three  low  stools,  and  a  common 
wooden  cupboard  carrying  an  ordinary  guinea  clock  ; 
in  the  corner  were  piled  up  numerous  brass  imple- 
ments of  various  sizes  and  shapes,  which  looked  more 
like  instruments  of  torture  than  basins  and  jugs. 
The  gentleman  with  the  peacock  feather  greeted  us 
warmly,  but  the  conversation  under  such  conditions 
could  hardly  be  lively,  and  ended  in  a  complete 
fiasco.  We  used  all  our  diplomatic  resources  to 
obtain  someone  acquainted  with  the  region,  saying 
that  we  were  ourselves  important  people  in  our 
country,  and  that  our  sovereigns  would  be  very  much 
annoyed  if  they  knew  that  we  had  not  been  treated 
according  to  our  position,  etc. — but  all  in  vain.  The 
constant  reply  was  that  he  had  received  no  orders 
from  Kobdo.  Moreover,  after  having  perused  our 
passports,  he  told  us  that  he  would  have  to  send 
them  to  the  authorities  of  that  town  to  be  care- 
fully examined,  and  that  we  should  be  obliged  to 
wait  till  they  were  returned,  which  implied  three 
weeks'  stay  at  the  karaoul.  Paying  no  attention 
to  this  ultimatum,  we  solemnly  got  up,  thanked  him 
for  his  courtesy,  and  retired  with  the  firm  intention 
of  starting  on  the  following  day.  In  this  dilemma 
our   new  Chinese   interpreter   Daniel   came  up   to   us 


i76  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

and  proposed  himself  as  a  guide,  saying  he  knew 
the  country  well  enough,  and  asking  us  not  to  repeat 
this  to  any  of  the  karaoul  officials.  We  naturally 
accepted  his  services,  thankful  to  have  got  out  of 
the  difficulty. 


The  evening  was  quite  warm,  though  we  were 
still  at  an  altitude  of  about  7,000  feet.  Next  morning 
we  found  that  our  ponies  had  been  so  exhausted  by 
the  previous  day's  long  march  that  we  had  to  give 
up  all  hopes  of  leaving  the  karaoul  until  another 
twenty-four  hours'  rest  should  render  them  fit  tor 
work.       It   was   only   one  day  lost   after  all,   and  we 


CHINESE   CURIOSITY  177 

expected  Joseph  every  moment  with  a  month's  stores 
from  Kosh-Agatch — reinforcements  which  we  badly 
required.  The  weather  continued  beautiful.  After 
luncheon  our  friends  the  Chinamen  strolled  up  to  our 
camp  with  a  view  of  ascertaining"  our  plans,  but  we 
kept  on  the  defensive  in  a  most  Machiavellian  way. 
Their  curiosity  was  otherwise  satisfied,  for  there  was 
hardly  a  thing"  in  our  tents  they  left  untouched,  some 
of  them  going  so  far  as  to  feel  the  ladies'  skirts, 
buttons,  and  boots.  The  excuse  they  gave  for  paying 
us  this  visit  was  to  learn  whether  we  had  spent  a 
comfortable  night.  They  professed  to  apologise  for 
not  being  able  to  supply  us  with  a  guide,  and  took 
roundabout  turns  with  that  object,  such  as  :  Our 
Emperor  lives  on  very  good  terms  with  yours,  and 
we  are  quite  ready  to  comply  with  your  wishes,  but 
.  .  .  etc.  Here  Mrs.  Littledale  thought  it  might  be 
the  best  opportunity  for  securing"  the  silver  belt 
already  described.  She  offered  the  man  60  roubles 
for  it,  and  we  produced  sixty  new  silver  coins,  hoping 
to  entice  him  into  the  bargain,  but  he  was  not  ac- 
quainted with  Russian  money,  or  at  least  appeared 
not  to  be,  and  sent  to  his  yourt  for  a  pair  of  scales 
in  order  to  weigh  the  metal.  When  he  had  carefully 
weighed  it  he  appeared  to  suggest  that  it  might  not 
be   all   silver,   and    that    there   might   be   lead   inside, 


178  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE    ALTAI 

whereupon  we  said  he  could  cut  one  in  half  to  assure 
himself  of  the  contrary.  Evidently  he  did  not  con- 
sider us  trustworthy  customers.  Finally  he  said  he 
would  not  part  with  his  belt  for  less  than  57  Chinese 
oulans  (114  roubles),  but  as  Mrs.  Littledale  refused 
to  ^ive  such  a  sum  he  brought  it  down  to  100  roubles. 


A     TAME    YAK. 


While  this  was  taking  place  the  others  had  each 
caught  hold  of  something  in  the  tent,  examining 
every  article  with  the  greatest  interest ;  the  camera 
seemed  to  frighten  them,  and  when  Littledale  pointed 
it  towards  them  they  all  made  a  sudden  rush  back- 
wards. After  this  decisive  trial  of  their  standing- 
powers  they  took  leave  of  us  and  departed.  A  few 
minutes    later    a    special     messenger    from    the    Kha 


PRESENTS 


79 


brought  me  a  tin  of  tea  as  a  present  from  His 
Excellency,  saying  that  the  Emperor  of  China  and 
a  few  favoured  mandarins  were  the  only  people  who 
had  ever  tasted  such  a  beverage.  I  immediately 
sent  Nicholas  to  present  the  Governor,  on  my  behalf, 


^^^^^^m 


[TTLEDALE   TRYING   THE   YAK. 


with  a  pair  of  field-glasses  and  a  Waterbury  watch. 
Thus  ended  our  dealings  with  the  karaoitl  officials. 
The  evening  was  lovely,  the  hills  in  the  distance  were 
covered  in  a  dark  blue  mist,  and  the  undulating  steppe 
around  us  reflected  the  bright  red  hue  of  the  setting 
sun.      As  we  were  dining  one  of  the  natives  came  up 


180  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

to  us  with  his  tame  Yak,  offering  his  services  for  our 
journey;  Littledale  politely  declined  them,  though 
not  before  he  had  tried  the  animal,  which  refused  to 
advance  a  step.  Joseph  turned  up  at  6  p.m.  with 
stores,  but  our  expectations  were  not  realised  in 
regard  to  letters — he  had  found  none  at  Kosh-Agatch. 
On  the  following  morning  we  lifted  camp  at  9  a.m. 
towards  the  Bain  -  Khairkhan  range,  whose  lofty 
plateaux  seemed  to  promise  fine  hunting-grounds. 


CHAPTER    V. 

March  to  the  Suok  River — Camp  at  foot  of  Bain-Khairkhan  Range — 
Suok  Valley — Wild  Sheep  seen — An  unsuccessful  Stalk — Antelopes 
seen — Sand-grouse — Wolves — Plover — Grayling  fishing — Snow-cock 
Littledale's  success — More  Stalks — Shift  Camp — Russian  Merchant 
— March  by  Kobdo  River — Hares  —  Marmot — Horses  footsore  — 
Kirghis  Yourts  —  Marmot  Skins  —  Crossing  Tchagan-Kol  River — 
Chinese  Karaoul  —  Valley  of  the  Sumdairik — Muss-Taou  Range  — 
A  new  Guide 

Our  departure  from  the  karaoul  on  the  morning  of 
July  3rd  must  have  produced  somewhat  of  a  sensation 
at  the  Chinese  post,  for  the  Governor  had  refused  his 
permission  till  our  passports  had  been  duly  examined 
at  Kobdo,  deeming  it  impossible  for  us  to  continue 
our  route  without  the  guide  we  had  so  unsuccessfully- 
applied  for.  Our  caravan  passed  solemnly  by  the  side 
of  his  yourt  on  its  way  down  the  Boro-Burgassy 
stream,  but  the  old  gentleman  made  no  apparent 
objection  to  our  advance,  and  his  passive  opposition 
showed  itself  only  by  his  not  bidding  us  farewell. 

Our  intention  that  day  was  to  make  a  short  march 
to  the  Suok  River,  and  pitch  camp  by  its  side.      The 

country  we  crossed  was  barren  and  sunburnt  ;  it  was 
N  2  181 


i82  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

an  undulating  steppe  on  either  side,  and  presented  the 
aspect  of  a  geographical  map  for  the  blind.  The 
higher  grounds  of  the  Tchagan-Burgaza  were  now 
hardly  visible  in  the  distance  behind  us  ;  in  front  rose, 
a  few  miles  ahead,  the  range  of  hills  known  as  the 
Bain-Khairkhan,  which  we  were  so  anxious  to  in- 
vestigate, whilst  to  our  left  ran  a  series  of  low  table- 
lands, which  I  explored  later  on,  and  found  several 
rams.      These  were  the  Beliou  mountains. 

Three  hours  brought  us  to  the  junction  of  the 
Boro-Burgassy  and  Suok  rivers,  where  we  pitched 
camp  at  noon  after  a  short  march  of  twelve  miles. 
The  wind  blew  furiously,  which  greatly  hindered  the 
erection  of  our  tents.  We  now  found  ourselves  nearly 
at  the  foot  of  the  massive  range  we  intended  to 
inspect  on  the  morrow. 

The  valley  of  the  Suok,  bordered  on  the  south- 
west by  the  Bain-Khairkhan  lofty  crest,  was  more  a 
wide,  Mat  steppe  than  a  valley.  The  Suok  water 
was  clear  and  promising  for  Grayling,  the  current 
slow,  owing  to  the  gentle  slope  of  the  ground.  It 
was  here  that,  for  the  first  time,  the  exceeding  dry- 
ness of  the  climate  showed  its  effects.  The  bed-poles 
broke  in  twain,  and  we  had  much  difficulty  in  finding 
timber  to  replace  them.  Luckily  we  discovered  a 
small  clump  of  trees,  the  only  one  within  many  miles, 


HERDS   OF   ANTELOPE  183 

mostly  pine  and  larch,  growing  in  a  ravine  on  the 
opposite  slopes,  and  immediately  despatched  Taba 
with  an  axe  to  bring  back  two  or  three  of  the 
straightest  ones  which  might  serve  our  purpose. 
He  succeeded  in  a  most  intelligent  manner,  and  we 
were  soon  in  possession  of  a  couple  of  poles  which 
were  ultimately  worked  into  shape.  But  these  had 
to  dry,  and  it  was  some  days  before  they  were  fit 
for  use.  Meantime  we  had  to  strap  the  broken 
ones  together  as  tightly  as  possible.  Rain  poured 
down  the  whole  afternoon.  There  was  no  fuel  to 
be  obtained  on  the  spot,  and  our  dinner  that  night 
consisted  of  dried  "Julienne"  and  tinned  tongue.  On 
the  following  morning,  at  3  a.m.,  Littledale  and  I 
started  for  the  hills.  We  crossed  the  river,  which 
we  found  easily  fordable  close  to  camp,  and  on 
reaching  a  small  plateau  half-way  up,  separated  in 
different  directions. 

In  three  hours  we  found  ourselves  on  the  table- 
land, about  1,500  feet  above  camp-level.  Although 
our  tents  appeared  to  stand  at  the  very  foot  of  the 
range,  yet  so  deceiving  was  the  distance  over  the 
steppe,  that  the  hills  seemed  gradually  moving  away 
from  us  as  we  advanced  over  that  endless  plain.  On 
our  way  we  came  across  several  herds  of  antelope, 
probably  A.  gutturosa,  and  here  for  the  first  time  we 


1 84  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE  ALTAI 

also  met  with  antelopes  of  a  much  smaller  species, 
which  my  Kalmuks  called  "Suite."  They  would 
start  at  a  few  hundred  yards  from  us  and  jump  for 
some  time  on  the  same  spot  like  india-rubber  balls 
before  dashing  off  at  a  tremendous  pace.  I  do  not 
know  that  this  curious  little  animal  has  ever  been 
described  before,  and  am  sorry  that,  being  intent  on 
shooting  sheep,  we  did  not  endeavour  to  secure  one 
or  two  specimens.  We  did  not  see  any  of  them 
beyond  the  Suok  steppe,  in  the  valley  of  the  Kobdo, 
nor  on  the  Kosh-Agatch  plain,  where,  however,  on 
our  return  journey,  we  bagged  several  of  the  larger 
antelope.  I  should  estimate  the  height  of  the  smaller 
species  to  be  about  twenty  inches  at  the  withers, 
roughly  speaking,  and  the  coat  was  of  a  dark  brown 
hue,  growing  lighter  under  the  stomach. 

When  we  had  finally  crossed  the  dreary  steppe 
we  began  ascending  one  of  the  numerous  parallel 
ravines  leading  up  to  the  higher  grounds,  and  our 
ponies  found  it  by  no  means  easy  to  toil  up  the 
steep  marshy  slopes.  There  was  no  avoiding  it, 
however,  and  at  6  a.m.  we  landed  on  a  broad  plateau, 
from  which  a  promising  sheep  country  came  into 
view.  Two  or  three  heads  of  wild  sheep  strewed 
the  ground,  and  gave  us  hopes  of  success.  Here 
we   drew   lots,    Littledale   and    I,   and   parted   on  our 


AN    UNKNOWN    COUNTRY  185 

exploring  trip,  fortune  sending  me  to  the  right,  whilst 
my  companion  took  the  opposite  direction.  The 
scenery  in  front  of  us  was  a  wild  and  desolate  one  ; 
long  arid  tablelands  succeeded  each  other  in  the 
distance  ;  occasional  rocky  boulders  springing  out  of 
them  broke  the  monotony  of  the  view,  whilst  deep 
corries  with  precipitous  banks  of  rolling  stones 
divided  the  plateaux  from  one  another.  Small 
streams  trickled  at  the  bottom  of  the  ravines,  with 
patches  of  grass  on  -either  side,  and  wide  stretches 
of  snow  melted  fast  under  the  rays  of  the  rising 
sun,  the  whole  conveying  the  impression  of  a  drawing 
in  black  and  white.  Not  a  creature  was  in  sight 
save  a  few  Plovers,  which  fluttered  round  us,  en- 
deavouring to  draw  our  attention  from  their  nests, 
and  a  herd  of  Yaks,  which  had  been  abandoned  on 
the  high  grounds  for  summer  grazing  by  some  stray 
Kirghiz  tribe.  As  we  advanced  on  horseback  they 
suddenly  took  fright,  and  started  off  in  a  frantic 
gallop  with  the  noise  of  a  charge  of  cavalry.  Neither 
Taba  nor  my  other  Kalmuk  knew  anything  of  the 
country,  and  the  word  "  Bclbess"  ("  I  do  not  know") 
was  the  constant  answer  to  my  questions.  We  rode 
on  in  this  manner  for  some  time,  crossing  several 
lateral  corries,  spying  on  our  way,  and  finally  dis- 
mounted at  the  edge  of  a  steep  descent  in  order  to 


1 86  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

inspect  more  carefully  the  ground  before  us.  But 
no  game  was  visible,  and  I  was  about  giving  it  up 
when  a  few  grey  specks  came  into  the  field  of  my 
telescope,  half  an  inch  above  an  intervening  ridge. 
Sure  enough  these  were  wild  sheep  at  last !  Strain- 
ing my  sight  to  the  utmost  I  managed  to  make  out 
the  large  spread  of  their  horns,  and  counted  ten  rams 
lounging  in  the  open,  some  two  miles  in  front  of  our 
position.  Taba's  face  gleamed  with  joy  as  he  re- 
turned my  glass,  and  I  could  see  him  anxiously 
examining  the  nullah  below  us,  and  mentally  making- 
plans  for  the  forthcoming  stalk.  In  a  moment  we 
got  out  of  sight,  descending  over  the  rolling  stones, 
and  dragging  our  ponies  after  us.  There  was  a 
noisy  dislodging  of  boulders,  and  the  ponies  refused 
several  times  to  advance,  but  the  sheep  were  a  long 
way  off,  and  there  were  no  other  means  of  proceed- 
ing. This  dangerous  scramble  succeeded  after  much 
trouble,  and  we  found  ourselves  safe  in  the  depths 
of  the  nullah.  Here  we  mounted  again,  following 
down  the  stream  the  best  part  of  a  mile  so  as  to 
get  well  round  the  place  where  we  had  located  the 
herd,  under  shelter  of  the  opposite  slopes.  The 
question  now  arose  whether  we  could  cross  the  next 
ridge  unnoticed,  and  whether  the  further  banks  of 
the   second   ravine  would   conceal   us   from    the  com- 


A    DILEMMA  187 

mandirig  view  from  the  plateau  on  which  the  sheep 
were  lying.  If  so,  the  stalk  was  possible,  for  I  had 
detected  a  hollow  which  led  up  to  within  a  hundred 
yards  of  them.  So  we  toiled  on,  but  found,  on 
peeping  over  the  summit,  that  further  advance  would 
mean  certain  failure,  for  the  whole  herd  was  in  full 
sight  some  800  yards  across  the  corrie.  The  rams 
carried  splendid  heads,  and  two  of  them  especially 
were  grand  old  patriarchs.  In  this  dilemma  we 
decided  to  retrace  our  steps,  and  try  the  same  ridge 
further  down  the  valley.  Taba  led  the  way  back 
in  good  order,  and  another  half  a  mile  lower  down 
we  crossed  the  ridge,  as  we  had  expected,  under 
cover.  We  now  entered  a  wide  grassy  nullah,  which 
I  first  carefully  inspected,  and,  on  seeing  no  sign  of 
the  sheep,  we  made  straight  for  the  opposite  side, 
where  a  long  ravine  ran  up  to  the  very  edge  of  the 
plateau  on  which  they  were  lying.  But  "  there  is 
many  a  slip  'twixt  the  cup  and  the  lip."  I  had 
decided  to  leave  the  ponies  at  the  bottom  of  the 
valley  with  my  "  second  horseman "  and  go  on  with 
Taba.  As  we  were  half-way  down  the  slope  the 
horses  showed  signs  of  nervousness,  the  cause  of 
which  was  soon  explained,  for  on  looking  round  I 
saw  a  Wolf  within  40  yards  of  us,  crouching  low  on 
a  patch  of  snow,  evidently  on  the  warpath.      As  we 


1 88  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

approached,  he  quietly  gazed  at  us  and  walked  slowly 
off,  apparently  disappointed  at  our  interference,  and 
looking  reproachfully  back  at  us  now  and  then.  This 
was  ill  omen  indeed,  and  hardly  had  we  advanced 
when  up  sprang,  from  behind  a  mass  of  rock,  a 
couple  of  ewes,  and  trotted  off  in  the  direction  we 
had  chosen  for  approaching  the  rams,  disappearing 
at  the  very  point  from  which  I  had  intended  to  take 
my  shot !  No  words  can  convey  an  idea  of  my 
feelings  at  that  moment.  As  for  Taba,  he  gave 
vent  to  his  rage  in  his  usual  broken  English  vocabu- 
lary, which  by  no  means  helped  matters.  A  faint 
hope,  however,  inspired  us  that  the  sheep  might  not 
have  been  completely  scared  away,  and  that  we 
might  perhaps  still  find  them  in  the  neighbourhood. 
I  left  the  horses  by  the  stream  and,  together  with 
Taba,  followed  up  the  gully  in  low  spirits.  The 
wind  was  blowing  in  our  faces  as  steadily  as  could 
be,  and  had  it  not  been  for  those  ewes  I  certainly 
should  have  given  my  rifle  a  chance.  When  we 
reached  the  top,  however,  we  found  that  our  pre- 
cautions were  useless,  for  the  sheep  had  vanished, 
and  we  soon  stood  on  the  place  where  they  had 
been  lying,  evidence  of  this  being  afforded  by  the 
numerous  fresh  droppings  on  the  ground.  We  were 
now   on  a  lofty  plateau   at  the   back   of    the  highest 


OUR    BILL   OF   FARE  189 

summit  of  the  Bain-Khairkhan  range.  Snow  had 
by  this  time  almost  entirely  melted,  thus  destroying 
our  only  chance  of  discovering-  the  direction  which 
the  herd  had  taken.  We  carefully  examined  the 
ground  for  a  mile  round  the  plateau,  excepting  in 
the  direction  from  camp,  as  it  was  getting  late,  and 
ten  miles  separated  us  from  the  Suok  River.  But 
though  we  used  our  glasses  with  the  utmost  care, 
inspecting  every  corner  in  the  depths  of  each  nullah, 
there  was  no  game  to  be  seen  ;  the  sheep  had 
vanished  like  ghosts.  We  accordingly  decided  to 
retrace  our  steps,  and,  mounting  our  steeds,  reached 
the  tents  just  before  darkness  had  set  in.  I  found 
Littledale  busily  engaged  in  fitting  the  new  bed- 
poles.  He  had  come  across  a  few  ewes,  but  had 
returned  empty-handed.  He  was  convinced  that  the 
ground  allotted  to  him  was  not  worth  visiting,  and 
proposed  that  before  shifting  to  new  quarters  he 
should  have  a  try  the  following  day  at  the  herd 
I  had  so  unexpectedly  come  across.  Moreover, 
Mrs.  Littledale  was  suffering  from  a  bad  headache, 
and  we  accordingly  decided  upon  another  day's  rest 
before  starting  for  the  Muss-Taou  range.  My  wife 
had  been  fishing  in  the  stream  and  had  causrht  a  few 
Grayling,  thus  giving  us  a  change  in  our  customary 
bill  of  fare,    which    invariably   consisted   of  pea-soup 


i9o  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

or  Maggi's  consomme4,  mutton,  and  tinned  fruit. 
Littledale  was  off  early  next  morning,  whilst  I  re- 
mained in  camp  with  the  ladies.  The  heat  was 
simply  overpowering-,  my  thermometer  showing  1 20 
degrees  in  the  shade.  I  stopped  the  whole  day  in 
our  tent,  sheltering  from  the  scorching-  rays  of  the 
sun.  The  extraordinary  variation  of  temperature  in 
these  regions  is  worth  noting.  Within  five  or  six 
hours  it  fell  from  130  degrees  above  to  3  degrees 
belozo  zero ;  as  soon  as  the  sun  sets  the  altitude 
begins  to  tell,  and  it  may  freeze  at  any  moment. 

Towards  evening  we  anxiously  expected  Littledale's 
return,  but  at  9  p.m.  there  was  no  sign  of  him,  nor  of 
Taba  who  had  accompanied  him,  and  when  we  awoke 
next  morning  at  six  there  was  still  no  Littledale. 
Ultimately,  however,  at  7  a.m.  three  horsemen 
appeared  in  the  distance,  and  great  was  our  relief 
when  we  recognised  our  companion  riding  in  front 
with  a  decidedly  triumphant  air,  for  there  sure  enough 
we  made  out  a  magnificent  ram's  head  tied  at  the 
back  of  Taba's  saddle.  Littledale  forthwith  gave  us 
an  account  of  his  twenty-eight  hours'  outing  in  the 
hills.  He  had  found  my  herd  a  couple  of  miles 
beyond  the  ill-fated  plateau  in  a  small  nullah  in  the 
only  direction  I  had  failed  to  examine,  and  had 
succeeded  in  approaching  them  late  in  the  afternoon, 


A   SPLENDID    HEAD  191 

not  before  he  had  realised  the  actual  size  of  the  two 
largest  rams.  One  of  these  had  then  fallen  to  his 
rifle,  and  the  horns  measured,  as  taped  on  the  spot, 
19?,  inches  in  girth  at  the  base,  60  inches  length  along 
the  curve,  and  40  inches  from  tip  to  tip.  The  other 
he  thought  was  a  still  more  massive  head,  though 
perhaps  shorter  in  length,  and  he  strongly  advised  me 
to  start  off  directly  and  make  an  attempt  to  secure 
it,  as  the  animals,  he  said,  had  not  been  greatly 
frightened  by  his  single  shot.  The  reason  he  had 
stayed  out  all  night  was  that  darkness  had  set  in 
while  he  was  in  a  steep  gorge,  and  he  found  himself 
shut  up  in  a  cul-de-sac  amongst  inaccessible  rocks, 
where  further  advance  was  out  of  question  both  for 
men  and  ponies.  He  had  accordingly  squatted  down 
with  his  hunters  under  a  protruding  ledge  and  waited 
for  dawn.  A  small  bit  of  chocolate  divided  in  three 
had  constituted  their  evening  meal  ;  but  their  spirits 
were  kept  up  by  the  day's  success.  On  hearing  of 
the  possibility  of  coming  across  the  other  large  ram 
I  decided  to  take  my  chance  without  delay,  and 
started  at  J.30  with  Taba,  who  was  most  anxious 
on  my  behalf,  and  who,  though  he  had  spent  the 
whole  night  in  the  open,  insisted  upon  accompanying 
me.  But  this  hurried  departure  was  doomed  to  be 
a  failure.      We  covered  that  day  miles  and  miles  of 


i92  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

country,  and  rode  far  beyond  the  plateau  where  I  had 
first  spied  the  sheep,  until  we  reached  a  wide,  grassy 
valley,  where  we  found  several  herds  of  ewes  grazing 
at  leisure,  but  no  rams.  We  passed  the  very  spot 
where  Littledale  had  killed  the  day  before,  hardly 
a  mile  from  where  I  had  seen  the  animals  lying,  and 
I  was  highly  disgusted  at  my  bad  luck.  We  returned 
to  camp  at  7  p.m.,  after  twelve  hours'  continuous 
riding,  without  having  caught  sight  of  anything  worth 
a  shot. 

Thus  ended  our  sport  over  the  Bain-Khairkhan 
hills.  The  result  was  small,  but  satisfactory,  the 
trophy  obtained  being  that  of  the  largest  Ovis  aniiuou 
yet  on  record,  and  the  second  best  during  the  whole 
trip.  Next  morning,  July  7th,  camp  was  lifted,  and 
a  general  start  was  made  down  the  Suok  valley 
with  the  object  of  pitching  tents  if  possible  at  the 
junction  of  that  stream  with  the  Kobdo  River.  Our 
Chinese  interpreter,  Daniel,  who  was  acting  as  guide, 
had  come  up  to  me  the  night  before  saying  that 
he  thought  I  might  find  sheep  in  the  lower  mountains 
above  the  left  slopes  bordering  the  Suok  steppe,  and 
volunteering  to  take  me  to  a  fine  nullah  in  the  Beliou 
range,  thence  bringing  me  on  to  our  next  camping 
place.  He  added  that  we  could  just  manage  to  do 
it    in    a    day,    and    I    naturally   assented    to    the    pro- 


HERDS    OF   ANTELOPE  193 

position.  Littledale  made  no  objection,  and  said  he 
would  manage  the  march,  so  accordingly  I  started 
at  3  a.m.  with  Daniel,  who  was  dressed  in  a  con- 
spicuous red  coat,  and  Littledale's  hunter,  Lepet, 
poor  Taba  being  done  up  with  the  hard  work  of 
the  previous  day.  On  our  way  across  the  steppe 
we  met  with  several  herds  of  Antelope,  both  of  the 
larger  and  smaller  kind.  They  would  let  us  approach 
to  within  400  yards  and  then  start  off  at  a  great  pace, 
coursing  round  us,  and  stopping  at  times  to  watch  our 
proceedings.  A  couple  of  hours  brought  us  to  the 
foot  of  the  hills,  when  we  be^an  ascending  a  narrow 
gully,  which  gradually  widened  as  we  advanced,  and 
eventually  turned  into  a  broad  stretch  of  stony  table- 
land. It  was  a  bright,  sunny  day,  too  bright  in  fact 
for  easy  stalking,  and  the  heat  was  already  making 
itself  felt  at  7  a.m.  as  we  came  into  likely  ground  and 
dismounted.  Numbers  of  Hares,  startled  by  our 
presence,  ran  in  front  of  us,  and  the  shrill  whistle 
of  the  Marmot  alone  broke  the  silence  of  the  morning. 
We  were  now  at  an  altitude  of  about  9,000  feet  above 
sea-level  ;  the  hills  presented  an  aspect  of  rolling 
boulders,  covered  with  shingle  and  occasional  patches 
of  grass.  To  our  left  rose  a  huge  mass  of  rocky 
pinnacles  with  perpendicular  cliffs  some  hundred  feet 
high,  at  the  foot  of  which  lay  traces  of  snow.      Before 


194  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

lis  we  discovered  a  broad  valley  affording  good 
pasture  grounds,  and  at  the  bottom  of  it  flowed  the 
Beliou  stream  due  eastwards.  I  now  advanced 
towards  it  with  Lepet,  both  of  us  spying  carefully 
as  we  moved  on,  and  leaving  our  friend  Daniel,  with 
his  bright  red  stalking  jacket,  in  charge  of  the  ponies. 
He  seemed  highly  disappointed  to  be  left  behind,  but 
I  explained  to  him  that  his  conspicuous  array  would 
considerably  handicap  us,  and  might  compromise  the 
success  of  our  stalk  in  case  we  came  across  game. 
But  he  was  not  to  be  thus  despised,  and  would  keep 
following  us  at  a  distance  on  the  plea  that  he  was 
responsible  for  our  safety.  On  reaching  the  edge  of 
the  plateau  the  whole  valley  came  into  view,  and 
Lepet  immediately  pointed  out  to  me  a  lot  of  seven 
rams,  lying  in  a  corrie  about  800  yards  below  us. 
Seeing  us  suddenly  squat  down,  Daniel,  totally  unable 
to  restrain  his  impatience,  crawled  up  to  us  in  order  to 
have  a  peep  for  himself,  and  I  had  to  keep  him  low- 
by  sheer  force,  for  he  moved  his  head  up  and  down  in 
a  most  careless  fashion,  which  threatened  to  attract 
the  sheep's  attention.  I  saw  that  two  of  the  rams 
carried  good  heads,  and  were  worth  trying  for,  but 
the  open  ground  on  which  they  lay  prevented  further 
advance.  Just  as  I  was  considering  our  next  move 
the  animals  got  up  and  started  off  at  a  gallop.      I  was 


A    DIFFICULT    PATH  195 

convinced  that  they  had  seen  Daniel,  and  was  about 
to  give  vent  to  my  feelings,  when  Lepet  assured 
me  that  they  were  only  shifting  to  cooler  quarters  for 
shelter  from  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun,  under  the 
rocks  I  had  previously  noticed.  I  was  disposed  to 
believe  him,  for  though  they  ran  fast  they  did  not 
behave  like  frightened  animals,  which  generally  after 
a  sharp  gallop  suddenly  halt  to  take  breath  and  look 
round  in  the  direction  of  the  intruder,  and  then  gallop 
off  again  at  full  speed.  They  never  turned  once, 
and  it  became  evident  that  they  were  making  for  the 
rocks.  But  we  should  now  have  to  find  their  hiding- 
place.  When  they  had  disappeared  over  a  ridge 
we  decided  to  mount  our  ponies  and  proceed  down 
the  corrie  and  up  to  the  place  where  we  had  lost  sight 
of  them,  leaving  the  horses  again  below  the  ridge. 
The  ravine  we  had  to  negotiate  was  a  difficult  one 
owing  to  the  rolling  stones,  and  at  places  soft  marshy 
ground,  which  we  had  to  cross  at  its  bottom.  Seeing 
that  this  was  too  much  for  the  ponies,  I  dismounted 
and  went  on  with  Lepet.  The  "  red  man  "  was  again 
left  behind,  and  happily  this  time  did  not  object.  At 
this  stage  I  found  that  the  wind  was  blowing  steadily 
at  our  backs,  so  I  suggested  a  long  detour  which  took 
us  an  hour  to  make,  and  when  we  reached  the  top 
of  the  next   corrie  we  were   on   the  far  side   of   the 


1 96  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

rocky  buttresses,  among"  stretches  of  melting  snow. 
A  large  bird,  reminding  one  of  a  Snowcock  ( Tetrao- 
gallus),  fluttered  away  in  front  of  us,  followed  by 
seven  or  eight  young  ones.  I  asked  Lepet  what  it 
was  called  ;  he  answered  "  Ullar"  in  a  whisper,  for  no 
hunter  took  greater  precautions  on  the  war-path  than 
Lepet.  On  advancing  a  little  further  I  soon  found 
the  sheep,  lying  about  500  yards  away  to  our  left,  and 
began  crawling  towards  them  on  all-fours.  But  there 
was  no  approaching  them,  for  the  boulders  presently 
grew  scarcer,  and  an  open  slanting  slope  extended 
in  front  of  us.  So  I  waited  amongst  the  larger  rocks, 
trusting  to  fortune.  One  of  the  rams,  the  only  one 
I  could  now  see,  got  up,  and  slowly  stretching  his 
limbs  walked  in  our  direction,  and  disappeared  in 
a  dip  of  the  ground.  Again  I  waited,  expecting 
every  moment  the  sight  of  a  pair  of  horns  emerging 
within  shot  ;  but  nothing  came,  and,  growing  im- 
patient, I  crept  on,  after  taking  Lepet's  advice.  On 
reaching  in  this  manner  the  edge  of  the  hollow,  I 
found  no  sign  of  game  ;  the  herd  had  moved  away  ! 
Here  Lepet  caught  me  by  the  arm  and  pointed  to 
our  right.  Sure  enough  there  were  three  sheep, 
some  400  yards  below  us,  playing  and  fighting,  and 
evidently  making  for  a  perpendicular  rocky  wall 
which    separated    us   from   them.      Two   were   young 


A    RUNNING   SHOT  197 

males,  the  third  a  fine  old  ram.  Whether  these 
were  a  fresh  lot,  or  part  of  the  herd  we  had  dis- 
covered in  the  morning,  I  could  not  tell.  As  soon 
as  they  were  hidden  from  view  we  rushed,  Lepet 
and  I,  towards  the  cliffs.  My  companion  was  con- 
fident we  should  find  them,  though  I  rather  doubted 
it,  as  they  did  not  seem  to  me  inclined  to  settle  down. 
As  we  reached  the  edge  of  the  precipice  we  began 
peering  carefully  over  into  the  depths  below,  and 
Lepet  suddenly  stopped  like  a  statue,  beckoning  to 
me  to  move  forward  ;  but  I  had  hardly  time  to  come 
up  when  out  of  the  crags  dashed  the  three  rams  in 
wild  confusion  some  hundred  yards  beneath  me.  A 
running  shot  was  my  only  chance.  By  the  time  I 
took  my  aim  and  fired  at  the  biggest  sheep  he  was 
fully  1 50  yards  off,  and  great  was  my  amazement 
when  I  saw  him  stagger  for  a  second  and,  consider- 
ably slackening  his  pace,  walk  slowly  away,  whilst 
the  two  younger  rams  halted  and  kept  looking  back, 
apparently  waiting  for  their  superior.  But  the  poor 
old  fellow  was  very  weak,  and  soon  lay  down  in  a 
hollow.  "Jakski,  baaloii"  ("Bravo,  wounded"),  said 
Lepet  with  a  triumphant  smile,  as  he  sat  down  to 
watch  the  animal  through  his  glass.  The  others  had 
now  abandoned  their  comrade  to  his  fate.  I  could 
plainly  distinguish    from    where    I    was   his   shoulders 


i9S  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

and  head,  which  he  swayed  from  one  side  to  another, 
feeling  evidently  restless  and  uncomfortable.  Leaving 
Lepet  in  his  commanding  position,  I  scrambled  down 
the  steep  cliff  and  advanced  along  the  plateau,  keep- 
ing out  of  sight  of  the  beast.  It  took  me  half  an 
hour  to  creep  within  range  of  him.  As  I  looked 
back  I  could  see  Lepet  on  the  sky-line  intent  upon 
my  proceedings,  and  thereby  gathered  that  every- 
thing was  right,  when  suddenly  the  sheep  got  up 
and  gave  me  an  easy  broadside  shot.  A  second  after 
he  fell  motionless  to  the  ground.  I  found  him  to  be 
an  old  veteran  of  his  kind.  His  horns  taped  fairly 
well  (51  inches  length  by  \$>\  inches  girth),  though 
both  tips  were  unfortunately  broken  off.  To  my 
astonishment  Daniel  made  his  appearance  with  the 
ponies  before  Lepet  had  time  to  come  up.  The 
rascal  had  been  unable  to  subdue  his  sporting  pro- 
clivities, and  had  been  stalking  on  his  own  account, 
thus  running  the  risk  of  spoiling  all.  He  con- 
gratulated me  so  warmly  that  I  refrained  from  invino- 
vent  to  my  discontent,  and  we  shook  hands  in  a  most 
friendly  manner.  When  my  hunter  arrived  we  joined 
our  efforts  to  grallock  the  dead  ram,  and  cut  him  up 
in  quarters.  Daniel  with  his  red  gown,  tucked-up 
sleeves,  showing  his  blood-smeared  arms,  presented 
the    dismal    look    of    an    executioner    in    the    Middle 


A   TEDIOUS    MARCH  199 

Ages  ;  the  fatal  axe  would  have  completed  the  picture. 
Having-  packed  the  meat  and  head  of  the  kotchkor 
on  our  saddles,  we  started  at  2  p.m.  towards  our  next 
presumed  camping  ground.  The  heat  was  almost 
unendurable  as  our  ponies  struggled  over  the  stony 
tableland  and  across  numerous  rocky  ravines.  On  our 
way  we  came  across  the  two  young  rams,  still  search- 
ing for  their  lost  companion,  but  no  others  were  to 
be  seen.  At  6  p.m.  we  finally  caught  sight  of  our 
tents,  low  down  in  the  valley,  pitched  near  a  broad, 
marshy  stretch,  about  three  miles  from  the  junction 
of  the  Suok  and  Kobdo  rivers.  We  were  obliged 
to  make  a  dtHour  in  order  to  avoid  getting  stuck  in 
the  bog,  and  reached  camp  as  darkness  was  setting 
in.  The  ladies  and  Littledale  greeted  my  return, 
and  admired  my  well-earned  trophy.  The  march 
along  the  steppe,  they  told  me,  had  been  so  trying 
for  the  horses,  owing  to  the  extreme  heat,  that  they 
had  been  obliged  to  stop  before  their  intended 
destination,  which  was  the  Kobdo  River.  We  sat 
down  to  dinner  in  the  best  of  spirits,  little  knowing 
the  difficulties  that  lay  before  us.  This  was  to  be 
our  last  successful  day  for  a  considerable  length  of 
time.  A  series  of  long  tedious  marches  up  the 
valley  of  the  Kobdo,  through  a  gameless  country, 
now  awaited  us,  till  after  many  a  struggle  we  decided 


200  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

to  abandon  our  journey  towards  the  Muss-Taou 
range,  and,  turning  off  northwards,  found  "fresh  fields 
and  pastures  new." 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  of  July  we  struck 
camp,  in  spite  of  our  Kalmuk's  unwillingness  to 
go  further,  and  mounted  our  steeds  at  7  a.m.  We 
waited  till  the  ponies  were  duly  loaded,  and,  sending 
them  off  in  front,  followed  them  up  at  close  quarters. 
We  soon  found  ourselves  on  the  banks  of  the  Kobdo 
River,  which  at  that  spot  attains  a  width  of  300  feet, 
and  is  very  rapid.  Its  water  was  deep  and  muddy, 
as  we  discovered  later,  owing  to  its  chief  tributary, 
the  Tchagan-Kol,  which  we  reached  on  the  following- 
day,  and  which  flows  through  sandy  and  clayey  soil. 
Above  the  tributary  the  water  of  the  Kobdo  was 
perfectly  clear,  and  afforded  capital  fishing.  As  we 
entered  the  valley  and  began  ascending  its  left  slope 
we  were  agreeably  surprised  at  the  sight  of  small 
woods  bordering  the  river,  consisting  chiefly  of  larch, 
willow,  ash,  and  abundance  of  juniper  in  full  bloom. 
This  considerably  altered  the  aspect  of  the  country, 
which  had  hitherto  been  dreary  and  desolate.  What 
with  the  heat  of  the  day  and  hard  ground,  our 
caravan  advanced  very  slowly.  The  unshod  ponies 
had  gradually  worn  away  their  hoofs,  and  were  now 
most   of    them    footsore.       Moreover,    our   men    were 


A    HARD    PULL  201 

beginning  to  grumble,  and  it  was  all  our  demitcha 
could  do  to  keep  them  in  order.  We  were  anxious 
to  reach  the  snowy  range  at  the  head  of  the  valley 
as  quickly  as  possible,  but  this  half-hearted  advance 
was  by  no  means  encouraging,  and,  though  we  had 
arranged  with  the  Zaissan  at  Kosh-Agatch  to  supply 
us  with  a  fresh  lot  of  ponies  every  month,  we  hardly 
expected  that  they  would  find  us  in  the  wilds  we  were 
now  exploring.  According  to  my  forty-verst  map,  it 
would  take  us  at  least  two  days  to  reach  the  Tchagan- 
Kol,  or  Ak-Kol,  River  (both  "Tchagan"  and  "  Ak  " 
meaning  white  in  Mongol),  but,  to  our  great  astonish- 
ment, we  found  ourselves  on  its  banks  that  very 
evening  after  crossing  a  long  steep  pass,  and  having 
covered  a  distance  of  about  twrenty  miles  from  the 
Suok  River.  Evidently  the  map,  our  main  guide, 
was  as  unreliable  as  our  friend  Daniel,  who  now 
confessed  that  his  knowledge  of  the  country  was 
confined  to  the  caravan  route  to  Kobdo  town. 
There  was  practically  no  path,  and  the  ascent  up 
to  the  pass  in  the  afternoon  was  a  hard  pull  for 
our  pack-horses,  several  of  which  straggled  behind, 
and  had  to  be  repeatedly  reloaded.  On  reaching 
the  top  a  broad  swamp,  produced  by  the  junction 
of  the  Tchagan- Kol  and  Kobdo  rivers,  came  into 
view.      The  former  flowed  through  a  wide  and  arid 


202  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

alkali  steppe,  whilst  the  latter  was  concealed  by 
numerous  clumps  of  trees  and  bushes  growing  along 
its  banks  on  either  side.  In  the  middle  of  the  plain 
stood  a  couple  of  Kirghiz  yourts,  in  which  lived 
a  tradesman  who  was  on  his  annual  summer  tour, 
gathering  marmot  skins  from  the  natives.  We  de- 
cided to  pitch  camp  by  the  side  of  these  yourts, 
and  cross  the  Tchagan-Kol  on  the  morrow.  Some 
of  our  packs  came  in  very  late,  and  it  was  close 
upon  7  p.m.  when  we  finally  settled  down.  Next 
morning  as  I  came  out  of  my  tent  at  5  a.m.,  after 
a  restless  night,  our  dcmitcha  let  me  understand 
through  Nicholas,  the  Russian  interpreter,  that  the 
men  flatly  declined  to  go  any  further.  He  said  that 
their  ponies  had  been  mercilessly  overworked,  that 
their  backs  were  sore,  that  the  few  sheep,  the  only 
remnants  of  former  prosperity,  had  been  devoured 
by  wolves  during  the  night,  and  that  the  river  was 
altogether  unfordable.  This  was  indeed  a  piece  of 
rebellion.  Littledale  and  I  would  hear  nothing  of 
it.  We  promised  them  a  short  march  that  day,  and 
said  that  all  those  difficulties  would  be  easily  over- 
come by  us,  who  were  "mighty  white  chiefs,"  and 
that  no  power  could  stop  us.  The  dcmitcha  then 
confided  to  us  that  the  instigator  of  the  whole  move- 
ment was  one  of  the  Kalmuks  who  had  deserted  from 


REBELLIOUS    KALMUKS 


■°3 


China  into  Russian  territory,  and  that  if  he  was  caught 
by  the  Celestial  authorities  he  would  be  sentenced  to 
death.  Whereupon  I  had  him  called  up,  and  told 
him  that  so  long  as  he  remained  with  us  and  served 
us  faithfully  we  should  protect  him  against  the  Chinese 


•ACK-I'ONIES. 


Emperor  himself.  As  for  the  horses,  I  said,  they 
would  soon  recover  while  resting  in  a  permanent 
camp,  and  food  would  be  supplied  to  the  men  some- 
how or  other.  This  seemed  to  have  a  cheering  effect 
on  them,  especially  as  we  expected  to  find  a  Kirghiz 
encampment  a  few  miles  higher  up,  where  we  could 
buy   some   sheep.       We   struck   camp   accordingly   at 


204  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

7  a.m.,  and  soon  found  ourselves  on  the  low  banks 
of  the  Tchagan-Kol  River.  It  was  about  150  feet 
broad  at  that  place  ;  the  water  was  high  and  muddy, 
and  the  current  strong.  I  suggested  trying  to  find  a 
ford,  but  the  Marmot -skin  dealer,  whom  we  con- 
sulted, assured  us  that  it  was  impossible  to  cross  the 
river  at  that  time  of  year,  and  that,  unless  we  went 
up  to  its  very  sources,  we  should  find  no  available 
ford.  In  this  dilemma  we  risked  not  only  losing 
our  prestige,  which  we  were  continually  obliged  to 
maintain  in  order  to  influence  our  men,  but  also 
having  to  turn  back  and  abandon  the  Muss-Taou 
hunting-grounds.  Having  no  portable  boat  with  us, 
the  only  plan  was  to  build  ourselves  a  raft  of  some 
kind.  Littledale  had  had  some  experience  of  this 
kind  during  his-  journey  through  Tibet,  and  decided 
that  we  should  make  use  of  our  waterproof  sheets 
and  bed-poles  for  the  purpose.  To  our  Kalmuk's 
amazement  we  accordingly  set  to  work.  Little  Taba 
was  the  first  to  understand  what  we  were  about,  and, 
together  with  Cristo,  Gabriel,  and  Nicholas,  greatly 
contributed  to  ensure  success.  The  other  men 
watched  passively,  now  and  then  shrugging  their 
shoulders,  which  was  equivalent  to  saying,  "  You 
will  never  get  over  that  job."  In  a  couple  of  hours 
the  frame  was   practically  ready  ;    it  consisted  of  our 


MAKING   A    RAFT  205 

bed-poles  lashed  together  in  the  form  of  a  square, 
and  tightly  bound  at  the  corners.  A  large  water- 
proof sheet,  which  we  used  as  the  floor  of  our  tent, 
was  then  attached  to  this  square  frame  as  firmly  as 
possible ;    the    bottom    was    strengthened   by   several 


PREPARING    TO    CROSS    THE    TCHACAN-KOI 


other  waterproofed  canvas  sheets,  and  a  long  bit 
of  rope  was  attached  to  each  of  the  opposite  corners 
of  this  improvised  ferry,  one  end  of  which  was  taken 
over  to  the  farther  side  by  two  Kalmuks,  whilst  the 
other  end  remained  on  the  left  bank,  and  served  to 
haul  the  boat  back  after  each  voyage.  This  in- 
genious   contrivance    was    completed    by    noon,    and 


206 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


the  question  then  arose  how  this  extemporary  vessel 
would  stand  the  force  of  the  current.  Littledale, 
who  had  been  chief  engineer,  got  in  first,  after  final 
instructions  to  the  men  on  the  other  side  whose 
business   it   was  to  pull   the   raft  across  ;    but  just  as 


MRS.    LITTLEDALE   AND   THE    AUTHOR    CROSSING    THE   TCHAGAN-KOL. 

he  was  reaching  mid-stream  (they  either  pulled  too 
hard  or  the  boat  was  badly  balanced)  water  flowed 
in  over  the  sides,  and  our  companion  had  to  be 
hauled  back,  submerged  almost  up  to  the  waist. 
The  next  voyage,  however,  proved  more  successful, 
for    the    weight    of    the    luggage    steadied    the    vessel, 


CROSSING   THE   TCHAGAN-KOL 


s°7 


which  alighted  safely  some  fifty  yards  lower  on 
the  opposite  bank.  The  whole  of  the  caravan  and 
impedimenta  crossed  the  Tchagan-Kol  in  this  manner, 
and  the  horses  swam  over  without  incident.  But 
this   occupied   the    whole   day,    and   it   was    not    until 


A    SMOOTH    PASSACK. 


6  p.m.  that  we  found  ourselves  safely  on  the  other 
side.  We  pitched  camp  close  to  the  river,  and 
forthwith  hung  all  our  sheets  and  bedding-  out  to 
dry.  The  Kalmuks  looked  at  us  now  with  the 
greatest  possible  respect,  and  grumbling  ceased  for 
a  time. 


2o8  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

On  the  following  morning,  July  1 6th,  wo  started 
at  7  a.m.  up  the  Kobdo  River  again,  leaving  the 
Tchagan-Kol  behind  us.  The  water  in  the  Kobdo 
was  now  perfectly  clear,  and  looked  promising  for 
Grayling.  Along  the  river  banks  the  vegetation  was 
rich  and  beautiful.  We  passed  through  sunny  glades, 
amongst  shady  groves  of  pine  and  willow.  The 
grass  was  tall  and  wonderfully  green,  whilst  flowers 
of  every  description  and  colour  completed  the  smiling 
picture.  It  was  a  pleasant  change  to  us,  as  we 
followed  gaily  the  windings  of  the  stream,  and  en- 
joyed the  verdure  of  this  oasis.  The  hills  on  either 
side  were  mostly  barren,  with  occasional  small  larch 
woods,  their  altitude  not  exceeding  8,000  feet.  At 
1  p.m.  we  reached  a  small  meadow  on  the  very  banks 
of  the  river,  and  decided  to  halt  there  for  the  night, 
after  having  covered  a  distance  of  about  twenty  miles. 
Our  pack  -  ponies  had  picked  up  a  little  during  this 
comparatively  easy  march  over  soft  grass,  and  it  was 
a  welcome  sight  to  watch  them  come  in  one  after  the 
other,  neighing  joyfully  as  they  were  being  unloaded, 
and  rolling  on  the  ground  in  wild  contentment.  In 
the  afternoon  we  went  out  fishing,  my  wife,  Littledale, 
and  myself.  This  was  not  merely  for  amusement, 
but  to  supply  food  for  our  men,  who  possessed  no 
more  sheep,  and  were  in  a  constant  state  of  ferment. 


A    DIFFICULTY  209 

Fortunately,  though  the  wind  was  strong,  Grayling 
were  numerous,  and  appeared  to  be  as  hungry  as  our 
Kalmuks,  for  in  a  couple  of  hours  we  returned  to 
camp  with  sixty  fish,  averaging  three-quarters  of  a 
pound,  which  we  distributed  amongst  the  men. 
These  fish  rose  to  any  kind  of  fly,  and  afforded 
capital  sport.  As  for  animal  life,  the  surrounding 
country  seemed  entirely  void  of  game  of  any  sort. 

Next  morning  we  were  off  again  at  6  a.m.  The 
Littledales  started  before  us,  but  we  soon  caught  them 
up  at  a  sharp  turn  of  the  river,  where  perpendicular 
rocks  barred  further  advance.  The  valley  had  been 
gradually  growing  narrower  till  it  formed  a  gorge 
with  sheer  cliffs  on  both  sides.  There  was  no  visible 
path,  and  the  rocks  prevented  an  inland  detour.  After 
careful  inspection,  we  decided  that  the  only  means  of 
surmounting  the  difficulty  was  to  tie  each  pony  sepa- 
rately to  a  long  rope  and  swim  them  round  the  projecting 
rock  one  after  the  other,  whilst  Littledale  and  I  clung 
to  the  rock  with  one  hand  and  held  tight  to  the  rope 
with  the  other,  thus  seeing  the  horses  round  to  a  safe 
landing-place.  There  was  hardly  any  foothold,  and  we 
several  times  just  missed  an  involuntary  bath.  Some 
of  the  horses,  on  being  pushed  into  the  stream  by  our 
men,  refused  energetically  to  advance,  and  struggled 
so   violently   that   their    packs    came   off,   occasioning 


210  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

double  work  in  reloading  them.  A  Kalmuk  lost  hold 
of  the  rope  while  swimming  one  of  the  ponies,  and 
the  latter  was  immediately  carried  away  down  stream, 
and  eventually  secured  some  hundreds  of  yards  lower 
down,  with  my  wardrobe  thoroughly  drenched.  It 
took  us  over  three  hours  to  get  the  whole  caravan  on 
the  other  side,  and  we  fervently  hoped  that  no  similar 
straits  would  ever  befall  us  again. 

We  pitched  camp  a  few  miles  higher  up,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Kobdo,  at  an  altitude  of  about  7,000 
feet,  after  a  short  but  exciting  march.  The  valley 
was  now  much  narrower,  and  woods  were  growing 
scarcer.  Now  and  then,  at  turnings  of  the  river,  we 
could  catch  an  occasional  glimpse  of  shining,  snow- 
clad  peaks  far  ahead  of  us,  the  sight  of  which  made 
our  hearts  beat  quicker.  Yet  we  knew  not  what  lay 
before  us,  and  insurmountable  obstacles  might  still 
prevent  us  from  reaching  our  eagerly  sought  for 
destination.  Towards  evening"  we  returned  with  over 
one  hundred  fish,  which  we  proceeded  to  hand  over  to 
the  demitcka,  whose  duty  it  was  to  distribute  them  as 
fairly  as  possible  amongst  our  Kalmuks.  Here  again 
a  misunderstanding  took  place,  presumably  owing  to 
favouritism  on  his  part,  and  some  of  the  caravan  men 
threatened  to  leave  us.  This,  however,  had  no  effect 
upon   us,  for  we  knew  that,  besides  running  short  ol 


KIRGHIZ    "SLIMNESS"  211 

food,  they  would  have  to  find  their  way  back  alone, 
which  was  no  easy  matter,  having  advanced  so  far 
into  unknown  country,  and  these  facts  we  impressed 
upon  them  as  forcibly  as  we  could. 

Just  as  we  were  sitting"  down  to  our  frugal  evening 
meal  Nicholas  came  up,  saying  that  two  Kirghiz  men 
had  been  sighted,  and  were  riding  in  our  direction. 
We  decided  to  seize  the  opportunity  and  secure  them 
as  guides.  But  we  were  doomed  to  disappointment, 
for  Kirghiz  "  slimness "  remains  unrivalled  among 
Asiatic  tribes.  The  two  men  presently  came  up  to 
our  tent,  and  appeared  frightened  at  our  presence. 
The  striking  feature  of  their  costume  was  undoubtedly 
the  tall,  red  heels  of  their  top-boots,  fully  four  inches 
long,  which  showed  that  it  was  more  their  habit  to 
ride  than  to  walk.  They  wore  long,  greasy  frocks, 
lined  with  sheepskin,  and  low  fur  caps.  Their  faces 
bore  an  expression  of  astonishment,  though  their  eyes 
betrayed  cunning.  When  we  explained  to  them 
through  our  interpreter  that  we  wanted  them  to  ac- 
company us  to  the  Muss-Taou  hills,  they  flatly 
declined  to  do  anything  of  the  kind,  saying  that  they 
had  pressing  business  to  attend  to,  and  that  it  was  too 
far  out  of  their  way ;  whereupon  we  gave  them  to 
understand  that  their  services  would  be  handsomely 
rewarded  by  us.     This,  of  course,  led  them  to  suppose 


2i2  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN     THE    ALTAI 

that  wc  could  not  do  without  them,  and  they  suggested 
that  they  might  perhaps  be  tempted  by  such  ridicu- 
lously high  wages  that  we  forthwith  put  an  end  to 
the  interview  by  telling  them  they  were  no  longer 
wanted,  though  not  before  we  had  ascertained  from 
them  that  there  were  large  herds  of  Kirghiz  sheep 
at  the  head  of  the  valley.  This  was  our  first  meeting 
with  representatives  of  the  Kirghiz  tribe,  and  I  must 
own  that  we  found  them  to  be  the  cleverest  race  we 
had  as  yet  come  across.  No  wonder  the  wretched 
Kalmuks  are  afraid  of  their  influence,  and  avoid  them 
in  every  possible  way.  We  ascertained  afterwards 
that  the  two  men  had  returned  late  in  the  evening, 
having  agreed  to  our  conditions,  but  that  they  had  met 
with  a  spiteful  reception  on  the  part  of  our  Kalmuks, 
whose  sole  aim  was  to  prevent  our  advance. 

On  the  following  morning  we  made  an  early  start, 
and  after  an  hour's  march  reached  the  junction  of  the 
Kobdo  River  with  its  tributary  the  Sumdairik.  We 
were  now  in  an  awkward  dilemma,  and  had  to  con- 
sider whether  we  would  continue  our  journey  up  the 
main  river,  whose  valley  was  becoming  narrower  and 
consequently  difficult  to  negotiate  with  pack-ponies, 
or  turn  up  the  Sumdairik  stream  where  it  was  easy 
eoino-    and,  making-  a  dttour,  join  the   Kobdo  at  its 

fc>  o>  o  'J 

sources.        Our    caravan     men     only    answered     our 


A    DISCOVERY  213 

questions  by  their  usual  negative  expressions  of  "I ok" 
and  " Be/dess"  ("  No,"  and  "  I  do  not  know").  After 
some  hesitation  we  chose  the  latter  alternative, 
which,  fortunately,  proved  a  success  ;  for  hardly  had 
we  advanced  a  few  miles,  when  we  came  across  a 
Chinese  soldier,  whom  we  proceeded  to  "commandeer" 
as  a  guide,  and  who  announced  the  pleasant  fact  that 
we  were  in  the  vicinity  of  a  karaott/.  Although  scared 
by  the  number  of  strange  faces  round  him,  he  under- 
took to  accompany  us  to  the  Chinese  post,  which  it 
took  us  scarcely  an  hour  to  reach.  The  valley  of  the 
Sumdairik,  which  we  followed  for  a  few  miles,  re- 
sembled, like  that  of  the  Suok,  a  broad,  fiat  steppe 
rather  than  a  valley.  The  ground  at  places  was 
white  with  Edelweiss  flowers  under  our  horses'  feet, 
elsewhere  it  was  sandy  and  barren.  Low  undulating 
hills  rose  on  either  side  and  joined  at  the  head  of  the 
stream,  forming  an  amphitheatre,  covered  with  larch 
woods,  at  the  bottom  of  which  stood,  sheltered  on 
all  sides,  half  a  dozen  dirty  yourts  above  a  fairly 
large  lake.  This  was  indeed  a  discovery,  for  my  map 
entirely  ignored  both  the  karaoul  and  the  lake.  One 
of  the  yourts  was  slightly  cleaner  and  larger  than 
the  others,  and,  as  usual,  conspicuous  by  several 
yellow  flags  fixed  into  a  palisade  round  it.  This  was 
evidently  the  head  official's  abode.      As  we  passed  the 


2i4  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

karaoul  all  the  inhabitants,  fifteen  or  twenty  men  and 
women,  rushed  out  in  their  rags  to  have  a  look  at  the 
new-comers.  We  pitched  our  camp,  after  having 
carefully  chosen  our  ground,  a  couple  of  hundred 
yards  above  the  Chinese  post,  at  an  altitude  of  7,900 
feet.  The  Kha  soon  appeared  with  his  escort  and 
bade  us  welcome  ;  he  seemed  a  much  less  important 
man  than  the  Suok  Governor,  being  adorned  with 
few  coral  beads  on  his  cap,  but  no  peacock  feather. 
He  asked  for  our  passports,  which  he  was  apparently 
unable  to  read,  for  he  handed  them  over  without 
perusal  to  his  clerk,  who  returned  them  to  us  with 
a  pleasant  smile.  Educated  Chinese  clerks  naturally 
acquire  great  influence  over  their  village,  and  practi- 
cally rule  the  country,  exacting  illegal  tributes  from 
the  wretched  Mongols,  and  often  sharing  the  spoils 
with  "  His  Excellency  the  Governor."  The  official 
at  this  karaoul  was  much  more  willing  to  help  us, 
probably  owing  to  his  more  humble  condition,  and 
we  were  soon  supplied  with  a  native  who  knew  the 
surrounding  hills,  and  who  was  to  act  as  our  guide, 
at  the  moderate  fee  of  eight  roubles  per  month.  He 
came  to  our  tents  in  the  afternoon,  and  we  learnt 
from  him  that  wild  sheep  were  by  no  means  numerous 
on  the  Muss-Taou  range,  and  that  he  considered 
the  country  round  Lake  Dain-Kol  to  be  much  richer 


OUR    DECISION 


215 


in  rame.  Yet  the  grounds  we  had  been  endeavour- 
ing  to  reach  for  the  last  week  seemed  to  us  so 
attractive  from  afar,  that  we  decided  to  march  on 
to  the  head  of  the  river  Kobdo.  As  for  the  Dain- 
Kol   district,   it  was   so   much    out  of   our  way,    in   a 


southern  direction,  that  taking  into  consideration 
the  bad  condition  of  our  ponies  and  the  constant 
opposition  of  our  Kalmuks,  we  deemed  it  advisable, 
in  case  of  failure  on  the  Muss-Taou,  to  shift  north- 
wards and  carefully  explore  the  spurs  of  the  Altai, 
between  the  sources  of  the  Tchagan-Kol  River  and 
the  Siberian  frontier.      In  addition  to  our  new  L>uide 


216  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  Kha  sent  us  on  the  following  morning,  as  we  were 
proceeding  to  lift  camp,  one  of  his  soldiers  as  a  guard 
of  honour.  This  Chinaman  was  clad  in  a  bright 
yellow  frock  with  a  patch  of  embroidered  white  silk 
sewn  in  to  it  both  on  his  breast  and  back,  which 
made  us  give  him  the  nickname  of  "  the  target."  He 
proved  of  no  use  whatever,  and,  having  accompanied 
us  half-way  to  the  Kobdo  lakes,  we  sent  him  back 
with   gratitude  to  his   native  post. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

Sources  of  Kobdo  River — Lakes — Fishing — Muss-Taou  Hills — Journey 
northwards  —  Nicholas  sent  for  Sheep  —  Sumdairik  River  Camp — 
Meat  at  last  —  Fresh  Ponies  expected  at  Tchagan  -  Kol  River — 
March  on  16th  of  July — No  Sport — Fresh  Ponies  and  Men  arrive — 
More  Marches — Moraine  of  old  Glacier — Crossing  the  Tchagan-Kol 
back — Camps  —  Snowstorm  —  Littledale  finds  Wild  Sheep — Joseph 
sent  for  Stores — Olonur  Valley — Snow — July  23rd — Shooting— Game 
at  last — Antelope — First  sight  of  Ibex  (Capra  Sibirica)—'$XaS&s>  with 
Taba  —  Littledale  brings  in  a  good  Ram  —  Meeting  with  Zaissan 
Semion  and  Kirghiz  Chief. 

We  left  the  karaoul  on  the  morning  of  July  13th 
en  rotitc  for  the  Muss-Taou  Hills.  As  usual  we 
were  delayed  by  Kalmuk  recriminations  respecting 
the  ponies,  and  it  was  not  till  7.30  a.m.  that  we 
were  ready  to  start.  Our  new  Mongol  guide,  whose 
shabby  appearance  might  conceal,  as  we  hoped,  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  country,  took  the  lead 
of  our  caravan,  and  after  a  long  ascent  we  found 
ourselves  at  the  top  of  a  pass  about  8,500  feet  high, 
from  which  a  magnificent  view  presented  itself. 
Beneath  us  lay  two  lakes  whose  waters  were  joined 

by  a  broad  river,   the    Kobdo,   the   sources   of  which 

217 


218  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

were  now  before  us.  The  upper  lake  seemed  to  me 
much  larger  than  I  had  expected,  according-  to  the 
map,  stretching  westwards  to  what  I  thought  was 
over  fifteen  miles.  With  regard  to  these  two  lakes 
I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  a  passage  from 
Lieutenant  Kozloff's  observations.  This  well-known 
explorer  visited  these  regions  the  year  after  our 
journey  (1898)  on  his  way  to  the  Lob-Nor,  and  his 
account,  which  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Russian 
Geographical  Society  on  November  22nd,  tallies  with 
the  notes  I  then  took  there  :  "  My  party  came  to  the 
spot  where  the  Kobdo  River  forms  two  small  lakes, 
on  the  banks  of  which  there  are  several  Kirghiz 
encampments.  The  lower  Kobdo  lake  has  an 
irregular  elongated  form,  stretching  10  miles  from 
east  to  west,  with  a  width  of  about  5^  miles.  There 
are  in  it  fifteen  islands,  of  which  some  are  from  2  to 
2z>  miles  long.  The  upper  lake  is  connected  with 
the  lower  by  a  rapid  watercourse  420  feet  wide. 
The  upper  lake  proved  much  larger  than  it  was 
supposed  to  be;  its  length  is  about  16%  miles  and 
its  width  4  miles;  its  depth  attains  18  fathoms." 
From  the  pass  where  we  stood  we  could  plainly 
distinguish  Lake  Dain-Kol  in  the  distance  due  south 
of  us,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  two  Kobdo 
lakes  ran  the  snowclad  Muss-Taou  ranee  from  north- 


A    DEBATE 


219 


west  to  south-east.  Towards  noon  we  reached  the 
river,  at  the  place  where  it  Hows  between  the  two 
lakes,  and  found  it  so  wide  and  deep  that  the  crossing 
of  it  implied  a  still  more  serious  undertaking  than  that 


OUR    NEW    DEMITCHA    AND    MEN. 


of  the  Tchagan-Kol.  We  therefore  decided  to  pitch 
camp  on  this  side  of  the  watercourse  and  hold  a 
debate  in  the  afternoon  on  the  dilemma  which  now 
presented  itself.  The  first  question  to  elucidate  was 
the  presence  of  wild  sheep  in  those  mountains,  which 
fact  could  only  be  ascertained  from  our  new  Mongol 


2  2o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

guide,  who,  alone  of  the  whole  caravan,  was  supposed 
to  have  ever  visited  those  regions.  Accordingly  we 
had  him  called  up  and  interrogated  him  on  the  subject 
through  our  Russian  and  Kalmuk  interpreters.  In 
answer  to  our  inquiries  he  said  that  he  had  spent  over 
two  months  in  those  hills  catching  Marmots,  of  which 
he  had  found  great  numbers,  but  that  he  had  never 
come  across  any  kotchkor  (wild  sheep),  which  in- 
habited the  eastern  spurs  beyond  Dain-Kol,  where 
he  thought  we  should  be  likely  to  get  sport.  These 
statements,  though  perhaps  untrustworthy,  materially 
changed  the  aspect  of  affairs.  We  had  now  advanced 
so  far  into  Mongolia,  overcome  numerous  difficulties, 
kept  our  Kalmuks  constantly  on  the  march  merely 
by  promises  of  a  permanent  camp — all  this  with  the 
sole  view  of  exploring  the  Muss-Taou  range,  and  now 
that  we  were  within  a  few  miles  of  it,  we  discovered 
that  it  was  useless  to  attempt  it.  Moreover,  the  hills 
themselves  did  not  now  seem  so  attractive  as  they  did 
from  a  distance.  Their  slopes  were  covered  with 
pine  and  larch  woods,  and  the  rocks  above  appeared 
to  be  more  suited  to  Ibex  than  to  Sheep,  for  no  grassy 
rolling  knolls  so  attractive  to  the  latter  could  be  seen 
through  our  telescopes.  The  Dain-Kol  district  was 
entirely  out  of  the  question.  It  was  out  of  our  way 
to  the  south,  and  would  mean  another  month  through 


OUR    INTENTION    ABANDONED  221 

a  country  where  it  was  doubtful  if  there  were  sheep, 
with  home-sick  men  and  worn-out  ponies.  In  addition 
to  all  this  we  ran  the  risk  of  being  snowed  in  by  the 
closing-  up  of  the  passes  back  into  Siberia,  and  a 
winter  in  a  Chinese  kai'aoul  was  by  no  means  a 
pleasant  prospect.  We  also  intended  to  devote  the 
end  of  August  and  part  of  September  to  shooting 
Maral  and  Roe-deer  in  the  wooded  regions  of  the 
Altai  before  returning  to  Europe.  Besides,  we  had 
run  short  of  meat,  and  were  obliged  that  very  evening 
to  send  Nicholas  and  another  man  to  one  of  the 
Kirghiz  encampments  on  the  shores  of  the  upper 
lake  in  order  to  buy  a  dozen  sheep.  These  and 
other  reasons  induced  us  to  abandon  our  idea  of 
exploring  the  long-coveted  Muss-Taou  range,  and 
turn  our  attention  northwards,  where  Taba  told  us 
he  knew  of  first-rate  ground  for  Sheep  and  Ibex. 
Looking  back,  after  a  period  of  three  years,  on  the 
circumstances  here  detailed  I  now  regret  that  we 
abandoned  our  original  intentions  on  the  faith  of  an 
unknown  native  ;  for  the  other  difficulties  in  our  way 
would  have  been  hardly  worth  mentioning.  But 
when  the  moment  arrived  for  decision  we  all  felt, 
unequipped  as  we  were,  that  further  advance  would 
be  foolish.  Great  were  the  rejoicings  amongst  our 
natives    when    they    learnt    that    on    the    morrow   we 


222  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

should  be  heading  towards  the  Siberian  frontier. 
They  never  gave  vent  to  regret  for  so  many  marches 
in  vain  and  so  much  precious  time  lost ;  in  a  second 
all  was  forgotten  ! 

The  evening  of  that  day,  which  was  to  be  the 
culminating  point  of  our  expedition,  was  the  loveliest 
we  had  as  yet  experienced.  The  whole  landscape 
was  bathed  in  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun.  The  lakes 
glittered  as  if  lit  up  by  thousands  of  sparks  reflected 
through  as  many  diamond  prisms,  whilst  the  hills 
opposite  slowly  changed  their  colour  from  bright  red 
to  lilac-grey,  with  countless  intermediate  hues,  as 
the  sun  gradually  descended  behind  them.  Presently 
the  rosy  tops  alone  were  visible,  whilst  the  lakes  below 
had  long  ago  put  out  their  lights,  and  the  dark  blue 
waves  were  rolling  in  before  a  strong  west  wind. 
Before  dinner  we  tried  our  luck  fishing,  and  caught 
some  fine  Grayling,  averaging  i^  lbs.,  with  which 
we  fed  the  whole  caravan.  As  I  have  said  before, 
Nicholas  was  despatched,  together  with  the  new 
guide,  to  purchase  sheep  from  the  Kirghiz  tribes  in 
the  neighbourhood,  and  with  strict  orders  to  join  us 
beyond  the  karaoul  on  the  Sumdairik  River,  where 
we  intended  to  camp.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the 
following  day  (July  14th)  we  started  northwards  in 
search  of  <>ame.      Tents  were  struck  with  the  utmost 


NICHOLAS    RETURNS  223 

celerity  now  that  the  Kalmuks  knew  we  were 
retracing  our  steps  towards  "home,  sweet  home." 
The  weather  was  bright  and  fine,  though  a  perpetual 
wind  from  the  west  never  stopped  blowing.  We 
passed  the  karaoul  without  calling  at  the  Kha's  yoiirt, 
and  followed  the  left  bank  of  the  lake.  Then  crossing 
the  low  saddle  we  descended  into  the  valley  of  the 
Sumdairik,*  and  pitched  camp  close  to  the  stream 
at  1  p.m.,  after  a  march  of  twenty  miles.  Here  we 
decided  nolens  volens  to  give  our  ponies  a  clay's  rest. 
Most  of  them  were  exhausted  by  constant  marches, 
and  the  place  we  had  chosen  for  camp  was  quite 
an  attractive  one,  in  the  shade  of  a  small  larch  wood. 
Fishing  was  our  occupation  as  usual,  and  that 
afternoon  we  killed  over  eighty  Grayling.  The  water 
in  the  river  was  clear  and  the  current  strong  ;  large 
blocks  of  stone  in  midstream  formed  at  intervals 
beautiful  deep  pools,  which  afforded  capital  sport. 
Fish  rose  to  any  fly  without  distinction,  though 
apparently  a  combination  with  red  was  preferable. 
During  the  night  Nicholas  returned  with  twelve 
sheep,  which  he  had  bought  for  two  roubles  fifty 
kopecks  apiece  (about  five  shillings).  He  had  had 
some   difficulty  in   finding  us,   and,  being   in  a  hurry 

*  This  is  the  name  given  to  the  river  by  the  Russian  Survey.     The 
natives  call  it  "  Kara-Adyr.'"' 


224  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

to  overtake  us,  had  been  on  the  move  for  over  thirty 
consecutive  hours.  We  remained  the  whole  of  the 
next  day  on  the  Kara-Adyr  (Sumdairik),  and  started 
only  on  the  morning  of  the  16th.  It  was  a  most 
uninteresting  and  monotonous  march  in  search  of 
wild  sheep  country.  I  kept  consulting  our  guide  as 
to  the  whereabouts  of  game,  but  met  with  the  constant 
reply  of  kotchkor  iok  (no  rams).  That  day  we 
followed  for  some  time  the  left  bank  of  the  Kara-Adyr 
River,  and,  having  gone  a  few  miles,  turned  off  to 
the  right.  We  now  began  advancing  through  higher 
ground  and  barren,  rocky  tableland,  where  the  only 
living  creatures  were  Marmots  and  Hares.  Here  my 
wife,  to  our  amazement,  gave  us  a  brilliant  display  of 
marksmanship,  for  she  killed  a  Hare  at  eighty  yards 
with  Littledale's  Mannlicher,  the  betting  being  twenty 
to  one  against  her.  This  was  the  only  incident  on 
our  way.  We  crossed  two  passes,  and  at  i  p.m. 
reached  a  valley,  at  the  head  of  which  we  discovered 
a  row  of  high  ridges  westwards  and  likely  ibex 
haunts.  We  therefore  decided  to  pitch  camp  at  that 
place  and  investigate  the  surroundings  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  notwithstanding  our  guide's  peremptory 
statement  that  we  should  find  nothing.  We  had  now 
been  many  a  day  without  the  chance  of  a  shot, 
and  our  bloodthirsty  instincts  were  again  roused  by 


A   FRESH    LOT   OF   PONIES 


225 


the  sight  of  favourable  grounds.  We  started  early 
next  morning,  Littledale  and  myself,  at  4  a.m.,  in 
different  directions  ;  but  our  guide's  words  were  to  be 
realised.  I  ascended  the  stony  slopes  of  a  small 
nullah,  and  spied  miles  of  country  around  me  without 


JACOB,    THE    DEMITCHA,    IN    THE    BASHKAOUS    VALLEY. 


finding  a  single  animal  of  any  kind  ;  then,  crossing 
another  dividing  ridge,  I  met  with  a  similar  result  in 
the  next  valley,  and  so  on  till  I  finally  returned  to 
camp  thoroughly  disheartened.  Here  we  found 
twenty-five  fresh  ponies  awaiting  us.  Before  entering 
the  Kobdo  valley  we  had  despatched  a  couple  of  our 
Kalmuks  back  towards  the  frontier,  in  order  to  meet 
Q 


226  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  ponies  which  we  expected,  and  direct  them  to 
their  destination,  which  was  the  head  of  the  Tchagan- 
Kol  River.  Before  parting  with  us  these  two  men 
had  refused  to  start  without  arms,  saying  that  "they 
might  have  to  defend  themselves  against  natives  and 
wild  beasts."  Hearing  this  I  was  stupid  enough  to 
lend  them  my  big  revolver.  When  we  saw  that  both 
the  men  and  ponies  failed  to  turn  up,  we  naturally 
thought  that  they  had  lost  their  way,  and,  a  few  days 
later,  commissioned  one  of  our  hunters  to  find  them, 
wherever  they  might  be.  The  latter  had  now  joined 
us  with  the  fresh  lot  of  ponies,  and  reported  that  he 
had  come  across  them  wandering  somewhere  about 
the  Suok  Steppe  ;  he  had  also  met  the  two  armed 
Kalmuks,  who  declared  to  him  that  they  were  going 
back  to  their  homes,  carrying  off  my  precious  weapon 
as  a  souvenir  ! 

Littledale  came  in  at  about  three  in  the  afternoon, 
reporting  that  he  had  seen  nothing  but  tracks  of  Ibex 
on  very  likely  ground.  fie  thought  it  was  hardly 
worth  while  remaining  at  that  place,  and  suggested 
a  start  for  the  morrow,  especially  as  Taba  promised 
better  ground  within  a  comparatively  short  distance. 
That  same  day  a  very  fine  head  was  picked  up, 
measuring  60  inches  along  the  curve  by  19J,  inches 
in  circumference  at  base. 


AN    EASY    FORD  227 

We  struck  camp  on  the  following  morning  at  7  a.m. 
and  went  for  some  time  down  the  valley  of  a  small 
stream  in  a  northern  direction.  Fresh  ponies  were  of 
great  service  to  us  now,  and  we  decided  to  make  a 
long  march  of  it.  On  our  way  we  passed  through 
a  deserted  place  covered  with  odd -shaped  rounded 
stones,  which  we  took  to  be  the  moraine  of  an  old 
glacier.  We  also  passed  on  our  way  a  fairly  large 
lake  which  had  probably  once  been  about  ten  times 
the  size,  for  we  could  plainly  distinguish  the  former 
water-line  on  the  surrounding  hills.  Most  of  the 
lakes  in  Asia,  and  especially  in  Tibet,  have  that 
well-defined  line  above  their  present  level ;  they 
appear  to  be  gradually  drying  away,  and  in  time 
will  become  reduced  to  small  pools.  Towards  midday 
our  caravan  reached  the  broad  valley  of  the  Tchagan- 
Kol  River,  which  we  now  had  to  cross  many  miles 
above  the  place  where  we  had  had  such  trouble  during 
our  journey  up  the  Kobdo.  Here  there  was  an  easy 
ford  ;  its  waters  were  as  milky  and  dirty  as  below,  and 
it  was  hardly  150  feet  wide  at  this  place.  As  we 
forded  the  river  some  fine  snowclad  peaks  at  the  head 
of  the  Tchagan-Kol  came  in  sight  and  made  us  hesi- 
tate whether  we  should  not  march  up  the  stream 
towards  the  hills,  which  looked  as  if  they  might  afford 
sport.     \Ye  inquired  about  it  from  our  new  guide,  who 


228  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

answered  decisively  that  there  were  no  sheep  about 
there,  so  we  continued  our  journey  northwards  and, 
having  crossed  the  main  river,  began  ascending  one  of 
its  small  tributaries  along  a  narrow  ravine  with  high 
banks  on  either  side,  and,  having  gone  up  a  few  miles, 
pitched  camp  at  3  p.m.  The  weather  was  still  fine 
and  exceedingly  hot. 

We  were  off  again  next  day,  starting  as  usual  at 
about  7  a.m.,  still  heading  northwards  parallel  to  the 
main  Muss-Taou  range,  and  crossed  a  fairly  high 
pass  into  loftier  ground.  It  rained  almost  the  whole 
of  that  afternoon,  and  we  pitched  camp  on  the  plateau 
at  an  altitude  of  8,400  feet.  On  our  way  we  saw 
Antelope  of  the  larger  kind.  The  end  of  that 
day's  march  cheered  us  up  a  little,  for,  as  we  entered 
a  narrow  valley  with  a  small  lake  in  the  middle,  many 
heads  of  sheep  strewed  the  ground,  and  it  seemed 
possible  that  we  had  struck  a  new  vein.  Close  to  the 
place  where  we  had  pitched  camp  stood  two  dirty 
yourts,  whose  inhabitants  were  so  frightened  at  the 
sight  of  us  that  they  all  disappeared  behind  the  rocks 
on  our  approach,  and  did  not  reappear  until  next 
morning.  We  decided  that  night  that  we  should  start 
early  next  day,  Littledale  and  I,  to  try  our  fortune,  for 
to  the  north  and  north-west  rose  high  mountains  and 
grassy   rolling   boulders   which   we  had   not   seen   for 


A   SNOWSTORM 


229 


a  long-  time.  Here  grumbling  began  again  amongst 
our  Kalmuks,  who  threatened  to  march  next  day ; 
they  had  probably  been  discouraged  by  the  bad 
weather,  and  especially  by  the  cold  that  suddenly 
came  on  during  the  night,  for  when  we  awoke  next 
morning  the  ground  was  covered  with  three  inches 
of  snow. 


"HEADS  OF  SHKKI'  strewed  the  ground." 


Next  morning,  July  20th,  notwithstanding  the  men's 
threats,  we  started  at  7  a.m.,  Littledale  and  I,  in 
different  directions.  The  snowstorm  was  so  strong  at 
3  a.m.  that  there  was  no  question  of  leaving  camp. 
The  wind  was  blowing  a  gale  from  the  south-west, 
and  as  might  have  been  expected,  I  returned  in  the 
afternoon    without    having   seen   even   tracks   of   any 


23o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

kind.  I  was  thoroughly  damped  and  numbed  by  cold, 
having  been  caught  in  a  very  severe  snowstorm  at  the 
head  of  a  valley.  Littledale  brought  in  the  meat  of 
a  young  ram  which  he  had  killed  for  the  pot.  He 
had  seen  two  or  three  young  ones,  but  no  good  old 
males  had  come  in  sight.  From  the  intense  heat 
which  had  prevailed  during  the  last  few  days  in  the 
lower  country  we  felt  again  as  if  we  were  in  the 
middle  of  winter.  We  now  decided  to  start  on  the 
next  morning,  having  sent  Joseph  to  Kosh-Agatch 
with  a  letter  to  our  friend  the  Zaissan  Semion,  asking 
him  to  supply  us  with  fresh  men,  horses,  and  sheep  at 
a  place  which  we  thought  would  be  a  permanent 
camp,  and  where  Taba  now  promised  we  should  get 
good  shooting.  Joseph  was  also  to  bring  back  stores, 
of  which  we  were  running  short.  Constant  rain  and 
snow  accompanied  us  our  whole  day's  march,  but  Taba 
seemed  now  to  know  the  way,  and  took  upon  him- 
self to  guide  us  towards  success.  We  marched  down 
the  valley,  turning  westwards  towards  the  Siberian 
frontier,  and  camped  at  the  bottom  of  a  wide  valley 
known  to  the  Kalmuks  as  the  Olonur  Valley,  at  the 
head  of  which  is  the  Nam  Daba  Pass,  the  Russo- 
Chinese  divide.  Apparently  on  our  map  the  river  we 
camped  on  was  the  Karaimaty.  We  were  fairly 
drenched,  as   we  pitched  camp   at    11    a.m.,  rain   and 


START   WITH    RENEWED   SPIRITS  231 

sleet  never  ceasing  the  whole  day.  We  were  now  at 
an  altitude  of  about  8,200  feet.  In  the  afternoon  we 
caught  sight  of  two  men  on  horseback  on  the  sky-line 
in  front  of  lis.  These  men  presently  came  up  and 
informed  us  that  the  Zaissan  was  now  in  search  of  us 
not  far  away  with  forty  fresh  horses  and  ten  men. 
They  also  intimated  that  we  were  within  two  days' 
march  of  Kosh-Agatch.  This  news  was  quite  a 
revelation  to  us,  as  the  map  upon  which  we  relied 
showed  a  much  greater  distance.  We  intended  to  try 
our  new  ground  on  the  following  day,  but  another 
snowstorm  during  the  night  prevented  us  from  doing 
so,  though  we  were  now  very  anxious  to  explore  the 
new  country  round  us,  especially  as  Taba  appeared  to 
be  so  confident. 

We  spent  the  whole  of  July  22nd  waiting  for  the 
weather  to  clear  up  ;  but  it  was  to  be  another  lost  day, 
and  fishing  in  a  small  lake  a  couple  of  miles  below 
camp  was  our  only  occupation.  Towards  evening  the 
weather  improved,  and  next  morning,  July  23rd,  we 
were  awoke  at  3  a.m.  and  started  uphill  with  renewed 
spirits  in  different  directions,  Littledale  taking  the 
ground  to  the  west  of  our  camp,  whilst  I  went  north- 
east towards  the  Siberian  frontier.  Taba,  as  usual, 
accompanied  me.  He  now  seemed  to  know  the 
ground  fairly  well,   and  conducted  me  up  the   valley 


232  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

for  some  time,  when  turning  north  we  ascended  the 
long  grassy  slope  till  we  reached  a  series  of  plateatix 
with  rolling  boulders  here  and  there,  separated  from 
each  other  by  deep  ravines.  Snowy  peaks  could  be 
seen  in  the  distance  before  us,  as  well  as  westwards 
where  Littledale  had  gone,  and  where  the  ground 
appeared  higher  than  where  we  stood.  At  first  no 
animal  came  in  sight  but  a  herd  of  the  larger  ante- 
lopes.  As  we  advanced  along  these  fine  pasture 
grounds  the  valleys  became  deeper  and  rocks  more 
frequent  till,  in  about  a  couple  of  hours,  we  reached 
some  very  likely  Ibex  ground.  From  here  I  could 
plainly  distinguish  the  hills  dividing  two  great  empires 
and  which,  according  to  my  idea,  were  most  probably 
the  southern  slopes  of  the  Happy  Valley.  From  the 
place  where  we  now  stood  we  could  command  a  view 
over  a  large  stretch  of  broken  country,  and  I  soon 
discovered,  on  the  opposite  slopes,  nine  or  ten  small 
brown  patches,  which  I  at  first  took  for  wild  sheep, 
but  which,  examined  through  the  glasses,  appeared 
to  be  a  herd  of  Ibex  feeding  about  a  mile  away  from 
us.  There  were  six  small  males  and  three  good 
heads  amongst  them.  There  being  no  shelter  from 
our  side,  it  was  a  question  of  making  a  very  long 
ddtour  in  order  to  get  the  chance  of  a  shot  ;  but 
I    was    very   keen   to    secure   a   specimen    or    two   of 


IN    FULL   SIGHT   OF   OUR   PREY  233 

Capra  Sibirica,  so  we  decided  to  attempt  the  stalk. 
We  retraced  our  steps,  and,  leaving  the  ponies  with 
the  other  Kalmuks,  I  started  with  Taba  towards 
a  range  of  steep  crags,  amongst  which  we  thought 
we  might  advance  in  safety  ;  but  the  ground  became 
very  difficult,  and  it  was  a  long  job  to  reach  the  other 
side  of  the  valley,  for  there  was  many  a  deep  ravine 
between  us  and  the  rocky  ridge,  while  the  ascents 
were  exceedingly  steep.  Loose  stones  were  being 
continually  displaced  by  us,  and  the  india-rubber  soles 
on  my  shoes  were  fairly  worn  out  in  less  than  an 
hour's  time.  After  many  a  scramble  we  succeeded 
in  covering  the  ground  between  us  and  the  rocks, 
but  here  our  real  difficulties  began.  We  sat  down 
to  rest  on  the  top  of  the  ridge,  and  spied  another 
herd  of  Ibex,  females  and  young  ones  this  time,  over 
seventy  in  number,  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley  about 
a  mile  below  us.  Leaving  them  to  our  right,  we 
went  down  the  crags  which  from  the  top  seemed  quite 
inaccessible,  but,  being  in  full  sight  of  our  coveted 
prey,  we  could  not  possibly  follow  the  ridge,  which 
would  have  been  much  easier  work.  About  a  hundred 
yards  below  it,  after  very  careful  and  dangerous  going, 
we  found  we  were  out  of  sight,  but  here  again  numer- 
ous long  and  steep  snow  -  slides  had  to  be  crossed. 
Some  of  them   were  fairly  wide,   and  the  snow  was 


234  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

still  hard  from  the  previous  night's  frost,  so  that  there 
was  no  other  means  of  getting  across  them  but  to 
take  a  long  run  and  negotiate  them  by  the  strength 
of  the  impulse,  landing  on  the  other  side  some  fifty 
or  sixty  yards  below.  Some  of  these  snow  -  shoots 
were  fairly  twenty  yards  wide,  and  the  precipice 
below  was  by  no  means  a  cheering  sight.  Little 
Taba  was  not  to  be  stopped  by  this,  and  several 
times  one  of  these  snow-slides  divided  us,  my  hesi- 
tation making  me  wait  before  the  decisive  rush.  In 
some  places  the  snow  had  given  way,  and  I  could  dis- 
tinguish some  yards  below  long  smooth  ice  cylinders 
that  had  been  formed  round  the  trickling  water, 
whose  hollow  murmur  might  have  given  a  shudder 
to  the  bravest  mountaineer.  At  all  events  the  snow 
did  not  give  way  under  our  feet,  and  we  managed 
to  get  over  the  disagreeable  passages  with  bruised 
feet  and  torn  rubber  soles.  Another  half-hour  up 
a  steep  slope,  covered  with  sharp-edged  stones  and 
shingle,  brought  us  to  a  low  pass  leading  into  the 
valley  where  our  Ibex  had  been  spied  by  us,  being 
within  about  400  yards  of  where  we  had  last  seen 
them  feeding.  Here  we  halted  to  rest.  The  grassy 
slope  that  stretched  itself  before  us  contained  few 
hiding-places,  and  the  question  now  arose  whether 
we  should  wait  for  the  animals  to  come  towards  us 


THE   ASIATIC    IBEX. 
(Capra  Silnrka.) 


A   SUCCESSFUL   STALK  237 

and  hide  under  shelter  of  the  rocks  in  the  middle 
of  the  day  (which  was  the  most  likely  alternative), 
or  to  advance  as  cautiously  as  possible.  The  wind 
being-  steady,  I  chose  the  latter  course.  We  had  now 
been  about  one  and  a  half  hours  out  of  sight  of  the 
herd,  and  it  was  quite  presumable  that  they  had  by 
this  time  shifted.  Instructing  Taba  to  keep  a  few  yards 
behind,  I  started  creeping  up  the  grassy  slope,  and  very 
soon  found  myself  within  what  I  thought  was  shoot- 
ing range  of  the  Ibex.  Two  or  three  minutes'  more 
creeping,  and  a  fine  pair  of  horns  showed  before  me 
on  the  sky-line  at  200  yards.  I  had  noticed  from 
the  opposite  side  of  the  valley  that  one  of  the  old 
bucks  was  much  lighter  than  the  others,  and  carried 
a  somewhat  finer  head,  so  naturally  it  was  the  one 
I  intended,  if  possible,  to  secure.  Seeing  now  only 
a  pair  of  horns,  I  could  not  judge  to  which  of  the 
three  they  belonged,  but  when,  a  moment  later,  their 
owner  got  up  and  gave  me  a  broadside  chance, 
although  it  was  not  my  light-coloured  friend,  I  could 
not  refrain  from  taking  my  shot.  Putting  up  the 
200  yards  sight,  and  drawing  it  as  fine  as  possible, 
I  fired  and  rolled  him  over.  Jumping  up  in  a  second, 
I  just  caught  sight  of  them  pelting  downhill  like 
lii_>-htninL>-,  and  fired  a  second  time  at  the  lighter  one 
but    missed    him.      When    they    had    all    disappeared 


238  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

behind  a  ridge,  we  went  up  to  see  our  quarry,  and 
found  him  to  be  a  very  fair  buck,  his  horns  measuring 
38  inches  along  the  curve  by  10  inches  in  girth, 
the  wide  spread  of  his  horns  giving  them  a  larger 
appearance  at  a  distance.  Rewarded  at  last !  This 
was  indeed  my  first  successful  day  since  we  had 
reached  the  Kobdo  River,  and  both  Littledale  and  I 
had  yearned  for  a  shot.  The  horns  seemed  to  me  to 
resemble  in  every  way  those  of  a  Cashmere  Ibex. 
On  inquiring  of  Taba  about  their  comparative  size, 
I  understood  him  to  say  that  he  had  seen  much  larger 
ones  in  the  district,  so  that  there  is  every  probability 
that  they  run  to  fifty  inches  and  more  in  length.  My 
little  hunter  would  have  it  that  we  should  see  many 
more  of  them  before  we  left.  Having  grallocked  our 
Ibex  and  left  him  with  the  ponies,  we  went  on  in  the 
direction  of  camp. 

The  country  being  still  favourable  for  game  we 
kept  on  the  look-out,  but  saw  no  signs  of  animals 
of  any  kind  till  we  reached  the  bottom  of  a  deep 
nullah,  where  Taba  suddenly  spotted  two  or  three 
Ibex  on  the  top  of  a  ridge  to  our  left.  As  it  was 
still  early  in  the  day  another  stalk  was  imminent. 
Circumventing  the  ridge  on  which  we  had  located 
the  animals,  we  found  ourselves  presently,  Taba  and 
I,  in  a  small  corrie  about  600  yards  long,  up  which 


A    HERD    OF   SIXTY    RAMS  239 

we  had  to  toil  in  order  to  face  the  direction  in  which 
the  Ibex  were  heading.  This  took  us  nearly  an  hour, 
and  as  I  was  just  reaching  the  plateau  I  suddenly 
saw  a  pair  of  horns  coming  towards  me  at  less  than 
fifty  yards  in  front ;  but  unluckily  I  was  quite  out 
of  breath,  having  walked  very  fast,  and  instead  of 
waiting,  I  carelessly  took  my  shot  at  the  only  part 
of  the  beast  in  sight,  and  naturally  missed.  When 
I  saw  him  next  he  was  rushing  downhill  some 
1 50  yards  below  me,  and  great  was  my  amazement 
when  I  found  that  this  was  my  light-coated  friend 
whom  I  had  already  missed  before.  As  well  as  I 
could  judge,  his  horns  must  have  measured  well  over 
forty  inches.  His  companion,  whom  I  just  caught 
sight  of,  was  a  young  buck  hardly  worth  shooting. 
I  was  much  disgusted  at  this  performance,  so  was 
Taba.  We  sat  down  to  wait  for  the  ponies,  which 
presently  came  up  with  the  head  of  the  Ibex,  and 
remounting  we  started  back  for  camp,  reaching  the 
tents  at  5  p.m.  Curiously  enough  Littledale  came 
back  almost  simultaneously,  bringing  with  him  the 
head  of  a  fair  ram  (51  inches  along  the  curve  by 
19]  girth).  He  told  us  that  he  had  come  across 
a  herd  of  sixty  rams,  almost  all  with  good  heads, 
and  another  lot  of  fifteen.  These  were  the  largest 
herds  of  rams  we  had  as  vet  seen,  and   we  decided 


24o  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE   ALTAI 

that    this    camp    should   be    a  permanent    one,   game 
being  plentiful  in  the  neighbourhood. 

I  found  our  caravan  greatly  increased  on  my  return 
by  the  arrival  of  the  Zaissan  Semion  with  forty  fresh 
horses  and  a  dozen  Kalmuks  with  a  demitcha,  who 
were  to  replace  our  men.  He  had  also  brought  with 
him  a  Khirghiz  chief,  Abduldho  by  name,  whose 
martial  appearance  and  stately  looks  made  a  great 
impression  upon  our  Kalmuks.  In  token  of  friend- 
ship he  had  brought  us  thirteen  sheep  as  a  present, 
and  told  us  through  our  interpreter  many  quaint 
stories  of  his  nomadic  life.  He  was  the  hereditary 
and  autocratic  ruler  over  about  a  thousand  Kirghiz, 
and  owned  immense  numbers  of  horses,  sheep,  and 
cattle.  He  had  been  for  years  past  under  Chinese 
rule  and  a  vassal  of  the  Chinese  Emperor,  but 
finding  no  suitable  ground  for  his  purpose  on  the 
Celestial  side,  he  had  shifted  quarters  and  settled 
down  on  Siberian  territory,  having  sent  in  a  petition 
to  the  Russian  authorities  with  a  view  to  becoming 
a  subject  of  the  Czar.  Apparently,  however,  his 
presence  was  not  wanted  in  Russia,  for  not  only 
was  there  no  answer  forthcoming  from  the  Altai 
governor,  but  orders  had  been  given  to  turn  him 
out  of  Russian  territory,  where  constant  frictions  took 
place  between  his  Kirghiz  and  the  native   Kalmuks. 


THE   ZAISSAN    SEMION  241 

He  now  applied  to  me  for  protection.  I  said  I  could 
do  nothing  for  him,  excepting  to  hand  over  the  paper 
he  gave  me  to  General  Boldyreff  at  Barnaoul.  He 
had  brought  over  with  him  several  of  his  subjects, 
one  of  whom  seemed  so  intelligent  that  we  asked 
his  permission  to  keep  him  till  we  returned  to  Kosh- 
Agatch,  to  which  he  readily  agreed.  We  found  the 
man  very  useful  and  handy  in  every  way.  The 
position  of  the  Kirghiz  Khan  was  naturally  a  very 
difficult  one,  for  he  now  found  himself  in  the  dilemma 
either  of  returning  to  China,  which  was  hardly  possible 
under  the  circumstances,  or  of  remaining  in  Siberia, 
where  he  was  not  wanted.  I  trust  that  by  this 
time  the  question  has  been  settled  in  his  favour. 
As  for  the  Zaissan  Semion,  he  seemed  to  be  in 
very  high  spirits  as  usual,  and  was  received  by  our 
Kalmuks  with  great  signs  of  joy  and  deference. 
He  told  us  that  he  had  learnt  from  some  stray 
Mongols  that  all  our  horses  had  died  on  the  way,  and 
that  we  had  been  compelled  for  the  past  fortnight 
to  march  on  foot.  This  news,  he  said,  had  made 
him  hurry  in  search  of  us,  and  he  was  now  glad  to 
see  that  we  were  not  in  such  straits  as  had  been 
represented  to  him.  He  complimented  us  on  our 
day's  success,  and  warmly  welcomed  us  back  into  his 
territory.      The  men  he   had  brought,   he  said,    were 


242  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

thoroughly  reliable,  and  the  demitcha  he  promised 
would  be  more  energetic,  and  keep  the  men  in  better 
order  than  the  one  he  had  granted  us  previously. 
He  said  he  would  go  to  his  home  on  the  following- 
day,  his  duties  calling  him  back,  but  promised  to 
meet  us  at  Kosh-Agatch,  and  thence  accompany  us 
to  his  house  on  the  Oulagan  River,  where  he  promised 
us  CTood  Maral  shooting. 

We  refrained  from  reporting  to  the  Zaissan  about 
the  constant  grumbling  that  had  taken  place  amongst 
our  Kalmuks,  but  told  him  of  the  two  men  who  had 
gone  away  with  my  revolver.  He  promised  to  look 
into  the  matter,  and  said  that  we  should  now  have 
no  more  trouble.  We  parted  with  our  men  that 
evening,  and  promised  the  Kirghiz  chief  to  visit  his 
encampment  on  our  way  home,  upon  which  the  two 
chiefs  bade  us  farewell. 

As  we  sat  down  to  dinner  in  high  spirits  we  talked 
over  the  day's  events,  and  turned  in  early  in  order 
to  make  a  start  as  usual  at  3  a.m.  on  the  following 
morning-. 


CHAPTER   VII. 

Olonur  Camp  —  Stalking  Sheep  —  Weather-beaten  horns  of  Maral 
found — Lake  Valley — Hares  and  Brahminy  Geese  seen — Joseph 
returns  with  Stores— My  Wife  goes  out  Stalking— Littledale's  Record 
Head— Thunderstorms — I  wound  a  fine  Ram— We  shift  Camp — 
Taba's  successful  Ruse — Unsuccessful  Pursuit— Our  Camp  under  the 
Nam  Daba  Pass — Stampede  of  the  Pack-horses— A  good  Stalk  on 
August  2nd  — Shift  Camp  over  Frontier— More  Stalking  — The 
Tarkhaty  River — Kirghiz  Encampment  with  great  Herds  of  Horses 
— I  get  a  good  Ibex — Return  to  Camp  on  the  Tchagan-Burgaza  River. 

Early  on  July  24th  I  was  awakened  by  my  faithful 
Cristo  with  the  good  tidings  that  the  weather  was  fine 
and  that  the  ponies  were  saddled.  We  accordingly 
started,  Littledale  and  I,  after  a  hasty  breakfast, 
towards  the  sheep-ground  which  my  companion  had 
inspected  on  the  previous  day,  and  where  we  found 
there  was  sufficient  room  for  both  of  us.  I  was 
anxious  to  get  a  glimpse  at  the  herd  of  sixty  rams 
which  Littledale  had  seen,  and  perhaps  get  a  shot 
at  a  fine  old  patriarch.  Wild  sheep  had  been  care- 
fully avoiding  me  for  the  previous  three  weeks,  and 
my  eager  anticipation  of  sport  may  be  readily  under- 
stood. From  camp  we  rode  down  the  main  valley 
243 


244  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

till  we  reached  a  lateral  one,  into  which  we  entered. 
Great  numbers  of  sheep's  skulls  strewed  the  ground, 
especially  under  a  mass  of  precipitous  rocks,  close 
to  which  we  passed,  and  where  apparently  a  regular 
slaughter  of  wild  sheep  had  taken  place.  The  valley 
through  which  we  were  passing  was  bordered  on  either 
side  by  low,  grassy  boulders,  with  rocky  pinnacles 
here  and  there,  the  whole  place  appearing  to  afford 
a  capital  winter  resort  for  the  animals  which  were 
probably  still  on  the  higher  ground  just  perceptible 
in  front  of  us.  This  was  our  destination.  A  small 
stream  trickled  down  the  middle  of  the  valley,  form- 
ing little  swamps  here  and  there,  through  which  our 
ponies  had  to  wade.  About  a  couple  of  hours 
brought  us  to  a  place  where  we  separated  in  different 
directions,  Littledale  taking  the  country  south,  whilst 
I  turned  to  the  right  up  an  easy  slope  northwards. 
Old  weather-beaten  fragments  of  horns  of  the  Maral 
lay  on  the  ground  in  some  quantity.  These  stags 
had  probably  frequented  the  country  years  ago,  and, 
living  in  such  a  timberless  region,  were  easily  shot 
down  by  the  merciless  natives.  On  reaching  a  low 
ridge,  we  came  in  sight  of  a  parallel  valley,  rather 
broader  than  the  one  we  had  just  left,  with  numerous 
small  lakes  glittering  in  the  middle  of  it.  The 
pastures  here  were  as  good  as  could  be  desired,  and 


NOT   AN    ANIMAL   IN    SIGHT 


245 


a  view  of  fine  stony  corries  at  the  head  of  it  promised 
a  successful  result  to  our  exploration.  But  though 
Taba  and  I  carefully  spied  the  valley  for  its  entire 
length  from  the  commanding  ridge  on  which  we 
stood,  not  an  animal  came  in  sight  ;  so  we  decided 
to   cross   it   and   examine   the   valley   beyond.       Here 


OI.ONUR    CAM1 


again  we  met  with  similar  want  of  success  ;  with  the 
exception  of  some  hares  and  a  few  Brahminy  geese  on 
the  lakes,  nothing  was  to  be  seen.  Taba  suggested 
we  should  go  straight  up  to  the  higher  ground  and 
inspect  the  plateau,  where  the  snow  was  still  left 
in  patches  from  the  previous  winter.  The  ascent 
up  the  stony  slopes  proved  a  very  difficult  one  ;  our 


246  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

horses  refused  to  advance  ;  so,  dismounting,  I  sent 
them  to  the  head  of  the  valley,  where,  at  the  bottom 
of  an  immense  amphitheatre  of  high  mountains,  lay 
a  larger  lake,  the  shore  of  which  was  to  be  our 
rendezvous  for  the  evening.  An  hour's  scramble 
brought  us,  Taba  and  myself,  to  the  top  of  the  com- 
manding ridge,  from  which  a  broad,  stony  tableland, 
gradually  sloping  away  from  us,  extended  for  three 
or  four  miles.  Here  we  sat  down  to  spy.  Presently, 
with  the  aid  of  my  Zeiss  glass,  I  made  out  a  sus- 
picious-looking brown  speck,  then  another,  then  a 
third,  till  I  could  count  forty  of  them  some  two 
miles  below  us.  Sure  enough  these  were  sheep  at 
last,  and  very  probably  belonged  to  the  herd  Little- 
dale  had  seen  the  day  before.  On  more  careful 
inspection  we  found  them  to  be  all  rams,  lying  on 
the  plateau  in  open  ground.  We  could  not,  from  that 
distance,  make  out  the  size  of  their  horns,  but  de- 
cided to  approach  them  nearer,  under  shelter  of  the 
crags.  The  wind  was  blowing  steadily  in  our  faces 
from  the  west,  which  was  decidedly  in  our  favour, 
but  the  question  arose  whether  we  should  find  any 
possible  way  of  hiding  ourselves  on  the  flat  table- 
land, over  which  we  should  have  to  crawl  for  at  least 
six  or  seven  hundred  yards.  We  advanced  under 
shelter  of  the  rocks  in  very  broken  ground,  having  now 


ANOTHER    STALK  247 

and  then  to  descend  a  steep  gully,  the  cliffs  in  front 
of  us  being  utterly  inaccessible,  then  climb  up  again, 
and  so  on  for  a  couple  of  hours,  till  we  reached  the 
end  of  the  ridge,  from  which  we  could  distinguish 
the  sheep  quite  plainly.  Some  of  the  rams  carried 
magnificent  horns,  which  served  to  encourage  us  on 
our  somewhat  daring  enterprise.  We  now  crept 
down  for  some  time,  and  presently  found  ourselves 
on  the  flat  grassy  steppe  upon  which  the  animals 
were  lying.  Here  we  discovered  that  we  could 
advance  out  of  sight  of  them  without  having  to 
crawl,  there  being  a  slight  depression  of  the  ground 
where  they  lay.  If  by  chance  one  of  them  had 
stood  up,  we  should  immediately  have  been  dis- 
covered. Taba  led  the  way  in  a  most  confident 
manner,  halting  at  places  in  order  to  look  through 
the  glass,  and  see  whether  any  bit  of  horn  was 
visible  ;  but  no.  All  went  well  for  the  next  half-hour. 
Two  or  three  hollows,  of  which  we  availed  ourselves, 
came  in  very  opportunely,  and  we  soon  found  it 
necessary  to  crawl  on  all  fours,  and  continue  the 
advance  in  this  uncomfortable  manner.  We  were 
now,  as  I  thought,  within  range  ;  but  distances  on 
the  steppe  are  so  deceiving  that  we  continued  in  this 
way  for  more  than  another  half-hour,  moving  on  as 
cautiously  as  we  could,  without  catching  sight  of  the 
coveted  horns. 


248  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

At  this  stage  I  deemed  it  advisable  to  leave  Taba 
behind,  lying  flat  on  his  stomach,  and  advanced  alone, 
though  still  the  grassy  line  in  front  of  me  was  unbroken 
by  any  object  overlooking  it.  I  was  gazing  intently 
in  front  of  me,  when  suddenly  I  perceived  a  move- 
ment to  my  right,  and  there,  within  forty  yards,  stood 
two  or  three  rams  quietly  feeding  up,  and  already 
almost  between  Taba  and  myself.  This  naturally 
spoiled  my  chance  of  picking  out  the  largest,  for 
they  might  at  any  moment  get  a  whiff  of  my  wind 
and  be  off;  in  fact,  I  was  now  almost  in  the  midst 
of  them.  Turning  round,  therefore,  as  cautiously 
as  I  could,  and  cocking  my  rifle,  I  pointed  it  in 
their  direction  with  the  intention  of  choosing  my 
animal  as  they  passed,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  getting 
my  shot  at  the  first  alarm.  Suddenly  one  of  them 
lifted  his  head  up,  another  followed  his  example, 
and  a  third.  They  had  evidently  become  suspicious, 
so  nothing  was  to  be  done  but  to  take  my  chance. 
One  of  them  carried  a  very  fair  head,  and  as  he 
was  standing  broadside -on,  I  let  go  at  him,  and 
rolled  him  over ;  the  others  disappeared  like  light- 
ning. Jumping  up,  I  fired  at  a  second  as  the 
herd  streamed  downhill,  but  the  result  was  a  clean 
miss.  In  the  hustle  I  was  unable  to  pick  out 
another   good   head,    and,    firing  at  random,   saw  one 


A    FAIRLY   GOOD    RAM 


249 
the    sheep 


tumble  over.  When  Taba  came  up 
had  already  placed  a  mile  between  us.  My  first 
ram  proved  to  be  a  fairly  good  one,  though  the 
ends  of  his  horns  were,  unluckily,  broken.  Their 
girth  at  base  taped  almost  20  inches  ;  their  length 
along  the  curve  45!  inches. 


"two  or  three  rams  quietly  FEEDIN'C. 


250  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

In  the  meantime  heavy  clouds  had  gathered,  and 
the  weather  looked  threatening-,  so  we  hurriedly 
grallocked  the  animal,  and  started  back  with  the 
intention  of  sending"  our  Kalmuk  with  the  pony 
to  bring-  back  the  head  and  meat.  Rain  now 
began  pouring-  down  in  torrents,  and  before  we  had 
gone  half  a  mile  we  found  ourselves  thoroughly 
drenched  from  head  to  foot ;  in  fact,  the  rain  never 
ceased  for  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  when  we  got 
down  to  the  Lake  Valley  and  found  our  ponies, 
there  was  no  question  of  sending  the  man  after 
my  booty.  The  second  animal  I  had  dropped  was 
a  young  one,  and  not  worth  bringing  back.  We 
reached  camp  at  about  6  p.m.,  none  the  worse  for 
the  dreadful  soaking  we  had  undergone,  and  found 
Littledale  returned.  He  had  seen  only  ewes  on  his 
ground,  about  200  in  number.  Thus  ended  my 
second  meeting  with  kotchkor.  I  had  greatly  en- 
joyed an  exciting  stalk,  and  had  never  before  found 
myself  so  close  to  them. 

The  following  day  I  remained  in  camp,  sending 
a  couple  of  men  to  bring  back  the  meat  of  my  two 
rams  killed  on  the  previous  day,  as  well  as  the  head 
of  the  large  one.  Though  the  weather  was  still  in- 
clement, Littledale  decided  to  explore  the  ground 
where    I   had  shot  my  Ibex.      The  two  native  chiefs 


A   NEW    HUNTER  251 

had  left  for  their  respective  homes  with  our  old 
horses  and  men.  Towards  evening-  Littledale  came 
back  and  reported  that  he  had  found  a  herd  of 
seventeen  rams,  and  had  followed  them  over  two 
or  three  ridges,  but  unsuccessfully.  The  night  was 
exceedingly  cold,  promising  a  fine  day  for  the 
morrow.  I  consequently  started  early,  on  July  26th, 
with  a  new  hunter,  whom  the  Zaissan  had  brought 
with  him.  and  of  whom  he  had  given  me  a  good 
account.  My  intention  was  to  try  to  find  the  herd 
Littledale  had  seen  on  the  previous  day.  We  passed 
over  the  same  rolling  hills  as  on  my  first  attempt 
from  this  camp,  and  on  reaching  a  small  river 
followed  it  down  for  about  eight  miles,  then  ascend- 
ing a  steep  slope,  where,  according  to  Littledale's 
account,  he  had  left  the  rams.  I  began  spying  the 
country  beyond,  but  though  I  carefully  inspected 
every  corner  of  the  nullah,  my  glass  revealed  nothing. 
On  the  sky-line  to  my  left,  however,  and  high  above 
us,  a  moving  object  attracted  my  attention  ;  I  found 
it  to  be  a  fair  ram,  and,  presuming  that  there  might 
be  others  behind  the  ridge,  we  started  in  his  direction. 
The  wind  was  very  unsteady,  and  we  were  obliged, 
therefore,  to  circumvent  the  hill  for  a  couple  of  hours 
in  order  to  get  to  leeward.  Leaving  the  ponies  under 
a    rocky   ridge    suggestive    of    Ibex,    I    continued    to 


252  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

advance,  when  suddenly,  about  eighty  yards  below  us, 
an  average-sized  ram  started  up  and  stood  staring  at 
us  for  some  time.  Unluckily,  he  had  taken  us  un- 
awares, and,  my  rifle  being  in  its  case,  it  took  me 
a  few  seconds  to  get  ready  to  fire.  While  thus 
engaged,  the  animal  jumped  over  to  another  rock, 
and  stopping  again  gave  me  a  doubtful  chance.  As 
I  fired  he  disappeared  among  the  crags,  and  though 
we  rushed  down  to  the  place  where  we  had  seen 
him  last,  we  were  unable  to  find  him  again.  This 
was  indeed  aggravating,  for  I  had  probably  frightened 
the  one  we  had  been  following,  and  on  resuming;  our 
course  we  naturally  found  that  he  had  disappeared. 
We  continued  our  search  over  the  rolling  stones  at 
an  altitude  of  about  11,000  feet,  with  many  ups  and 
downs,  examining  numerous  corries  and  gullies,  with 
the  only  result  of  finding  a  herd  of  six  young  Ibex 
bucks,  which  were  lying  a  few  hundred  yards  below 
us,  and  which  we  might  have  easily  approached  if 
they  had  been  worth  shooting. 

At  2  p.m.  we  gave  up  all  hope  for  that  day,  and 
started  back  for  camp,  which  we  only  reached  at 
six,  after  a  four  hours'  long  and  dreary  ride.  On 
the  way  back  I  found  a  half-rotten  sheep's  head  of 
gigantic  size,  and  putting  the  tape  to  it  I  found  it 
to  measure  63   inches   in   length   by  20  inches  girth. 


AGAIN    ON   THE   WARPATH  253 

This  was  the  largest  I  had  ever  seen.  Littledale 
had  returned  with  a  small  head,  and  reported  a 
herd  of  about  twenty,  with  one  good  one,  as  he 
thought,  but  he  failed  in  his  stalk. 

It  rained  the  whole  of  the  next  day,  so  everyone 
remained  in  camp.  Towards  evening  Joseph  came 
back  from  Kosh-Agatch,  but  to  our  great  disappoint- 
ment brought  neither  letters  nor  papers.  We  had 
instructed  him  to  bring  back  a  good  supply  of 
maccaroni,  as  we  had  run  short  of  vegetables  ;  but 
instead  of  that  we  found  several  boxes  of  matches, 
which  had  been  packed  up  in  similar  cases,  hence 
the  error — most  aggravating  to  empty  stomachs. 

The  following  day  the  weather  cleared  up  again, 
and  at  4  a.m.  I  was  once  more  on  the  warpath.  This 
time  I  turned  my  attention  to  the  darker-looking  hills, 
which  I  thought  were  a  continuation  of  the  backbone 
of  the  Happy  Valley.  In  these  regions  I  had  found 
both  Ibex  and  Sheep,  and  there  was  every  reason 
to  believe  that  I  might  come  across  more.  I  intended 
to  go  further  this  time,  and  investigate  the  numerous 
nullahs  I  had  as  yet  only  seen  from  afar.  As  my 
wife  was  very  anxious  to  get  a  shot,  Littledale 
obligingly  suggested  that  he  should  take  her  out, 
and  they  started  together  in  the  direction  of  the 
Lake  Valley.     We  actually  rode,  my  hunters  and   I, 


254  AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN   THE    ALTAI 

till  i  i  a.m.  without  seeing"  a  single  animal  in  any  of 
the  nullahs  ;  but  on  reaching  fresh  ground,  and  follow- 
ing a  high  rocky  ridge,  I  suddenly  heard  a  shuffle 
on  the  snow  amongst  the  boulders  below  us,  and 
caught  sight  of  two  sheep  that  had  jumped  out  of 
the  rocks  and  were  making  downhill.  By  the  time 
I  was  ready  to  shoot  they  were  fairly  200  yards 
away.  Another  running  shot  was  my  only  chance, 
and  as  I  fired  I  distinctly  saw  the  larger  one  stagger, 
though  he  only  stopped  a  second  and  continued  his 
course  downhill,  and  then  up  again  and  over  the 
ridge.  I  naturally  rushed  across  the  corrie  and 
reached  the  place  where  he  had  disappeared,  only 
in  time  to  see  him  pop  over  the  next  ridge.  It  was 
a  desperate  chase,  and  we  saw  him  once  more  when 
he  was  galloping  steadily  on.  The  pursuit  had  to 
be  abandoned,  for  it  was  now  fairly  late  in  the  after- 
noon, and  we  had  gone  away  from  camp  a  very  long 
distance  that  day.  Painfully  retracing  our  steps,  we 
were  returning  home  without  precaution  over  the 
ground  we  had  passed  in  the  morning,  and  where 
we  had  found  nothing,  when  suddenly  my  hunter 
pointed  out  a  couple  of  fine  old  rams  staring  at  us 
from  a  slope  above,  and  presently  starting  off  at  a 
sharp  trot.  In  my  state  of  excitement  I  decided 
to    follow    them,    which    of   course   was    a    very   rash 


DECEPTIVE   GROUND  255 

enterprise,  for  frightened  sheep  go  a  long  way.  I 
left  the  ponies  behind  a  small  boulder,  and  hurrying 
on  in  their  direction  found  them  again  a  mile  further 
on.  They  had  now  quieted  down,  and  were  care- 
lessly feeding,  though  looking  back  now  and  again. 
Leaving  my  Kalmuk,  I  crept  on  behind  a  row  of 
small  rocks,  but,  alas !  the  wind  was  shifty,  and  I 
had  not  advanced  half  an  hour  before  I  saw  them 
start  off  again.  My  hopes  had  gone  for  that  day. 
I  now  found  myself  in  broken  ground,  and  had 
entirely  lost  the  direction  from  which  I  had  come, 
so  that  I  was  at  a  loss  to  know  where  I  had  left 
the  ponies.  The  sheep  had  engrossed  my  whole 
attention,  and  I  had  failed  to  notice  my  direction, 
the  ground  being  everywhere  very  much  alike. 
Strange  to  say,  I  could  hardly  be  over  a  mile  away 
from  my  hunters,  and  yet,  though  I  shouted  at  the 
top  of  my  voice,  I  could  get  no  answer.  I  wandered 
about  in  this  manner  in  every  direction,  and  was 
about  giving  up  the  search,  when  I  suddenly  found 
the  ponies  and  men  quietly  lying  down  within  fifty 
yards  behind  the  boulder  where  I  had  left  them. 
This  was  not  the  first  time  I  had  found  the  ground 
most  deceiving  in  those  regions,  and  I  decided  hence- 
forward never  to  be  left  alone  again  on  the  steppe. 
It  was  now  nearly  dusk,  and  it  was  not  until  9  p.m. 


256  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

that  we  found  ourselves  safely  back.  Littledale  and 
my  wife  had  just  returned.  They  gave  me  an  account 
of  how  they  had  got  within  200  yards  of  a  herd  of 
rams  which  were  already  on  the  move  ;  she  had  fired 
five  shots  at  the  running  animals,  but  none  apparently 
were  hit.  Littledale  added  that  he  had  noticed  two 
or  three  magnificent  heads  amongst  them,  and  was 
most  anxious  to  go  out  next  day  in  search  of  them. 

Weather  being  fine,  on  the  morning  of  July  29th, 
Littledale  and  I  started  towards  the  higher  range 
to  the  left  of  camp.  My  intention  was  to  try  the 
ground  straight  ahead  over  the  Nam  Daba  Pass. 
On  my  way,  Taba  pointed  out  to  me  a  couple  of 
rams,  three  or  four  hundred  yards  in  front  of  us,  of 
which  one  was  a  fine  old  fellow,  whilst  the  other,  a 
smaller,  seemed  to  be  wounded.  Creeping  up  to 
within  150  yards,  further  advance  seemed  impossible, 
so  I  took  my  shot  at  the  smaller  animal  and  ended 
his  sufferings  by  rolling  him  over.  As  this  was 
close  to  the  ground  where  my  wife  was  shooting  the 
previous  day,  I  concluded  that  the  beast  had  been 
wounded  by  her,  and  accordingly  sent  my  second  man 
with  the  head  and  meat  back  to  camp  with  the  un- 
expected tidings. 

Taba  and  I  then  advanced  in  the  direction  of  the 
larger    sheep,    which    we     found    again     making    off 


A   STALK   FROM   ABOVE  257 

desperately.  Further  pursuit  was  naturally  useless, 
so  we  turned  westwards  of  the  pass,  and  presently 
spied  five  rams  standing  on  a  patch  of  snow,  half- 
way up  a  stony  nullah.  The  wind  being  shifty, 
Taba  suggested  we  should  wait  awhile  before  choos- 
ing the  direction  for  the  dttour  we  should  have  to 
make.  Unluckily,  flies  and  mosquitoes  were  very 
tiresome  that  clay,  as  we  found,  and  the  sheep  had 
evidently  retired  to  the  stretch  of  snow  in  order 
to  avoid  them.  I  noticed  through  my  glass  that  one 
of  the  five  carried  a  very  desirable  head,  and  seeing 
they  would  not  move,  I  decided  to  circumvent  them, 
and  come  clown  upon  them  from  above.  It  took  us 
two  good  hours  to  get  well  round  them,  and  when, 
creeping  down  as  cautiously  as  I  could,  I  reached  a 
protruding  ledge  of  rock,  from  which  I  thought  I 
should  be  within  range  of  them,  I  could  see,  on  peep- 
ing over,  part  of  the  patch  of  snow  still  about  400 
yards  below  me.  I  therefore  crawled  on  all  fours, 
tearing  my  hands  on  the  sharp  edges  of  stones,  till 
I  found  myself  within  about  a  hundred  yards  of  the 
place  where  we  had  located  them. 

At  this  moment  a  gust  of  wind  blew  down  the 
gully  right  in  our  backs,  and  a  second  after  the  five 
animals  came  in  siorht  moving  downhill.  I  im- 
mediately  fired  at   the   best   ram   as  he    rushed    past 


258  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

me,  but  a  running  shot  is  always  doubtful.  Three 
other  consecutive  shots  were  of  no  avail.  As  we 
watched  them,  however,  through  our  glasses,  Taba 
suddenly  shouted,  "  baalou"  which  means  "wounded," 
and  sure  enough  there  was  the  big  fellow  struggling 
to  keep  up  with  the  rest  with  one  of  his  hind  legs 
broken.  We  saw  him  cross  the  valley,  and,  to  our 
great  dismay,  ascend  the  opposite  slope,  and  dis- 
appear over  the  ridge.  Another  chase  similar  to  that  of 
yesterday  was  our  lot.  Though  we  found  blood-tracks, 
and  followed  them  for  a  couple  of  miles,  we  eventually 
had  to  give  up  the  pursuit,  and  returned  to  camp.  The 
vitality  and  energy  of  these  animals  when  wounded  is 
extraordinary.  Though  the  slope  was  exceedingly 
steep,  and  the  animal's  hind  leg  was  shattered,  he 
never  stopped  once,  but  galloped  steadily  away.  I 
was  fated  to  find  that  same  ram  again,  wound  him 
once  more  in  the  shoulder,  and  eventually  lose  him. 
According  to  a  careful  estirnate,  the  length  of  his 
horns  should  have  been  well-nigh  sixty  inches.  I 
reached  the  tents  at  8  p.m.  in  very  low  spirits.  The 
ladies  told  me  on  my  return  that  Littledale  had  sent 
in,  through  his  second  Kalmuk,  a  note  which  he  had 
scribbled  down  on  a  flat  bit  of  stone  with  Hint,  in 
the  absence  of  ordinary  materials,  with  the  following 
words  :    "  Wounded   big  sheep ;   send  small  tent  and 


A    MONGOLIAN   THUNDERSTORM  259 

stores."  This  was  indeed  good  news.  The  ladies 
had  ordered  the  Kalmuk  back  with  the  necessary 
things  for  a  night  out. 

In  the  evening  we  witnessed  a  Mongolian  thunder- 
storm,—  very  different  to  European  ones  !  It  seemed 
as  if  the  end  of  the  world  had  come.  The  continued 
rattling  of  the  thunder,  blending  with  the  noise  of  the 
gale,  and  interspersed  with  long  flashes  of  lightning, 
combined  to  produce  a  terrible,  yet  magnificent,  display 
not  easily  to  be  forgotten. 

On  the  following  morning,  there  being  no  sign  of 
Littledale,  and  the  sky  having  cleared,  I  sent  Taba 
out  in  the  hope  that  he  might  find  some  clue  to  the 
whereabouts  of  my  wounded  sheep,  while  I  remained 
in  camp  in  eager  expectation.  At  4  p.m.  Taba 
returned,  after  an  unsuccessful  search.  Half  an  hour 
later  we  perceived  a  small  party  riding  towards  us  ; 
this  was  Littledale  with  his  two  men.  He  brought 
in  the  finest  head  of  Ovis  ammon  that  had  as  yet 
been  obtained,  and  it  proved  to  be  the  record.  Its 
measurements,  as  taken  on  the  spot,  were  the  follow- 
ing :  Length,  63  inches;  girth,  19^  inches;  from  tip 
to  tip,  41^  inches.  He  gave  us  a  most  graphic 
account  of  his  two  days'  experiences.  He  had  come 
across  the  same  herd  which  my  wife  had  saluted 
with  five  shots  from  his  "  Mannlicher,"  and  to  which 


26o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

herd  belonged  the  young  ram  I  had  finished  off  for 
her.  He  had  waited  a  considerable  time  before  the 
animals  fed  into  stalkable  ground,  taking  the  utmost 
precaution  not  to  miss  the  chance  of  securing  the 
magnificent  old  ram  he  had  "spotted"  with  his  glass. 
Having  got  above  them,  the  whole  herd  passed  below 
him,  and  as  the  large  one  came  up  broadside-on,  he 
had  fired  twice,  shattering  his  hind  quarters  ;  but  this, 
he  found,  was  not  sufficient  to  stop  him,  and  as  he 
had  only  been  able  to  take  his  shot  late  in  the  after- 
noon, he  had  decided  to  spend  the  night  out,  and 
follow  him  early  the  next  day.  The  last  he  had 
seen  of  him  at  dusk,  much  to  his  discomfiture,  was 
that,  after  having  lain  down  several  times,  he  had 
finally  risen  and  walked  slowly  over  a  ridge.  Next 
morning,  at  dawn,  he  was  found  lying  some  hundreds 
of  yards  below  the  ridge  in  the  next  corrie,  still  alive. 
He  had  to  stalk  him  again,  and  put  another  bullet 
into  him  before  he  could  secure  him.  The  wretched 
animal  must  have  spent  a  most  uncomfortable  night ; 
but  such  is  the  vitality  of  these  animals  that  only  a 
mortal  wound  will  stop  them. 

Next  day  we  shifted  camp  westwards.  Though 
I  felt  much  depressed  over  the  last  days'  failures,  I 
decided  to  try  once  more  my  old  ground  in  an  eastern 
direction,  on   the  chance  of  finding   the  two  old  rams 


A    GRAND    OLD    RAM  263 

I  had  come  across  there.  Little  Taba,  who  again 
accompanied  me,  was  still  confident  and  sure  of 
success.  We  were  to  return  in  the  evening  to  our 
next  camping-ground,  which  was  to  be  on  the  other 
side  below  the  Nam  Daba  Pass.  On  reaching  the 
plateau,  after  an  hour's  ride  from  camp,  we  very  soon 
discovered  a  grand  old  ram  lying  amongst  rocks 
about  two  miles  north  of  our  camp.  We  thought 
he  had  naturally  seen  us,  as  his  head  was  turned  in 
our  direction,  and  we  were  in  full  sight  of  him  on 
horseback  at  about  500  yards.  Taba's  idea  was  that 
he  might  be  my  wounded  beast,  for  his  mighty  horns 
greatly  resembled  those  of  the  one  I  had  come  across 
a  couple  of  days  previously.  According  to  Taba,  the 
only  possible  way  to  approach  him  was  to  ride  on  in 
full  view  and  slowly  drop  out  of  our  saddles,  whilst 
his  attention  would  be  distracted  by  the  ponies,  which 
were  to  be  led  in  an  opposite  direction  by  my  second 
Kalmuk.  This  ruse  was  crowned  with  success,  for 
as  we  crept  along  behind  the  rocks  we  could  see  the 
animal  watching  the  ponies  intently  as  they  were 
being  led  away.  In  this  manner,  and  crawling  on 
all  fours,  I  got  without  difficulty  within  a  hundred 
yards  of  his  resting-place.  As  I  drew  nearer  I  judged 
his  horns,  which  were  on  the  sky-line  just  before  me, 
to  be  close  upon  sixty  inches,  and  just  as  I  was  pre- 


264  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

paring-  to  shoot,  he  started  up  and  gave  me  a  very 
doubtful  chance,  of  which  I  availed  myself,  however, 
and  fired.  As  he  made  off  I  could  plainly  see  that 
I  had  smashed  his  shoulder,  and  that  besides  one  of 
his  hind-legs  was  stiff,  which  confirmed  our  suspicion 
that  he  was  our  old  friend  which  I  had  wounded  on 
the  29th.  To  our  dismay  he  continued  moving  on  at 
a  slow  pace,  looking  round  now  and  again,  till  he- 
disappeared  over  a  ridge.  The  ponies  had  now  come 
up,  and  we  galloped  across  the  corrie  as  hard  as  we 
could  go.  We  came  up  just  in  time  to  see  my  ram 
walking  over  the  next  ridge.  On  we  went  at  full 
gallop,  heading  towards  a  mass  of  rock,  under  which 
we  hoped  he  might  lie  down  ;  but,  alas !  nothing- 
would  induce  him  to  stop,  and  again  we  saw  him 
toiling  up  the  opposite  slope.  He  must  have  noticed 
our  proceedings,  and  felt  that  he  was  being  pursued. 
We  then  decided  to  dodge  round  out  of  sight  of  him, 
and,  following  up  a  small  stream,  meet  him  before  he 
got  to  the  next  ridge,  for  which  he  was  evidently 
making.  The  ponies  were  now  exhausted,  but  we 
urged  them  on,  and  dismounted  close  to  the  bed 
of  the  stream.  Half  an  hour  brought  us  to  the  top 
of  the  ridge,  below  which  I  soon  spied  my  animal 
lying  on  the  slope  where  we  had  last  seen  him. 
Approaching   with    the    greatest   caution,    I    was  just 


A   LUCKLESS    PURSUIT  265 

about  to  fire,  when  he  again  rose  and  started  off; 
but  here  I  was  dead  beat,  and  my  two  shots  must 
have  been  clean  misses.  Looking"  round  I  saw  no 
sign  of  Taba  ;  as  for  the  ram,  he  had  trotted  across 
the  nullah,  and  I  remained  perfectly  helpless  with 
my  second  Kalmuk  and  the  half-dead  ponies,  who 
refused  to  advance  another  inch.  I  continued  my 
pursuit,  however,  and  on  coming  in  sight  of  the 
next  corrie  found  nothing  in  it,  neither  man  nor  beast. 
Having  spied  every  bit  of  ground,  I  stopped,  for 
further  advance  was  useless.  Retracing  my  steps 
to  the  stream  I  was  now  in  search  of  Taba,  and 
still  hoped  that  he  might  bring  back  good  news. 
On  the  other  side  of  the  river  stood  tiers  of  in- 
accessible crags,  to  which,  if  the  ram  had  betaken 
himself,  further  pursuit  would  be  out  of  the  question, 
and  this,  I  feared,  was  the  case.  Heavy  showers 
now  came  on,  and  I  resolved  to  return  home ;  my 
luck  had  evidently  deserted  me.  On  reaching  once 
more  the  scene  of  our  wild  pursuit,  I  suddenly  caught 
sight  of  Taba  and  his  pony  on  the  very  top  of  the 
opposite  hill.  Beckoning  to  him  to  come  down,  he 
explained  to  me  in  great  excitement  that  he  had 
seen  the  animal  make  for  the  bed  of  the  stream,  and 
had  tried  unsuccessfully  to  cut  him  off  from  the  other 
side,   where  we   should   necessarily  have  lost  him   in 


266  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  rocks.  He  said  he  had  been  within  twenty  yards 
of  the  beast,  shouting-  and  throwing  stones  at  him, 
but  that  he  had  held  his  own,  and  steadily  crossing 
the  stream  had  disappeared  amongst  the  crags.  Taba 
had  followed  him  for  some  time,  and  then  given  up 
the  chase.  These  sheep  were,  indeed,  the  toughest 
animals  I  had  ever  come  across,  and  this  day's  ex- 
periences furnished  the  best  proof  of  it,  for  the  ram 
had  gone  on  for  miles  with  a  hind-leer  broken  and 
a  shattered  shoulder,  and  yet  our  united  efforts  had 
been  unable  to  secure  him.  We  reached  camp, 
after  a  long  and  dreary  journey,  at  6  p.m.,  and  found 
the  tents  pitched  in  a  small,  narrow  gully  running 
northwards,  on  the  Siberian  side  of  the  Nam  Daba 
Pass.  We  were  now  about  twenty-five  versts  distant 
from  our  last  camp,  and  at  an  altitude  of  8,000  feet. 
I  heard  from  the  ladies  that  the  march  had  not  been 
made  without  incident,  for  the  new  horses,  which  had 
been  accustomed  to  remain  feeding'  all  day,  were 
exceedingly  loth  to  carry  any  baggage  or  to  shift 
quarters.  In  consequence  of  this  many  of  them 
stampeded,  with  the  result  of  throwing  over  their 
loads.  One  in  particular  was  a  most  vicious  animal, 
and  Littledale's  largest  sheep's  head  having  been 
packed  on  him,  the  horns  several  times  were  in 
great  danger  of  being  broken.      It  had  begun  raining 


OVER    ROLLING   STONES  267 

in  the  forenoon,  and  had  continued  steadily  all  day, 
so  that  the  tents  had  to  be  pitched  under  a  severe 
drizzle,  which  was  by  no  means  useful  for  our  bedding. 
We  hoped  to  be  able  to  get  out  shooting  early  next 
morning,  but  the  weather  prevented  this  ;  in  fact,  it 
poured  all  day,  and  it  was  not  until  the  evening  that 
the  clouds  gradually  dispersed.  Our  cattle-driver  had 
not  turned  up  in  the  afternoon,  and  want  of  meat  was 
beginning  to  be  felt,  when  at  last  he  arrived,  saying 
that  he  had  lost  his  way  in  the  hills,  and  had  been 
in  search  of  us  the  whole  day.  I  was  much  dis- 
concerted about  the  big  ram  which  J  had  wounded, 
though  I  still  cherished  hopes  of  finding  him  again, 
notwithstanding  that  we  were  now  a  good  six  hours' 
ride  from  the  ground  where  we  lost  him. 

Next  morning,  August  2nd,  the  weather  being- 
bright,  we  both  started  early  to  our  new  ground. 
Littledale  went  up  a  valley  in  a  southern  direction 
towards  the  higher  snow-covered  hills,  whilst  I  went 
westwards  into  country  as  yet  unexplored  by  us.  It 
was  freezing  hard  when  we  issued  from  our  tents,  and 
the  day  was  a  promising  one.  We  rode  for  three 
hours,  Taba  and  I,  over  nasty  rolling  stones,  and 
across  swampy  ravines,  without  catching  sight  of  a 
single  animal.  On  reaching  a  row  of  grey,  craggy 
hills,  Taba  suddenly  stopped  me,  saying  it  was  no  use 


268  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE   ALTAI 

continuing  in  that  direction,  because  he  thought  there 
was  a  very  poor  chance  of  game,  and  suggested  that 
we  should  turn  back  as  quickly  as  possible  and  re- 
visit our  old  Lake  Valley,  where  we  had  found  so 
much  game  from  our  previous  camp.  We  raced  back 
accordingly,  as  hard  as  our  steeds  could  carry  us, 
reaching  camp  at  9  a.m.,  having  lost  the  whole  of  the 
morning,  and,  changing  horses,  quickly  started  in  the 
opposite  direction. 

We  ascended  a  long  slope  during  the  next  two 
hours.  As  it  was  very  steep  and  wet,  my  horse 
slipped  and  fell,  bringing  me  down  with  him,  but 
luckily  without  serious  consequences.  On  reaching 
the  nullahs  with  which  we  were  already  familiar,  I 
began  spying,  and  straight  away  found  three  rams 
lying  about  half  a  mile  below  us.  Taba,  who  was 
slightly  in  front  of  me,  had  failed  to  notice  them, 
and  having  shown  himself  too  quickly  on  the  sky- 
line, made  them  gallop  away.  Great  was  my  dis- 
appointment, as  one  of  them  seemed  to  carry  a  good 
head.  We  let  them  go,  as  experience  had  taught  us 
it  was  of  no  avail  pursuing  scared  animals,  and  follow- 
ing another  low  ridge  eastwards,  we  presently  came 
within  sight  of  an  old  ram  standing  motionless  on  a 
rock  about  a  mile  in  front  of  us.  The  wind  being 
steady,  we  dropped  down  and  decided  to  try  for  him. 


AWAITING    DEVELOPMENTS  269 

We  were  now  on  a  small  plateau,  at  the  head  of 
two  parallel  grassy  valleys,  separated  by  low,  rolling 
boulders,  from  which  sprang  here  and  there  rows  of 
rocky  buttresses  resembling  ruins  of  old  forts.  These 
afforded  us  capital  shelter,  under  which  we  were  able 
to  hide  as  we  moved  cautiously  on.  We  continued 
in  this  manner  for  over  half  an  hour,  reaching  a  last 
clump  of  rocks  about  500  yards  from  our  coveted 
quarry,  which  was  still  standing  like  a  statue.  A  slant- 
ing grassy  saddle  now  only  divided  us,  and  we  could 
advance  no  further  without  risk  of  being  discovered  ; 
so  we  lay  down  to  wait  till  the  beast  should  move  out 
of  sight.  The  heat  was  intense  that  day,  and  the 
sky  cloudless,  and  it  was  evident  that  the  ram  was 
pondering  over  which  of  the  rocks  he  should  choose 
to  lie  under  in  the  shade. 

As  we  lay  awaiting  further  developments,  a  couple 
of  young  rams  came  up  to  within  fifteen  yards  of  us, 
probably  likewise  in  search  of  shade.  We  both  held 
our  breath,  fearing  to  disturb  them,  and  they  slowly 
passed  us  without  having  noticed  our  presence.  These 
had  distracted  our  attention  for  some  time,  and  when 
we  looked  back  for  the  big  ram  he  was  not  to  be  seen. 
We  accordingly  started  to  cross  the  intervening  ground, 
and  on  reaching  the  rocks  where  we  had  seen  him 
standings    we    found    that    there  was   another   row  of 


27o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

buttresses  further  down,  and  as  we  peeped  over  the 
rocks  Taba  caught  me  by  the  sleeve  and  pointed 
towards  a  tower-like  mass,  with  precipitous  walls  on 
every  side,  some  400  yards  lower.  There  was  my 
ram  again,  standing  motionless  on  the  very  top  of 
it !  I  soon  recognised  his  massive,  well-shaped  horns. 
Again  our  only  chance  was  to  wait,  and  we  presently 
saw  him  make  up  his  mind,  and  turning  away  from  us 
disappear  over  the  rocks.  Making  sure  he  could  not 
see  us  from  his  hiding-place,  wherever  it  might  be,  we 
again  rushed  downhill,  and  safely  reached  the  buttress. 
But  here  a  delicate  job  awaited  me,  for  in  all  proba- 
bility the  sheep  had  lain  down  under  some  protruding 
ledge  on  the  further  side  of  the  rocks,  and  I  should 
have  to  find  him,  and  probably  get  within  close 
quarters  before  discovering  him.  Leaving  Taba  at 
the  foot  of  the  cliff,  I  scrambled  up  the  wall,  rifle  in 
hand  and  on  the  alert.  It  was  rather  a  perilous 
ascent,  and  had  it  not  been  for  some  natural  steps 
here  and  there  where  I  could  get  my  foothold,  I 
could  never  have  reached  the  top.  Moreover,  the 
wind  kept  blowing  round  at  this  place,  and  might 
start  the  animal  any  moment.  I  slowly  advanced 
breathless,  from  corner  to  corner,  till  suddenly,  forty 
yards  below  me,  I  caught  sight  of  first  a  pair  of 
horns,   and  then  of  the   whole  of  the  animal's  body. 


AN    EXCITING   CHASE  271 

In  my  excitement  I  took  a  quick,  standing  shot  at 
him,  and  fired  again  as  he  rushed  down  the  rocks. 
In  a  second  Taba  was  by  my  side,  and  as  we  both 
watched  the  beast  running  away  at  full  speed  we 
clearly  saw  that  he  was  wounded.  He  went  on,  how- 
ever, till  he  reached  some  steep  crags  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  valley,  where  he  finally  lay  clown.  Taba 
said  he  had  located  him  ;  so,  calling  up  the  ponies,  we 
made  off  in  his  direction  in  order  to  approach  him 
again  from  above. 

But  the  difficulty  now  was  to  recognise  the  rocks 
from  another  side,  for  numerous  rows  of  similar  crags 
ran  down  parallel  from  the  top  ridge.  Dismounting, 
we  made  our  way  through  the  broken  ground,  peeping 
over  the  rocks,  till  suddenly  we  heard  the  rattling  of 
stones  and  caught  sight  of  him  as  he  dashed  down 
the  slope.  Bang  went  my  rifle  again,  with  the  result 
of  breaking  a  leg  ;  but  this  only  gave  him  greater 
impetus,  and  following  him  down  we  got  to  the  bottom 
of  the  valley  in  less  time  than  it  takes  to  describe  it. 
I  now  thought  that  we  had  lost  him,  and  was  giving 
vent  to  my  despair,  when  Taba  calmly  pointed  the 
beast  out  to  me  standing  on  a  ledge  half-way  up  the 
hill.  He  seemed  unable  to  move  ;  I  could  distinctly 
see  the  blood  flowing  from  the  wound,  and  thought 
I  might  go  on  and  finish  him  off,  but  Taba's  plan  was 


272  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

different.  He  ordered  the  second  Kalmuk  to  circum- 
vent the  crags,  and  cut  off  his  retreat  from  the  upper 
rocks.  This  manoeuvre  having  been  accomplished, 
he  beckoned  me  to  proceed  towards  the  animal,  which 
still  stood  motionless  on  the  same  spot.  We  soon 
found,  however,  that  he  could  move,  for  before  we 
could  approach  him  he  turned  round  and  rushed  away. 
Running  as  fast  as  our  legs  could  carry  us,  we  again 
reached  the  top  just  as  the  animal  had  been  turned 
back  by  the  mounted  Kalmuk,  and  as  the  ram  passed 
within  fifty  yards  of  me  at  full  gallop,  I  rolled  him 
over  with  a  bullet  in  his  neck.  Thus  ended  this 
memorable  chase.  I  found  that  his  horns  measured 
well — 51  inches  in  length,  19J  inches  girth,  $3  inches 
spread.  I  was  also  struck  by  the  fact  that  my  four 
shots  had  told — two  of  them  in  the  stomach,  one  in 
the  thigh,  and  the  last  one  in  the  neck.  Meat  not 
being  wanted  in  camp,  we  left  the  carcase  to  the 
foxes  and  vultures,  and  only  took  his  head,  which 
we  brought  back  to  camp  at  6  p.m.  Littledale  had 
come  back  empty-handed. 

Next  morning,  at  9  a.m.,  we  shifted  camp  eastwards 
and  pitched  our  tents  at  noon  at  an  altitude  of  7,800 
feet,  after  a  short  fifteen  versts*  march. 

August  4th  was  an  uninteresting  day  for  me, 
although   I   went  out  in  eager  expectation  of  finding 


THE    TARKHATY    RIVER  275 

the  big  ram  I  had  wounded.  Though  I  came  across 
several  herds,  we  were  doomed  to  be  discovered 
every  time  we  attempted  to  approach  them,  and  on 
reaching  a  high  ridge  where  we  expected  to  find 
Ibex,  we  came  across  several  rams  amongst  the  most 
broken  ground  I  had  as  yet  seen  ;  the  heat  of  the 
day  had  probably  caused  them  to  intrude  upon  the 
Ibex.  None  of  them  I  thought  were  worth  shooting. 
In  order  to  get  a  full  command  of  the  surrounding 
country,  Taba  and  I  made  the  ascent  of  the  highest 
peak  in  the  district,  and  discovered  about  a  mile 
below  us,  lying  on  a  grassy  cul-de-sac,  six  very  fine 
old  rams,  perhaps  the  finest  I  had  seen.  They  were 
lying  close  to  each  other,  all  resting  their  heads  on 
the  ground,  probably  tired  of  the  weight  nature  had 
imposed  upon  them  to  carry.  We  waited  till  5  p.m.. 
hoping  that  they  might  get  up  and  feed  towards  us, 
but  seeing  that  they  had  no  intention  of  doing  so, 
we  started  back  for  camp,  leaving  the  herd  un- 
disturbed, and  hoping  to  find  them  again  another 
day.  As  for  my  wounded  one,  there  were  no  signs 
of  him.  It  was  pitch  dark  before  we  got  to  the  tents. 
Littledale  was  back  with  two  good  heads. 

Next  day  we  shifted  camp  down  the  Tarkhaty 
River,  passing  our  friend  Abduldho's  Kirghiz  encamp- 
ment,   but    omitting    to    call    upon    him    for    fear    of 


276  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

wasting  time.  We  marched  up  a  small  tributary  of 
the  aforenamed  river,  and  about  2  p.m.  pitched  our 
camp.  We  now  had  in  prospect  for  the  following 
day  both  the  same  ground  which  I  had  visited  on 
the  previous  day,  as  well  as  a  new  range  of  hills 
running  northwards  of  us  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Tarkhaty  Valley.  These  were  supposed  to  be 
haunted  by  Ibex;  Taba  intimated  that  no  sheep 
ever  frequented  them.  It  began  raining  in  the 
afternoon,  and  so  continued  the  whole  of  the  follow- 
ing day.  Consequently  we  resorted  to  fishing,  but 
Grayling  rose  listlessly  in  the  Tarkhaty  River,  and 
we  caught  but  few  fish.  Towards  evening  the 
weather  cleared  up,  and  it  froze  hard  during  the 
night.  That  day  I  visited  several  of  the  Kirghiz 
yourts,  and  found  them  by  far  cleaner  than  those  I 
had  come  across  in  the  Kalmuk  country.  Large 
herds  of  horses  and  cattle  (some  thousands  together) 
were  grazing  round  the  encampment,  which  showed 
how  much  richer  the  Kirghiz  are  than  the  wretched 
Kalmuks. 

On  the  following  morning  I  started,  at  4  a.m., 
towards  the  hills  on  the  left  side  of  the  small  stream 
on  which  we  were  encamped,  and  presently  reached 
a  high  tableland,  from  which  I  could  plainly  dis- 
tinguish   the     Kosh-Agatch     Plain    in    the    distance. 


WADING   THE   TARKHATY    RIVER  277 

That  day  I  came  across  large  herds  of  ewes,  but 
found  no  shootable  rams.  We  went  on  a  long-  way, 
Taba  and  I,  reaching  the  scene  of  our  first  adventure 
with  Ovis  amnion.  The  Happy  Valley  was  now  in 
sight,  the  Bain  -  Tchagan  and  Tchagan  -  Burgaza 
rivers,  as  well  as  the  low  pass  over  which  we 
crossed  into  Mongolia.  I  felt  sorry  to  think  that 
we  were  so  soon  to  quit  these  happy  hunting-grounds 
and  return  to  civilisation  ;  but  our  time  was  up,  and 
the  approaching  autumn  was  announced  by  the  cold 
wind  that  swept  across  the  high  Mongolian  Altai. 
We  were  being  turned  out  by  a  late  season.  I  re- 
turned to  camp  late  in  the  evening  in  pensive  mood, 
without  having  fired  off  my  rifle.  Littledale  had 
come  back  with  the  meat  of  a  young  ram,  reporting 
that  he  had  seen  several  Ibex  (female  and  young). 
but  had  failed  to  discover  the  fine  herd  I  had  seen 
two  days  previously. 

Next  day,  on  coming  out  of  my  tent,  I  found  it  to 
be  a  beautiful  bright  sunny  morning,  and  decided  with 
Taba  to  cross  the  Tarkhaty  River  and  investigate  the 
lofty  spurs,  which  the  hunter  said  were  inhabited 
solely  by  Ibex.  Littledale  went  back  in  search  of 
the  large  rams.  We  waded  across  the  river  at  5  a.m.. 
and  gave  the  ponies  a  severe  trial,  as  we  ascended  an 
exceedingly  steep  slope  for   a  couple  of    hours.      On 


278  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

our  way  two  female  Ibex  watched  us  for  some  time, 
and  then  disappeared  in  the  rocks.  The  ground  we 
now  sighted  was  apparently  devoid  of  grass  ;  sharp- 
edged,  volcanic-like  peaks,  intercepted  by  stony 
corries,  and  joined  together  by  rocky  ridges,  gave 
the  country  an  aspect  of  solitude  and  desolation  ;  it 
seemed  as  if  an  earthquake  had  turned  everything 
upside  down.  Sundry  plateaux  here  and  there  en- 
abled us  to  continue  our  course,  and  as  we  reached 
a  high  saddle  which  commanded  a  view  over  a  wide 
stony  nullah,  I  spied  a  dozen  female  Ibex  lying  on 
the  opposite  slopes  about  a  mile  off.  Leaving  the 
ponies,  we  ascended  a  steep  slope  over  rolling- 
boulders  and  shingle,  and  in  about  an  hour  reached 
another  and  higher  plateau,  at  an  altitude  of  1 1,000 
feet,  in  order  to  inspect  an  adjacent  corrie,  where 
Taba  assured  me  he  had  always  seen  Ibex  and, 
strange  to  say,  sometimes  Maral  stags.  This  time, 
however,  we  found  nothing  there,  though  we  care- 
fully spied  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  rocks.  The 
horses  had  been  led  round  over  easier  ground,  and 
we  mounted  again  to  cross  a  large  tableland  and 
explore  the  nullahs  beyond.  Large  patches  of  snow 
lay  everywhere  ;  our  ponies  were  obliged  to  cross 
them,  sinking  now  and  again  up  to  their  bellies. 
Just  as  we   reached  the  ech^e   another  herd   of  about 


A    HERD   OF   IBEX  279 

forty  female  Ibex  came  in  sight.  They  were  making 
their  way  slowly  up  from  their  feeding  ground  below, 
and  were  evidently  heading  for  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  snow  patches.  We  were  now  within  400  yards 
of  them,  on  horseback,  and  stopped  in  order  to  let 
them  pass.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  they  did  not 
discover  us,  and  walked  slowly  away.  At  that 
moment  I  suddenly  saw  a  fine  old  buck,  then 
another,  and  a  third,  following  the  last  of  the  herd. 
I  now  made  desperate  signs  to  Taba  to  dismount, 
and  get  the  horses  out  of  sight  as  quietly  as  he 
could,  which  he  successfully  accomplished  without 
being  noticed  by  the  beasts.  Crawling  up  to  a 
small  hollow,  we  waited,  motionless.  The  Ibex  were 
quietly  making  for  the  rocks,  and  we  watched  them 
for  a  long  time  till  they  had  passed  out  of  sight. 
With  Wild  Sheep  we  should  never  have  been  able 
to  get  off  so  easily.  Three  of  the  old  bucks  had 
particularly  attracted  my  attention,  and  I  was  very 
anxious  to  secure  one  which  seemed  to  me  larger 
than  the  others  ;  the  tip  of  one  of  his  horns  was 
broken  off,  but  the  other  looked  a  very  good  one. 
As  they  disappeared  round  a  corner,  I  followed  them 
as  quickly  as  my  legs  could  carry  me,  and  could  now 
just  see  the  tips  of  their  horns  moving  amongst  the 
steep  crags.      They  were  evidently  about  to  lie  down  ; 


28o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN     THE    ALTAI 

so,  leaving  Taba,  I  crawled  on  over  the  rolling  stones. 
The  wind  was  blowing  steadily  downhill,  so  I  was 
obliged  to  circumvent  them  from  below,  and  crept  for 
about  half  an  hour  down  the  bed  of  a  small  stream 
till  I  reached  the  bottom  of  the  ravine.  They  were 
now  out  of  sight,  and  huge  rocky  boulders,  one  on 
the  top  of  another,  stood  like  a  broken  wall  in  front 
of  me.  Amongst  these  I  now  began  crawling  up, 
and  presently  found  that  two  or  three  young  bucks 
were  lying  amongst  them  within  200  yards  of  me 
facing  towards  me,  but  I  could  see  no  sign  of  the 
larger  ones.  There  was  no  possibility  of  an  advance 
without  being  discovered,  so  I  waited  fairly  an  hour 
in  a  most  uncomfortable  position  till  I  saw  them  lazily 
start  slumbering.  I  had  to  seize  the  opportunity,  and 
crawled  on  for  over  half  an  hour,  hiding  now  and 
again  behind  the  highest  boulders,  till,  finally,  I 
reached  a  corner  which  afforded  me  better  shelter. 
On  looking  back  a  last  time  I  saw  that  they  had 
not  been  disturbed,  and  now  appeared  some  300 
yards  above  me  against  the  sky-line  the  tips  of 
longer  horns,  towards  which  I  made  my  way  with 
the  utmost  caution.  The  wind  was  still  blowing 
steadily  in  my  face,  and  though  now  and  then  I 
was  still  in  sight  of  the  two  young  bucks,  I  managed 
somehow    to   get    within    200   yards   of  the   old   ones. 


A   GOOD    HEAD  281 

I  took  over  an  hour  to  advance  100  yards,  but  could 
not  venture  to  go  further ;  so  I  steadied  my  rifle 
against  a  bit  of  rock,  and  waited  till  one  of  them 
gave  me  a  chance  by  getting  up.  I  could  only  see 
four  or  five  horns  against  the  sky,  like  the  branches 
of  a  tree,  and  naturally  could  not  distinguish  which 
of  them  belonged  to  the  larger  Ibex.  Presently, 
however,  one  of  them  stood  up  broadside-on,  and 
I  immediately  recognised  the  one  with  the  tip  of  his 
horn  broken  off.  As  he  did  so,  I  drew  my  bead  on 
him  and  fired  almost  perpendicularly  twice.  I  saw 
him  stumble,  and  had  just  time  to  give  him  another 
shot  which  rolled  him  over.  The  others  instantly 
disappeared.  On  getting  up  to  him  I  found  he  had 
a  good  head,  the  unbroken  horn  measuring  over  40 
inches  in  length  and  10^  inches  girth.  Taba,  who 
had  been  waiting  some  hundreds  of  yards  off,  soon 
came  up,  and  helped  to  cut  the  animal's  head  oft. 
He  was  delighted  at  my  success,  and  gave  me  further 
samples  of  his  broken  English,  although  this  time 
not  in  his  usual  vocabulary,  which  had  been  hitherto 
applied  to  failures.  As  it  was  getting  late  in  the  day, 
we  decided  to  return  to  camp,  and  the  road  being  a 
difficult  one,  it  took  us  a  long  time  to  get  out  of  the 
crags,  and  as  long  again  to  find  the  horses.  At 
6  p.m.  we  crossed  the  Tarkhaty   River,  and  reached 


282  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

the  tents  a  little  later.  Littledale  had  brought  in  two 
more  trophies  of  sheep,  neither  of  them  measuring 
over  fifty  inches.  Next  day  we  bade  farewell  to  the 
Tarkhaty  country,  and  decided  to  make  a  long  march 
and  pitch  our  tents  on  the  banks  of  the  Tchagan- 
Bursfaza  River. 


KI.II'RN     lO     lCHACAN-Bl/RGAZA. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Pack -ponies  gone  astray;  replaced  by  Camels  from  the  Kirghis — 
Again  in  the  Happy  Valley — More  Stalking  —  Letters  at  Last 
Weather  breaks  up — Kosh-Agatch  Plain  —  Antelope  —  Our  Bag — 
Start  for  Bashkaous  Valley  —  Shooting  Wild  Fowl  on  the  Kosh- 
Agatch  Steppe — My  Wife  kills  a  Wild  Swan  with  the  Rifle — In  the 
Altai  Woodlands — Pine,  Larch,  and  Birch — After  Maral  and  Roe- 
deer —  Grayling  Fishing  in  the  Bashkaous  River  —  The  Zaissan's 
Home  —  Kara  Kodjur  Stream  —  Unsuccessful  Approaches  —  Wild 
Scenery— Sorry-Kol  Lake — Tracks  of  Maral  and  Moose— Littledale 
Shoots  a  good  Roe-buck — Our  Camp  at  Vulientash— Absence  of 
Deer — September  6th — General  Retreat  to  Ongoudai — Meeting  with 
Major  Wissmann — Homeward  Bound. 

Late  in  the  morning  of  August  9th  we  struck  camp. 
The  cause  of  delay  was  that  eight  of  our  pack-ponies 
had  somehow  gone  astray,  and  with  this  bad  news 
our  demitcha  met  us  as  we  stepped  out  of  our  tents. 
His  report  implied  that  they  might  have  been  stolen 
during  the  night  by  the  Kirghiz,  who,  he  said,  were 
addicted  to  such  proceedings.  Our  opinion,  however, 
was  that  the  Kalmuks  themselves  had  concealed 
them  with  the  view  of  making  us  pay  for  them.  The 
demitcha,  though  an  energetic  man  in  every  way, 
who  kept  his  followers  in  thorough  good  order,  had 
2S3 


284  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

shown  signs  of  craftiness,  and  we  were  therefore  on 
the  look  out  for  some  trickery.  We  let  him  know 
that  we  could  in  no  way  answer  for  their  negligence, 

and   that   the  entire  responsibility  before   the   Zaissan 


lay  with  him.  Four  camels  were  brought  in  from 
the  Kirghiz  encampment  to  replace  the  lost  ponies, 
and  at  10  a.m.  we  were  on  the  move.  The  demitcha 
had  despatched  two  of  his  men  in  search  of  the 
ponies,  with  strict  orders  to  "  find  them,"  and  natur- 
ally    the     Kalmuks     soon     reappeared     with     them. 


THE    HAPPY    VALLEY 


>85 


Having  passed  the  ground  we  knew  so  well,  we  pitched 
our  tents  in  the  afternoon  at  our  first  camping  place, 
and  forthwith  sent  Joseph  to  Kosh-Agatch  with  half 
a  dozen  ponies  laden  with  our  numerous  trophies. 
The  evenino-  was  clear  and  bright,  and  on  the  follow- 


OUR    CAMI 


ing  morning  I  was  off  to  inspect  the  Happy  Valley 
again,  whilst  Littledale  followed  the  nullah  south- 
wards. Alas !  I  found  the  place  entirely  deserted, 
and  though  I  followed  the  stream  to  the  very  head  of 
the  nullah,  I  saw  but  three  fair  rams  during  the  whole 
day,  though  there  were  numbers  of  ewes  on  the 
slopes    on    both    sides.      These    stood    crowning    the 


286  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

heights,  staring  at  us,  and  came  down  to  i(-cd  as  soon 
as  we  had  passed.  I  returned  to  camp  at  6  p.m. 
thoroughly  disappointed,  and  Littledale  had  met  with 
no  better  success. 

Next  day  he  went  to  the  Happy  Valley,  whilst  1 
stopped  in  bed  tired  and  disheartened.  Though  it 
blew  a  gale,  he  returned  in  the  afternoon  with  a  fine 
massive  head,  saying  he  had  come  across  a  small  herd 
of  old  rams,  out  of  which  he  had  succeeded  in  secur- 
ing one.  In  the  evening  a  Kalmuk  came  in  with 
letters  and  papers  from  Ongoudai,  the  first  we  had 
as  yet  received,  and  we  spent  three  or  four  hours 
devouring  the  "  latest "  news,  of  which  the  most 
important  was  an  account  of  the  Queen's  Jubilee 
procession,  which  had  taken  place  two  months 
previously  ! 

The  following  day,  August  12th,  was  to  be  my  last 
after  kotchkor.  The  weather  was  evidently  breaking 
up  lor  the  autumn,  and  a  bitterly  cold  wind  blew 
incessantly.  Littledale  went  to  the  Happy  Valley 
with  my  wife,  whilst  I  went  up  the  Tchagan-Burgaza 
together  with  Taba.  We  had  hardly  advanced  an 
hour  from  camp,  when  we  came  across  a  herd  of  ten 
rams  feeding  in  a  small  lateral  ravine.  Some  of  them 
carried  good  heads,  and  the  wind  being  favourable, 
we  attempted  to  stalk  them.      As  they  fed  slowly  over 


A   PACK   CAMEL  287 

a  boulder,  we  started  in  their  direction,  following  the 
bed  of  the  stream,  and  carefully  avoiding  discovery 
by  a  lot  of  ewes  at  the  entrance  of  the  gully.  As 
we  descended  out  of  sight,  the  rams  were  feeding 
about  300  yards  ahead  of  us,  and  so  I  approached  a 


I'AKA    WITH    A    PACK    CAMKI.. 


small  ridge  from  which  I  hoped  to  get  my  shot,  but 
on  peeping  over  with  the  utmost  caution  in  the  direc- 
tion they  had  taken,  I  found  that  they  had  gone.  As 
I  continued  to  advance  carefully,  I  heard,  to  my 
dismay,  a  rattling  of  stones  to  my  right.  Naturally 
I   thought  they  had  scented  us,   and  as   I   continued 


288  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

carelessly  on,  suddenly  to  my  left  a  fine  ram  jumped 
up  within  fifteen  yards,  and  immediately  after  the 
whole  herd  were  rushing  downhill.  I  had  to  take  a 
standing  shot  at  the  running  animals,  which  all  got 
away  uninjured.  Apparently  the  noise  of  rolling 
stones  I  had  heard  had  been  caused  by  some  other 
Sheep  that  had  seen  us.  We  went  on,  Taba  and 
I,  up  the  valley  and  over  the  saddle,  reaching  a  stony 
plateau,  out  of  which  rose  a  steep  mountain  covered 
with  reddish  soil  and  shingle.  Here  we  found  the 
rams  again,  and  made  a  long  dcHour  of  about  three 
hours  to  get  to  leeward  of  them,  but  when  we  again 
saw  them,  after  a  desperate  scramble,  they  were  lying 
at  the  very  top  of  the  hill  in  an  unstalkable  position. 
It  was  now  getting  late,  and  we  had  to  return  to 
camp  on  foot,  having  lost  our  ponies.  My  wife  had 
succeeded  in  approaching  within  200  yards  of  a  herd 
of  about  thirty  rams,  out  of  which  she  had  wounded 
one,  which,  however,  was  not  secured. 

On  August  13th  the  temperature  had  gone  down 
so  fast  that  we  decided  to  lift  camp  down  the  Tchagan- 
Burgaza  River,  and  in  the  afternoon  pitched  tents  on 
the  Kosh-Agatch  Plain,  with  the  intention  of  de- 
voting the  following  day  to  the  pursuit  of  Antelope. 
Heavy  leaden  clouds  were  rolling  in  the  sky,  and  in 
a   regular   hurricane   we   left  the   higher   ground   and 


HUNTING   ANTELOPES  289 

bade  farewell  to  the  Wild  Sheep  country  ;  and  I  must 
own  that  it  was  a  relief  to  find  oneself  once  more  on 
the  lower  steppe. 

Next  day  the  weather  was  again  fine  and  ex- 
cessively warm.  Littledale  and  I  went  to  different 
sides  of  the  river  after  Antelope.  Not  far  from  camp 
I  found  a  herd  of  about  a  hundred  with  some  good 
bucks  amongst  them,  but  as  there  was  no  means  of 
approaching  them  on  the  flat  plain  I  suggested  that 
they  should  be  driven  towards  us  by  my  second 
Kalmuk,  who  was  instructed  to  make  as  wide  a 
detour  as  he  could  before  showing  himself.  He  had 
not  gone  far  before  the  whole  herd  suddenly  got  up, 
and,  strange  to  say,  darted  at  headlong"  speed  towards 
the  place  where  I  was  lying.  I  took  a  running  shot 
as  they  passed  within  a  hundred  yards  of  me,  and 
dropped  one  of  them,  which  I  found  to  be  an  old 
buck.  Taba,  who  was  an  old  hand  at  this  game,  said 
the  best  way  to  secure  one  was  to  gallop  straight 
towards  them,  in  which  case,  instead  of  running  away, 
they  rush  in  confusion  at  right  angles  to  the  hunter's 
direction,  and  then  begins  an  extraordinary  chase,  the 
Antelopes  making  an  outward  circle,  whilst  the  ponies 
gallop  parallel  to  them  in  an  inner  one.  As  soon  as 
they  are  near  enough,  the  hunter  drops  off  his  saddle 
and    shoots.      In    this    manner    we    galloped    towards 


29o  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

them  as  fast  as  our  ponies  could  carry  us,  and  I 
succeeded  in  securing  a  couple  after  half  an  hour's 
breathless  ride.  It  was  a  curious  sight  to  see  these 
small  animals  tearing  along  the  plain,  while  the  faster 
they  went  the  nearer  we  were  able  to  approach  them. 
Littledale  brought  in  two  others,  which  made  a  fair 
bag  for  the  day. 

On  August  15th,  at  noon,  we  were  at  Kosh-Agatch. 
Here  we  were  met  by  our  friend  the  Zaissan,  who 
greeted  our  return  with  signs  of  joy.  We  proceeded 
to  take  photographs  of  our  bag,  which  consisted  of 
the  heads  of  thirty-two  Wild  Sheep,  two  Ibex,  and  five 
Antelope.  We  found  a  new  Russian  Customs  official, 
who  was  most  civil  to  us,  and  greatly  assisted  us  in 
the  preparations  for  our  next  journey  to  the  Maral 
country.  The  whole  of  the  following  day  was  de- 
voted to  packing  our  trophies,  which  were  carefully 
wrapped  up  in  felt,  leaving  the  smaller  heads,  which 
were  not  worth  taking,  and  sending  off  the  larger 
ones  straight  to  Ongoudai.  Daniel  was  instructed 
to  accompany  them  to  their  destination.  WTe  found 
twelve  ponies  not  too  many  for  the  purpose,  and  saw 
them  start  well  loaded  the  following  morning.  We 
spent  the  afternoon  in  settling  accounts  with  the 
Zaissan  for  the  ponies  and  men,  and  decided  as  soon 
as    possible    to    go    after    Maral.      According    to    the 


DUCK    SHOOTING 


'■93 


Zaissan,  there  were  two  passes  into  the  Bashkaous 
Valley,  and  he  strongly  recommended  the  Koukouriou 
Pass,  to  which,  in  our  ignorance  of  the  country,  we 
agreed.  The  other  way,  he  said,  was  much  longer, 
and   the   path   more  difficult  for  the   ponies.      In  the 


■ACKlNi;    HORN:- 


afternoon  of  the  1 7th  August  we  had  finished  our 
preparations,  and  went  out  Duck  shooting  on  one  of 
the  numerous  lakes  of  the  Kosh-Agatch  steppe.  I 
still  hoped  to  get  the  rare  Duck  I  had  been  asked  to 
look  for  by  Mr.  Alpheraki,  but  though  we  shot 
several,  they  were  all  of  common  species.      Littledale 


294  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE   ALTAI 

wounded  a  Wild  Swan.  After  dinner  the  Russian 
official  paid  us  a  visit,  and  having  learnt  from  him 
that  the  species  of  Duck  I  wanted  was  not  uncommon 
in  the  country,  I  left  with  him  my  coloured  plate  of 
the  bird,  together  with  three  or  four  skinning  knives, 
and  in  return  got  his  solemn  promise  that,  within 
three  months,  I  should  receive  a  skin  of  the  Duck  in 
question  at  St.  Petersburg.  Two  years  have  since 
elapsed,  and  the  Duck  has  not  yet  been  heard  of! 

Next  morning  we  said  good-bye  to  Kosh-Agatch, 
and,  crossing  the  Tchouia  River,  which  we  now  found 
fordable,  followed  it  down  along  the  Ongoudai  path. 
We  pitched  camp,  after  a  twenty-five  versts'  march, 
at  the  first  station,  called  Kouekhatonar,  where  a  small 
log  hut  was  built  for  the  few  travellers  or  tradesmen 
who  happened  to  pass  that  way.  Before  we  left  the 
Kosh-Agatch  Plain  my  wife  was  afforded  another 
chance  of  showing  her  skill  with  Littledale's  Mann- 
licher  at  a  Wild  Swan  which  was  swimming  on  a  lake 
a  hundred  yards  off.  The  bird  dropped  its  neck  into 
the  water  stone  dead,  and  I  forthwith  stripped  and 
started  to  bring  it  back,  though  the  lake  was  very 
cold.  Happily  it  was  shallow,  and  I  waded  through 
knee-deep  in  the  mud.  We  only  remained  that  night 
at  Kouekhatonar,  and  were  off  next  morning  at  9  a.m., 
branching  away  from  the  Tchouia  Valley  northwards 


A    LONG   AND    WEARY    MARCH 


'95 


up  a  steep  lateral  valley.  Snow  had  fallen  heavily 
during  the  night,  and  the  ponies  found  it  slippery 
work  to  get  on.  The  aspect  of  the  country  had 
entirely  changed.  Numerous  trees  on  either  side 
denoted    that    we    were    now    entering    the    wooded 


)KNS    START    FOR    ONGOUDAI. 


country ;  pine,  larch,  and  birch  were  the  most 
frequent.  About  eleven  o'clock  we  reached  a  pass 
some  8,000  feet  high  ;  on  either  side  were  rows  of 
rocky  ledges,  probably  inhabited  only  by  Ibex.  The 
descent  from  the  pass  was  a  long  and  weary  one,  and 
as  our  horses  were  tired  after  their  long  march,  we 
decided,  at   1   p.m.,  to  camp  on  the  banks  of  a  small 


296  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE   ALTAI 

mountain  torrent,  which  our  Kalmuks  called 
Karasou.  Our  tents  were  accordingly  pitched  on 
the  timber-line,  and  next  morning-  we  started,  Little- 
dale  and  I,  at  about  4  a.m.,  with  the  intention  of 
surveying  the  neighbourhood.  My  companion 
crossed  the  stream  and  took  the  country  on  the 
right,  whilst  I,  accompanied  by  Taba,  ascended  a 
steep  slope  rising  almost  perpendicularly  from  our 
camp.  We  naturally  had  to  leave  the  horses  very 
soon,  and  to  continue  till  we  reached  the  higher 
plateaux.  On  our  way  a  couple  of  female  Ibex  came 
in  sight,  and  we  passed  them  unnoticed.  The  country 
above  was  broken  and  desolate.  Very  little  game 
seemed  to  inhabit  it,  and  all  we  saw  that  day  was 
a  couple  of  young  Ducks  feeding  on  a  patch  of  grass 
in  a  large  corrie  below  us.  The  wind  was  bitterly 
cold,  and  I  was  half  frozen  when  I  decided  to  return 
to  camp.  As  we  descended  the  precipitous  grassy 
banks  at  full  speed,  my  foot  slipped,  and,  turning 
at  the  ankle,  the  result  was  a  bad  sprain.  Luckily 
we  were  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  camp,  and 
though  I  suffered  agony,  I  was  able  to  get  back  to  my 
tent,  where  I  lay  in  bed  for  the  next  few  days.  Little- 
dale  came  in  at  six,  bringing  the  head  of  an  Ibex  he 
had  shot,  with  horns  measuring  thirty-four  inches. 
He  had  been  on  very  difficult  ground,  and  had   not 


DENSE   FOREST  297 

come  across  any  desirable  trophy.  He  had  met  with 
a  Roe-deer  in  the  woods,  but  had  missed  him. 

The  next  day  snow  lay  thick  around  the  camp. 
I  naturally  remained  in  bed  with  my  sprained  foot, 
and  Littledale  thought  it  hardly  worth  while  going 
out,  the  weather  being  most  unfavourable,  with 
occasional  cold  autumn  showers. 

On  August  22nd  Littledale  went  out  early,  the 
weather  having  somewhat  improved.  In  the  evening 
he  gave  us  an  account  of  what  he  had  done,  and 
though  he  had  come  across  a  herd  of  thirteen  Ibex, 
with  a  fine  old  buck  amongst  them,  he  had  been  un- 
able to  approach  them,  owing  to  the  shiftiness  of  the 
wind.  The  higher  ground  he  found  was  very  similar 
to  that  of  Cashmere  ;  the  scenery  quite  lovely  in  the 
region  he  had  explored,  and  the  locality  well  suited  to 
Ibex,  though  the  inaccessibility  of  the  crags  had  often 
prevented  him  from  examining  carefully  every  ravine. 

Next  day,  my  foot  being  slightly  better,  we  decided 
to  start  down  to  the  Bashkaous  River.  Camp  was 
struck  at  10  a.m.,  and  we  descended  the  valley  for 
about  three  hours.  We  were  now  in  the  midst  of 
dense  forests  ;  the  path  was  at  times  so  narrow  that 
we  had  to  grope  our  way  through  the  woods.  At 
1  p.m.  we  came  to  the  junction  of  the  Karasou  and 
Bashkaous  rivers,  and  found  the  latter  to  be  a  wide, 


298  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

clear  stream  flowing  through  dense  tracts  of  timber. 
The  higher  hills  had  now  vanished,  giving  place  to 
low,  cedar-covered  boulders.  We  took  a  last  glimpse 
at  the  snow  peaks  in  the  distance  behind  us  as  we 
entered  the  heart  of  the  woodlands.  That  day  we 
came  across  several  fresh  tracks  of  Maral  stags.  We 
proceeded  down  the  main  valley  for  another  couple  of 
hours,  and  halted  at  3  p.m.  on  the  banks  of  the  river, 
some  five  miles  lower  down.  Here  we  pitched  camp 
on  a  nice  green  lawn.  Some  of  the  packs  had  not 
yet  come  in,  and  we  were  beginning  to  wonder  what 
had  happened  to  them,  when  one  of  the  Kalmuks 
brought  us  the  news  that  Joseph  had  fallen  off  his 
pony  and  broken  his  arm.  The  doctor  presently 
turned  up  with  the  invalid,  and  told  us  that  the  arm 
was  broken  above  the  wrist.  The  fall  had  been 
occasioned  by  an  unexpected  jerk  of  his  treacherous 
pony.  We  were  very  sorry  for  poor  Abbas,  and 
decided  to  send  him  straight  back  to  Ongoudai,  in 
company  with  the  doctor,  as  soon  as  he  should  be 
able  to  ride.  In  the  afternoon  we  caught  a  few  Gray- 
ling, and  turned  in  early  in  order  to  start  on  the 
following  morning  after  Maral.  At  4  a.m.  we  were 
both,  Littledale  and  myself,  scouring  the  woods  in 
search  of  Roe-deer  or  Stags.  I  noticed  a  great 
many  tracks  of  the  former,  but  saw  nothing  the  whole 


INVITATION    FROM    THE   ZAISSAN  299 

day.  Littledale  had  spied  a  fine  Stag  about  half  a 
mile  above  him,  but  had  failed  to  approach  him, 
owing-  to  the  carelessness  of  his  shikari,  who,  on 
arriving  near  the  spot  where  they  had  noticed  the 
animal  lying,  went  on  without  precaution,  and  startled 
the  beast,  which  they  heard  get  up  with  a  crash  in  the 
dense  underwood  close  by.  The  weather  was  now 
fine  and  warm,  but  it  almost  froze  at  sunset.  Our 
friend  the  Zaissan,  who  was  accompanying  us,  now 
strongly  induced  us  to  visit  his  home  on  the  Oulagan 
River,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Bashkaous,  promising 
us  plenty  of  Maral  in  the  neighbourhood.  We  were 
naturally  delighted  to  accept  his  invitation,  and  made 
a  long  march  next  day  clown  the  main  river  (about 
thirty  versts).  We  fished  on  the  way,  my  wife  and  I, 
in  some  of  the  deeper  pools  we  came  across,  and 
caught  several  Grayling,  averaging  a  pound  each,  but 
on  the  whole  our  fishing  in  the  Bashkaous  was  not 
very  successful,  though  we  came  across  many  likely 
pools.  The  hills  had  now  practically  disappeared, 
and  the  woods  grew  thinner  ;  large  tracts  of  low 
pasture  ground  stretched  before  us,  and  Kalmuk 
settlements  were  more  numerous.  Now  and  again 
we  saw  some  smoky  Kalmuk  yourts,  with  two  or 
three  haystacks  in  the  vicinity  (for  the  hay  had  just 
been  gathered),  as  well  as  many  horse  and  goat  skins 


3oo  AFTER   WILD   SHEEP    IN   THE   ALTAI 

hanging  on  long  poles  as  a  pagan  sacrifice  to  their 
gods.  The  weather  was  now  warmer  than  ever,  as 
if  we  had  shifted  from  winter  to  summer  quarters. 
The  next  day  we  pitched  camp  at  the  place  where  the 
Oulagan  River  falls  into  the  Bashkaous,  another 
twenty  miles  lower  down.  Here  the  valley,  which 
had  grown  narrow  and  gorge-like  in  some  places, 
became  wider  again.  The  country  had  entirely  lost 
its  savage  aspect,  and  the  scenery,  were  it  not  for  the 
cedar  woods,  bore  a  most  commonplace  character. 
In  the  evening  we  tried  for  Roe-deer,  but  in  vain;  in 
fact  we  could  hardly  realise  the  Zaissan's  statement 
that  we  should  find  Stags  in  the  neighbourhood. 

Next  day,  however,  we  went  up  the  Oulagan  Valley 
and  reached  the  Zaissan's  house,  which,  in  comparison 
to  what  we  had  seen  before,  was  quite  a  comfortable 
lodging.  His  wife  and  children  flocked  around  us, 
and  an  exchange  of  presents  took  place.  I  presented 
our  powerful  ally  with  the  big  revolver  that  had  been 
stolen  from  me  by  the  two  runaway  Kalmuks,  and 
which  the  Zaissan  had  managed  somehow  to  retrieve  ; 
I  presume  after  a  severe  swishing  of  the  culprits.  On 
my  eager  inquiry  about  the  number  and  whereabouts 
of  Maral  in  the  vicinity,  I  was  staggered  by  the 
Zaissan's  answer  that  there  were  seventeen.  He  had 
been    talking    the    whole    time    of    Maral    in    an    en- 


PROMISE   OF   GOOD    SPORT  301 

closure.  Having  accepted  a  Bear  skin  which  the 
Zaissan  had  kindly  offered  me,  with  his  good  wishes, 
we  bade  him  farewell  on  the  following  day,  and 
hurried  back  down  the  Oulagan  in  search  of  wilder 
country.  Our  days  being  now  numbered,  we  were 
disappointed  at  having  lost  our  time  up  the  Oulagan 
River,  though  a  visit  to  the  Zaissan  was  the  least  we 
could  do,  if  only  to  thank  him  for  the  civility  he  had 
continually  shown  us.  Orders  had  been  given  by 
him  to  our  former  demitcha  (Jacob)  to  meet  us  on 
our  way,  as  we  passed  his  yourt,  and  after  a  fifteen- 
mile  march,  as  we  were  pitching  our  camp  at  the 
junction  of  the  Kara  Kodjur  stream  with  the  Bash- 
kaous,  we  were  met  by  this  old  acquaintance  of  ours, 
who  was  now  in  his  own  country,  and  seemed  full  of 
pluck,  and  quite  another  man  in  comparison  with 
what  we  had  seen  of  him  in  Mongolia.  He  gave  us 
a  brilliant  description  of  the  country  at  the  head  of 
the  Kara  Kodjur  River,  and  told  us  that  it  abounded 
not  only  in  Maral  and  Roe  (in  Kalmuk  the  former  is 
known  as  Sougoun,  the  latter  as  Ic/ik),  but  also  in 
Moose,  which  he  called  Boulan.  This  made  us  most 
eager  to  continue  our  journey  towards  this  Eldorado, 
though  from  experience  we  felt  rather  mistrustful  of 
Kalmuk  statements.  Jacob  had  provided  us  with  a 
couple  of  native  hunters,  whom  we  met  on  the  follow- 


302  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

ing  day  on  our  way  up  stream.  One  of  these  seemed 
a  sharp  fellow,  and  gave  us  some  hope  of  success,  for 
he  inquired  whether  we  could  shoot,  and  said  we  were 
sure  to  have  to  put  our  rifles  to  the  test. 

On  August  29th  we  pitched  camp  some  twenty 
miles  up  the  Kara  Kodjur  River,  and  found  that  the 
scenery  had  grown  decidedly  wilder.  Having  been 
told  that  the  woods  round  camp  swarmed  with  Roe- 
deer,  we  went  out,  both  of  us,  in  the  afternoon  with 
our  new  men  in  search  of  game,  but  returned  in  the 
evening  without  having  seen  a  single  beast. 

Next  morning,  at  9  a.m.,  we  were  again  on  the 
move,  following  the  banks  of  the  stream.  It  was  a 
long  march,  though  the  Kalmuks  had  said  we  were 
close  to  its  sources.  On  reaching  the  top  of  a  low 
pass,  at  about  2  p.m.,  we  came  upon  a  beautiful 
prospect.  About  half  a  mile  ahead  of  us  lay  a  large 
lake  known  as  the  Sarry-Kol  Lake.  The  hills  all 
round  were  covered  with  dense  forests  of  pine,  cedar, 
and  especially  larch  on  every  side.  Large  glades  of 
low,  thick  bushes  of  a  reddish  hue  lay  here  and  there 
in  their  midst,  reminding  one  greatly,  were  it  not  for 
the  trees,  of  the  Scottish  Highlands.  In  the  distance- 
rose  a  higher  range  of  mountains,  half-powdered  with 
fresh  snow,  in  an  immense  semicircle.  The  whole 
picture  decidedly  bore  a  touch  of  loneliness  and  wild 


LAKE   SARRY-KOL  303 

desolation.  In  places  the  broad  stretches  of  timber 
had  been  destroyed  by  wood  fires,  and  the  grand 
branchless  stems  rose  hi<>h  over  the  boulders,  causing 
them  to  resemble  the  backs  of  gigantic  Porcupines. 
After  a  long  search  for  a  suitable  place,   we  pitched 


OUR    CAMP    ON    THE    BANKS    OF    LAKE    SAKRY-KOI 


camp  close  to  the  banks  of  the  lake.  The  weather 
was  dull  and  cold,  and  towards  evening  it  began  to 
drizzle.  We  were  in  great  hope  of  finding  Stags, 
and  though  the  rutting  season  had  not  yet  begun,  it 
was  not  improbable  that  we  might  find  some  feedino- 
in  the  open  at  early  dawn.  I  made  out  the  altitude 
of  our  camp  to  be  about  6,000  feet.      It  rained  almost 


3o4  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

all  night,  and  as  we  started,  Littledale  and  I,  at  5  a.m. 
next  morning,  an  icy  cold  wind  chilled  us  to  the  bone. 
The  hills  were  white  with  snow,  almost  down  to  our 
tents,  and  I  certainly  should  have  remained  in  bed  if 
it  had  not  been  for  the  repeated  assurances  of  our 
hunters  that  we  should  get  some  sport.  We  followed 
for  some  time  the  northern  bank  of  the  lake,  and 
leaving  our  horses  in  charge  of  a  Kalmuk,  ascended 
a  long,  slanting  slope,  out  of  which  rose  here  and 
there  half-burnt  poles  of  trees.  The  ground  was 
white  with  snow,  giving  the  country  before  us  a 
fantastic  appearance.  As  we  toiled  through  the  low- 
bushes,  we  were  soon  thoroughly  drenched  up  to  our 
knees.  On  reaching  a  bit  of  open  country,  my  new 
hunter  and  Taba  both  caught  sight  of  a  Roe-buck 
about  half  a  mile  ahead  of  us.  I  found  it  impossible 
to  make  him  out,  and  confidently  followed  Taba  in 
the  approach  we  now  attempted.  As  we  reached  a 
higher  boulder  greater  precaution  seemed  to  be 
necessary,  and  we  crawled  up  to  the  top  of  it,  but  on 
peeping  over  found  that  the  animal  had  disappeared. 
Taba  attributed  this  to  the  shiftiness  of  the  wind. 
On  reaching  the  spot  where  the  Roe  had  been  seen, 
we  found  its  fresh  tracks  on  the  snow,  a  fact  which 
resolved  my  doubts  on  the  subject,  and  so  we  pro- 
ceeded.     We    wandered   through    the   woods   in    this 


NEW    MODE    OF    HUNTING 


;°5 


way  for  a  long  time,  peeping  cautiously  into  likely 
glades  between  the  trunks  of  tall  larches,  but  without 
success.  We  came  across  a  few  tracks  of  Maral 
stags,  but  that  was  all.  The  wind  was  bitterly  cold, 
and  as   I    was   by  this   time   thoroughly   drenched,    I 


SIBERIAN      ROE-BUCK. 
(Capreotus  />ygargus.) 


decided  to  return  to  camp,  which  we  reached  soon 
after  midday.  On  the  whole  I  found  this  new  mode 
of  hunting  most  difficult  and  aggravating,  and  with 
but  slight  chance  in  favour  of  the  hunter.  Little- 
dale,  who  had  gone  westward,  returned  late  in  the 
day,  and  reported  that  he  had  only  come  across  three 


306  AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

Roe-deer  docs,  and  although  he  had  scoured  large 
tracts  of  timber,  had  met  with  very  few  signs  of 
Stags. 

Next  day,  September  ist,  we  exchanged  ground, 
starting"  at  daybreak.  It  was  a  frosty  morning,  and 
a  thick  mist  covered  the  whole  country,  clearing  up 
towards  6  a.m.  As  we  advanced  through  the  bushes, 
nothing  came  in  sight  for  a  couple  of  hours,  during 
which  time  we  had  journeyed  five  or  six  miles  from 
the  lake.  As  I  sat  down  to  spy  a  broad,  open  corrie, 
my  glass  revealed  four  animals  feeding  slowly  in  the 
distance.  On  more  careful  examination  I  found  them 
to  be  two  Maral  hinds  with  their  fawns.  I  had  taken 
Jacob  with  me  that  clay  ;  the  fellow  was  very  anxious 
that  I  should  shoot  at  least  a  hind.  I  naturally 
restrained  his  impetuosity,  and  as  we  were  discussing 
the  matter,  my  other  hunter  suddenly  pointed  out 
amongst  the  trees  some  200  yards  ahead  of  us  a 
Roe-deer  with  two  kids  quietly  feeding.  As  soon  as 
the  animal  moved,  I  saw  it  was  a  doe.  But  this  was 
not  to  be  our  last  disappointment  that  day.  As  we 
made  our  way  through  the  high  bushes,  which  at  this 
place  came  almost  up  to  our  necks,  a  buck  and  a  doe 
suddenly  sprang  out  and  disappeared  in  a  second, 
without  giving  me  the  slio-htest  chance  of  a  shot,  and 
only  just  affording  me  the  glimpse  of  a  pair  of    fine 


VALLEY   OF  THE    KATOUN    RIVER  307 

horns.  A  little  further  on  Jacob  pointed  out  to  me 
the  tracks  of  a  Moose  (Boulan),  and  there,  sure 
enough,  on  the  mud,  were  the  well-known  footprints  ! 
On  our  way  back  two  more  Roe-deer  sprang  out  of 
the  brushwood  a  few  yards  in  front  of  us,  but  with 
the  same  result  as  before,  and  at  noon  I  was  back  in 
camp  thoroughly  disheartened.  Littledale  had  not 
yet  returned,  but  had  sent  in  the.  head  of  a  fair  buck, 
and  at  3  p.m.  he  came  in  saying  that  he  had  seen 
another  fine  buck,  but  had  failed  to  get  near  him. 
Rain  now  came  on,  but  as  it  cleared  up  towards 
evening,  we  decided  to  have  another  try  on  the 
following  day  before  striking  camp.  Unfortunately, 
however,  it  poured  continuously  the  whole  of  next 
day,  and  we  were  obliged  to  keep  to  our  tents  and  dig 
entrenchments  round  them  in  order  to  carry  off  the 
water,  and  keep  the  insides  dry. 

On  the  morning  of  September  3rd  we  struck  camp, 
at  9  a.m.,  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  and  again 
pitched  tents  at  1  p.m.,  after  a  fifteen-mile  march,  on 
the  banks  of  a  small  stream  at  a  place  known  to  the 
natives  as  Yulientash.  We  had  crossed  a  low  divide 
separating  two  watersheds,  and  now  found  ourselves 
again  in  the  valley  of  the  Katoun  River.  The  country 
here  was  very  similar  to  that  we  had  just  left,  and  our 
hunters    still    promised    us   sport    with    Maral.       The 


308  AFTER    WILD   SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 

ground,  indeed,  seemed  suitable  for  them  ;  westwards 
of  us  ran  a  range  of  snowclad  hills,  whilst  on  all 
other  sides  the  low,  undulating  country  was  covered 
with  fir  woods  and  great  stretches  of  reddish  brush- 
wood. Towards  evening,  clouds  still  hung  on  the 
sides  of  the  higher  mountains,  but  the  rain  had 
stopped.  As  it  snowed  the  whole  of  the  following 
morning,  it  was  not  until  after  luncheon  that  we  could 
get  out  in  search  of  game.  On  that  day  I  saw 
nothing  but  a  Capercaillie.  I  found  tracks  of  Deer, 
however,  and  occasionally  noticed  signs  of  Maral 
Stags  on  small  trees,  which  were  stripped  of  their 
bark,  but  no  fresh  ones.  Littledale  had  succeeded 
in  stalking  a  couple  of  Roe,  and  had  shot  the  doe  by 
mistake,  unable  to  make  out  the  horns  amidst  the 
thick  branches.  Another  attempt  next  day  proved 
as  unsuccessful  as  the  previous  ones.  Taba  had 
suggested  that  we  might  find  game  in  the  direction 
of  the  higher  ground  westwards,  towards  which  we 
now  directed  our  course.  Owing  to  Mrs.  Littledale's 
bad  state  of  health,  my  companion  remained  to  look 
after  her.  As  for  me,  I  scrambled  half-way  up  the 
steep  slopes  of  the  western  mountain  range,  where 
the  only  living  creatures  I  saw  during  the  whole  day 
were  a  female  Ibex  with  a  kid.  I  returned  to  camp 
at     2     p.m.,   thoroughly     sick     of    this    God-forsaken 


MEET   TWO    EUROPEANS  309 

country,  and  we  unanimously  decided  in  the  evening 
to  make  a  general  retreat  to  Ongoudai. 

Next  day  a  long  march  of  about  twenty  miles  over 
broad  stretches  of  moorland  and  a  low  pass  brought 
us  to  the  banks  of  a  small  tributary  of  the  Katoun 
River,  where  we  pitched  camp  at  3  p.m.  The 
weather  was  now  evidently  breaking  up,  and  we  were 
all  anxious  to  get  back  to  civilisation.  Consequently, 
next  day  we  made  a  very  long  march  (about  forty 
versts)  down  a  small  stream,  and  reached  the  Sakljar 
Pass,  on  the  Ongoudai-Kosh-Agatch  path,  a  little 
after  2  p.m.  As  we  descended  the  steep  slope  into 
the  Katoun  Valley  we  met  a  caravan  with  two  Euro- 
peans, who  were  on  their  way  to  Kosh-Agatch.  We 
found  them  to  be  Germans — Major  Wissmann  and 
Doctor  Bomuller,  with  whom  we  exchanged  a  few 
words.  They  were  intending  to  cross  the  Mongolian 
plateaux  into  the  Zaissan's  country,  and  then  proceed, 
via  Tashkend,  to  Merv.  We  warned  the  well-known 
African  explorer  of  the  difficulties  he  would  have  to 
encounter,  owing  to  the  late  season  and  roughness  of 
the  autumn  months  on  the  high  Altai,  and  wishing 
him  a  good  journey,  parted  with  the  first  Europeans 
we  had  come  across  for  a  long  time.  At  4  p.m.  we 
reached  the  ferry  over  the  Katoun,  which  we  crossed, 
and  camped  on  the  steppe  close  to  its  banks. 

Next  day  Ongoudai  was  reached  in  the  afternoon, 


3io 


AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    ALTAI 


the  last  few  miles  being  accomplished  in  iarantass, 
which  had  been  kindly  placed  at  our  disposal  by  our 
friend  the  Zassedatel  Meyer,  who  had  himself  gone 
away  on  leave.  Here  we  discovered  that  during  our 
entire  journey  we  had  miscalculated  the  days  of  the 
week,  and  that  Mrs.  Littledale,  who,  as  she  supposed, 
had  been  keeping  Sundays  most  religiously,  had  by 
mistake  been  observing  Fridays  instead  !  We  found 
that  our  trophies  had  safely  arrived,  and  had  been 
carted  on  to   Barnaoul. 


IKIMKWARD    IIOUM). 


The  next  day  was  entirely  devoted  to  paying  off 
our  men,  and  making  preparations  for  the  journey 
back  to  Barnaoul.  We  bade  farewell  to  Jacob  the 
demitcka,    and    on    the    ioth    September    finally    left 


Ongfoudai  en  route  for   Bisk. 


HOMEWARD    BOUND 


3i3 


On  the  14th  we  were  met  at  Barnaoul  by  General 
Boldyreff  and  the  Ispravnik,  who  greeted  us  warmly 
and  complimented  us  on  our  safe  return  from  our  long- 
journey.  We  remained  a  couple  of  days  as  guests 
of  the  Governor  of  the  Altai,  who  helped  us  most 
civilly  in   our  preparations  for  the  start,  and  after  a 


OUR    SPECIAL    LUGGAGE   VAN    FOR   TROrHIES   AND    PACKAGES. 

hearty  good-bye,  we  reached  the  Ob  River  a  day  later. 
Here  fresh  trouble  awaited  us  with  regard  to  the 
registering-  of  our  luggage.  The  horns  alone  weighed 
over  forty-six  poods.  After  a  long  and  weary  dis- 
cussion, we  were  supplied  with  a  special  luggage  van, 
and  on  the  16th  September  slowly  steamed  off  to- 
wards Europe. 


APPENDIX 


LIST    OF    PLANTS    FROM    THF    ALTAI    MOUNTAINS 

Collected  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  St.  George  R.  Littledale 

Received  January,    1 898 


Anemone  Pulsatilla,  L. 
Ranunculus  aquaiilis,  L.  (2  forms). 

,,  Cymbalaria,  Pursh. 

, ,         plant aginifolius,  M  u  rr. 

,,         long/mulls,  C.  A.  Mey. 
pulchellus,  C  A.  Mey. 

,,         sulphureus,  Soland. 
Aconitum  napellus,  L. 
,,  Anthora,  L. 

Trollius  asiaticus,  L. 
Papaver  alpinum,  L. 
Corydalis  striata,  Steph. 
Parrya  exscapa,  Ledeb. 
Cardamine  pralensis,  L. 
Draba  glacialis,  Adams. 
,,      incana,  L. 
„      /u'rta,  L. 
Chorispora  sibirica,  1)  C. 
Smebncskia  calycina,  C.  A.  Mey. 
Capsella  Tliomsoni,  Hook,  f. 
Hesperis  ? 
Viola  altaica,  Pall. 


Clayton/a  sibirica,  L. 
Dianthus  supcrbus,  L. 

,,  Seguieri,  Yill. 

Lychnis  apclala,  L. 
Stellar ia  gr amine  a,  L. 
Cera  stiu  in    lithospei  -m  ifoliu  in , 

Fisch. 
Cerastium  trigynum,  Yill. 

sp. 
Cherlcria  sedoides,  L. 
Silene  tenuis,  \\'ilid. 

,,      repens,  Patrin. 
Bicbcrsttinia  adora,  Steph. 
Geranium  ulassovianum,  Fisch. 
O nolo ycb is  sp. 

Hedysarum  polymorphum,  Ledeb. 
Astragalus  alpinus,  L. 

sp. 

sp. 
Oxytropis,  2  sp. 
Dryas  ociopetala,  L. 
Spiraea  hypericifolia,  L. 


3i4 


APPENDIX 


3i5 


Potentilla  anserina,  L. 

,,         multifield,  L. 

.,  grandifolia,  L. 
Sibbaldia  procumbens,  L. 
Saxifraga  melaleuca,  Fisch. 

,,  oppositifolia,  L. 

,,  Hircn/us,  L. 

Parnassia  palustris,  L. 
Sedum  Rhodiola,  D  C. 

„      (juadrifidinn,  Pall. 
Umbilicus  spinosus,  I )  C. 

,,         leucanthus,  DC. 
Epilobium  latifolium,  L. 
Galium  verum,  L. 
Leontopodium  alpinum,  Cass. 
,,  sibiricum,  Cass. 

Erigeron,  alpinus,  L. 
yafi-/^'  alpinus,  L. 
Saussurea  pygmaea,  Spreng. 

,,  alpiua,  L. 

Senecio flammeus,  DC. 

,,      jt/.   near  5".   goringensis, 

Hemsl. 
Artemisia  rupeslris,  L. 

glacialis,  Willd. 
Pyrethrum  pulchellum,  Ledeb. 
Scorzonera  radiata,  Fisch. 
Leoutodon  autumnale,  L. 
Youngia  pygmaea,  Ledeb. 

,,       diver sifolium,  Ledeb. 
Statice  spcciosa,  L. 
Primula  nivalis,  Pall. 

,,       farinosa,  L. 


Glaux  maritima,  L. 
Androsace  septentrionalis,  L. 
Rhododendron  daouricum,  L. 
Campanula  Steveni,  M.  B. 
Pokmonium  cxruleum,  L. 
Gentiana  altaica,  Pall. 
,,        barbata,  Froel. 
„         tenella,  Fries. 
„        prostrata,  Hacnke. 
,,         Olivier/',  Griseb. 
Swertia  perennis,  L. 
Myosotis  sylvatica,  Ehrh. 
Eritrichium  villosum,  Bunge. 
Castilleia  pallida,  Kunth. 
Veronica  spicata,  L. 
Pedicularis  verticillaia,  L. 

„  comosa,  L. 

,,  foliosa,  L. 

Marrubium  eriostachyum,  Benth. 
Leonurus  lanatus,  Pers. 
Dracocephalum  pal  malum,  Steph. 

,,  grandiflorum,  L. 

Thymus  Serpyllum,  L. 
i-W/.v  Myrsinites,  L. 
„     Brayi,  Ledeb. 
Ephedra  monostachya,  L. 
B  lit  urn  virgatum,  L. 
Rumex  Acelosa,  L. 
Polygonum  alpinum,  All. 

,,  viviparum,  L. 

,,  Bistort  a,  L. 

/«i  Tigridia,  Bunge. 
Lloydia  serotina,  Salisb. 


3*6 


APPENDIX 


Allium  silnricum,  L. 

„       Semenovii,  Regel. 

,,       tenuissimum,  Ledeb. 
Eriophorum  Scheuchzeri,  Hoppe. 
Carex  rigida,  Good. 

,,      stenophylla,  Wahl. 

,,      melanantha,  Turcz. 

„      melanantha,  C.  A.  Mey. 
Deyeuxia,  near  D.  lapponica. 
Trisetum  subspicatum,  Beauv. 
Triticum  caninum,  var.  altaicum, 
Griseb. 


Hordenm  violaceum,   Boiss.   and 

Hohen. 
Stipa  orientalis,  Trin. 
Bromus  inermis,  Leyss. 
Agropyrum  cristatum,  Bess. 
Woodsia  iloensis,  R.  Br. 
Cy stopfer is  fragilis,  B  er n  h . 
Equisetum  arvense,  var.  alpinum. 
Bryum,  cf.  B.  caespitosum. 
Mnium  rostratui/i,  Schwaeg. 
Amblystegium  Jluviatile,  Schpr. 
Hyp nu in  uncinatum,  Hedw. 


INDEX 


Abbas,  Joseph,  2,  5,  33,  61,  62,  92, 

100,  161,  162,  177,  180,  230,  253, 

285  ;  breaks  his  arm,  298. 
Abduldho  (a  Khirghiz  chief),  240, 

275. 
Adar  kotchkor  (kill  sheep),  102. 
Ak  (white),  60. 
Ak-sou  (white  water),  143. 
Akmolinsk  country,  24. 
Alexander  I.  the  Beloved,  28,  29. 
Alpine  flowers,  68. 
Alpheraki  (a  Russian  naturalist),  4, 

83.  293. 
Alps,  95. 

Altai  district,  25,  26,  31,  33,  34,  36, 
49,  53,  54,  56,  78. 

„     mountains,  1,2,14,45,54,215, 
221,  309. 

„     peaks,  47. 

„     pine  forests,  31. 

„     scenery,  63. 

,,     sheep.     See  Ovis. 
Altaiskoie,  48. 
Altaisky  Zassedatel,  58. 
Amnion  sheep.     See  Ovis. 
Antelopes,   89,    150,    183,    193,   228 

288,    289  ;     sight    a    herd,    232  ; 

our  whole  bag,  290. 
A  ni Hope   gutturosa,   89,    150,    151, 

183. 
Arkhar  (ewe),  60,  95,  161,  165,  108. 
Ash  trees,  200. 


Asia,  6,  15,  16,  150,  227. 

„     boundary  of,  15. 
Asiatic  tribes,  211. 
Aurochs,  14. 

Baggage,  6. 

Bain-Khairkhan     Hills,    147,     153, 

162,   180,   182,   189,   192. 
Bain-Tchagan,    the,    97,    100,    103. 

107,   112,   139,  277. 
Bain-Tchagan  Valley,  118,  124. 
Barnaoul,  20,  23,  25,  26,  31,  33,  34, 
36,  47,  61,  241. 
„         departure   from,   35,    39, 

3io,3i3- 
„         Museum,  34. 
„         welfare  and  education  of 
people  of,  34. 
Bashkaous  River,  297,  299,  300. 

Valley,  225,  293. 
Bears,  13,  15,  301. 
Belbess  (don't  know),  112,  1S5. 
Beliou  mountains,  182,  192. 

.,      stream,  194. 
Bia  River,  33,  36,  45,  47. 
Bielokourikha,  47. 
Bielukha  glaciers,  39,  43. 

,,         range,  68. 
Birch  trees,  25,  295. 
Birds  on  the  Volga,  9. 
Bisk,  3^,  36,  39,  42,  45,  47, 56,  61,  310. 
Black  game,  1  5. 
7 


u8 


INDEX 


Boldyreff,(  General,  25, 31-  5,241,313. 

Madame,  33. 
Boma  (a  dangerous  path),  67,  78,  79. 
Bomiiller,  Doctor,  309. 
Boro-Burgassy  River,  142,  181,  182. 

„  Valley,  169. 

Boun,  or  Ibex,  82. 
Brahminy  Geese,  60,  108,  245. 
Brown  Bears,  13. 
Bunge  (a  botanist),  34. 

Camels,  27,  285. 

Capercaillie,  14,  308. 

Cap)  a  sibirica,  34,  82,  1 10,  1 18,  220, 

221,   226,  232-5,  237-9,  250-3, 

275-9,  290,  295-7,  308;  sight  a 

herd,  1 1 8. 
Cap) < coins  pygargus,    13,    56,   221, 

297,  298,  300-2,  304-8. 
Caravan,  our,  92. 
Cariboo,  13. 
Cashmere,  297. 
Caucasus,  6,  91,  150. 
Cedar  woods,  32,  47,  48,  301,  302. 
Central  Russia,  41. 
Chamois,  150,  152. 
China,  92,  147,  203. 

„      Emperor  of,  179,  203,  240. 
„      proposed  route  from,  26. 
trade  with,  54,  55. 
Chinamen,  170,   171,   177,  213,  214, 

216. 
Chinese,  55,  56. 

„         frontier,  99,  144. 
„         territory,     124,     141,    142, 
170,  203,  241. 
Cold  intense,  1  1 1,  122,  161. 
Constantine,  Father,  65. 
Copper,  13. 
Cranes,  60, 
Cristo   (Author's   valet),   5,  92,  98, 

139,  143,  161,  168,  204,  243. 


Cumberland,   Major,   1,  2,  87,  100, 

140. 
Czar  of  Russia,  240. 

Dain-Kol  district,  215,  220. 

,,         Lake,  214,  218. 
Daniel,   173,   175,   176,    192-5,   198, 

201,  290. 

Deer  parks  in  the  Altai,  53. 

DemidofT,  Princess,  1,  3,  19,  20,  92, 
107,  108,  132-4,  140,  142,  153, 
161,  162,  168,  189,  190,  199,  208, 
224,  253,  256,  258,  259,  266,  286, 
288,  299. 

Demitcha,  92,  94,  139,  162,  168,  201, 

202,  210,  219,  225,  240,  242,  283, 
284,  301,  310. 

Djeran,  150. 

Dogs,  53,  215. 

Ducks,  60,  83,  89,  293,  294,  296. 

„        round  Kainsk,  24. 
Dutchinas,  or  communes,  56,  5S. 

Eagles,  108. 

Eastern  hospitality,  2,3- 

„         Siberian  galleys,  16. 
Ekaterinburg,  23. 
Ekaterinburg,  S.S.,  9. 
Ekaterinburg  Shooting  Club,  14. 
Elizabeth,  Empress,  23- 
Elk,  13,  15,  301,  307. 
Ermak,  the  adventurer,  16. 
Europe,  15,  16,  45,  88,  221. 

„        boundary  of,  15. 

„        return  to,  313. 
European  Russia,  34,  41. 

Fir  trees,  94. 

Flowers,  32,  68,  140,  161,  213. 

Gabriel,  Mr.  Littledale's  servant,  6, 
92,  139,  168,  204. 


INDEX 


3J9 


Geese,  83,  89. 

Gold  near  Taguil,  13,  16. 

Granaries  of  Siberia  and   Russia, 

24. 
Grayling-,   182,    189,  208,   209,  222, 

223,  276,  298,  299. 
Grebes,  Eared,  89. 
Greek  Church,  57. 
Gultcha  (wild  ram),  60. 

Happy  Valley,  97,  98,  107,  112,  116, 

121,  124,  132,  133,  140,  143,  144, 
151  ;  start  for,  153,  164,  232,  253, 
277,  285,  2S6. 

Hares,  100,  193,  224,  245. 

Horses,  86,  143-5. 

Hot  springs,  47. 

Iaksht  (good),  60. 

Iaman  (bad),  60. 

Ian  miiss  (big  horn),  60,  106. 

Ibex,  34,  82,  no;  discover  a  herd, 
118,  220,  221,  226,  232-4,  235, 
237-9,  250-3,  275-9,  281  ;  our 
whole  bag,  290,  291,  295-7,  308. 

Imperial  Geographical  Society,  4. 

Inia  River,  a  small  tributary  of  the 
Katoun,  71. 

lodro,  75. 

Iok  (no),  1 50. 

Iron  mountains,  13,  17. 

Iron-ore  at  Taguil,  13. 

Ispravnik  (chief  of  the  police),  26, 
27,  29,  31,  32,  40,  48,  49,  56,  60, 
66,  75,  85,91,313. 

Ivan  the  Terrible,  16. 

Jacob,  the  dcmitcha,  225,  301,  306, 

Jakshi  (well  done),  106. 
Joseph.     See  Abbas. 
Juniper,  200. 


Kaams,  or  Kalmuk  priests,  76-8. 

Kainsk,  23,  24. 

Kalmuk  country,  56,  65,  276. 
„        matrons,  26. 
,,        peace  offering,  71,  72,  300. 
„        priest,  75-8,  82,  85,  86. 
,,        punishing  one,  87. 

Kalmuks,  5,  26,  32,  45,  53,  54,  56-62, 
65,  66,  68,  75-8,  82,  85-7,  90-6, 
98,  99,  102,  104,  106,  115,  124, 
138-40,  143,  150,  151,  153,  161, 
164,  168,  169,  172,  184,  185,  200, 
202,  204,  205,  207,  209,  210,  212, 
215,  217,  220,  225,  226,  229,  230, 
233,  240-2,  250, 255,  258,  259,  263, 
265,  272,  276,  283,  284,  286,  289, 
296,  298-302,  304. 

Kama,  10. 

Kamlanie  (a  ceremony),  76. 

Kara  (black),  60. 

Kara-Adyr  River,  224.  See  Sum- 
dairik. 

Karaimaty  River,  230. 

Kara  Kodjur,  301,  302. 

Karaoul  Suok,  162. 

Kara-sou  (black  water),  143,  296-7. 

Kasan,  the  great  Tartar  town,  9, 
10. 

Katoun  Valley,  309. 

„       River,  36,  45,  47,  66,  7 1 ,  72, 
307, 309 ;  crossing  the,  67. 

Kha,  169,  170,  172,  173,  174,  179, 
214,  216,  223. 

Kiachta,  26. 

Kirghiz,  26,  58,  60,  117,  124,  150, 
185,  202,  203,  211,  212,  221,  222, 
240-2,  276,  283,  284;  encamp- 
ment, 203,  218,  284. 

Kitchinek  kotchkor  (young  rams), 
147. 

Kobdo  town,  26,  55,  174,  175,  181, 
201. 


320 


INDKX 


Kobdo  lakes,  216,  218. 
„       merchants,  172. 
„       river,     142,     192,     199-201, 
208,   210,    212,    215,    217, 
218,  227,  238. 
Valley,  184,  199,  225. 
Komar  Pass,  48. 

Kosh-Agatch,  25,  26,  36,  58,  62,68, 
71,  72,  82,  84,  88-90,   140,  161, 
162,  177,  180,  201,  230,  231,  241, 
242,  253,  285,  290,  291,  293,  294, 
309. 
Kosh-Agatch  plain,  5,  150,  184,  276, 
288,  294. 
„  plateau,  81-3. 

steppe,  293. 
Koslot'f,  Lieutenant,  218. 
Kotchkor    bar    (there     are     Wild 

Sheep),  87,   100,   112. 
Kotchkor  (wild  ram).     See  Ovis. 
Kouekhatonar,  82,  294. 
Kouickhtonar,  82,  294. 
Koukouriou  Pass,  293. 
Koumiss  (fermented  mare's   milk), 

60. 
Kourgan,  23. 
Kuldja  Valley,  4. 
Kurai  hills,  68. 
„      range,  81. 
„      steppe,  81. 
Kvas  (a  Russian  beverage),  16. 

Pake  Valley,  250,  253,  268. 

Parch,  47,  48,  94,  200,  2 1 3,  223,  295, 

302,  3°5- 
Pedebour  (a  botanist),  34. 
Legend  of  the  so-called   "  Father 

Theodor,"  28. 
Lepet  (Littlcdale's  hunter)  133,  154, 

.93-8. 
Littledale,  Air.,  2,  5,6,  19,  32,  33,  45, 

55,61,89,90,92,99,107,108,110,    J 


1 16-8,  122,  124,  1 31-3,  138-40, 
142,  144,  '5P  I53>  '54,  161,  [62, 
16S,  171,  173,  174,  178,  180,  183, 
184,  189,  190,  192,  193,  199,  202, 
204,  207-9,  224-6,  228-32,  238, 
239,  243,  244,  246,  250,  251,  253, 
256,  258,  259,  266,  267,  272,  275, 
277,  282,  285,  286,  289,  290,  293, 
294,  296-9,  304,  305,  307,  308  ; 
record  head,  260,  261. 

Littledale,  Mrs.,  3,  5,  19,  20,  32,  33, 
45,  61,  92,  107,  108,  140,  142,  153, 
161,  162,  168,  171,  177,  178,  189, 
190,  199,  209,  258,  259,  266,  308, 
310. 

Lob-Nor,  218. 

Lomatchevsky,  General,  25,  26,  30. 

Lubimoff  Company,  9. 


Mannlicher,  224,  259,  294. 
Maral  deer,  34,  49,  5°,  53,  54, 
116,  220,  221,242,  278, 
298-301,    303,    305, 
308. 
„       country,  290. 
,,       horns  found,  116,  244. 
„      some  seen,  1 10. 
Maralnik  (enclosure  for  Maral) 

50. 
Marmots,  45,  46,  100,  193,  202, 

224. 
Medicine  made  from  horns,  55. 
Melons,  24. 
Merv,  309. 
Meyer,  Mr.,  58,  62,  66,  77,  85, 

310. 
Mines  at  Taguil,  20. 
Mining  people's  cruelty,  16. 
Mohammedans,  58. 
Mongolia,   2,  26,  78,  94,   100, 
no,  115,  123,  131,  142,  151, 
277. 


290, 
306, 


49, 


INDEX 


32: 


Mongolian  Altai,  141,  148,  277. 
„  frontier,  91,  107. 

„  plateau,  5,  84,  139,  309. 

,,  thunderstorm,  259. 

Mongols,  26,  56,  78,  124,  142,  214, 

217,  219,  241. 
Moose,  13,  15,  301,  307. 
Moscow,  3,  5,  6,  29. 
Mus  citilus,  46. 

Muss-Taou    hills,    189,    200,    204, 
211,  214-8,  220,  221,  228. 

Nam  Daba  Pass,  230,  256,  263,  266. 
Napoleon's  invasion  of  Russia,  28. 
Newsky,  Dr.,  4,  5,  92,  298. 
Nicholas  (our  interpreter),  65,  91, 

92,  139,   168,   173,   179,  202,  204, 

211,  220-3. 
Nicholas,  Emperor,  29. 
Nijni-Novgorod,  6,  10. 
Nikolaevsky,  30. 

Ob  River,  20,  25,  27,  30,  31,  33,  36, 

39,45,47,  313- 
Olonur  Valley,  230. 
Omak,  23. 
Ongoudai-Kosh-Agatch  path,  294, 

3°9- 
Ongudai,  33-5,  45,  47,  55,  56,  58-61, 
65,  66,  71,98,  162,  286, 
290,  295,  298,  309,  310. 
„         reach,  310. 
„         start  from,  295,  298,  309. 
Oulagan  River,  242,  299-301. 

„         Valley,  300. 
Ovis  amnion,  I. 

„  country,  95,  221,  289. 

„  first  sighted,  95. 

,,  length    of    horns    in 

ewe,  95. 
„  length  of  horns  lying 

on  ground,  96. 
Y 


Ovis  a 


)imon,  find  heads  on  river- 
bed, 100. 
a  herd  of  ewes  and 

young,  100. 
rams  located,  103. 
rams  stalked,  104. 
two    fine    heads    se- 
cured, 105. 
measurement  of  the 

two  heads,  105. 
height  at  shoulder  and 

size,  106. 
Littledale  secures  five 

heads,  107. 
found   at  altitude  of 

9,000  feet,  108. 
a  herd  of  ewes  spied, 

108,  112,  169. 
a  fine  old  ram  sighted 

and  shot,  113,  114. 
eighteen     cross     the 

stream,  115. 
measurements  of  fine 

head,  115,  191. 
find  horns  in  bed  of 

stream,  1 16. 
a  large  herd  sighted, 

118. 
spy  a  ram,  251. 
fifteen    rams    in    the 
river-bed,  125. 
unsuccessful      stalks, 

129,  138,  148. 
two  fair  heads,  131. 
a  small  head,  130. 
one  found  dead,  130. 
Littledale  gets  a  fair 

head,  133. 
herd  of  sixteen  seen, 

133- 
ground  strewed  with 

horns,  140,  228,  229, 

244. 


32: 


INDEX 


Ovis  a, 


n won,  sheep  horns  on  shores 

of  small  lake,  144. 
,  seven  young  ramsand 

ewes,  147. 
,  sight  two  rams,  148, 

199,  254,  256. 
,  sightaherdofsix,i5o. 

,  sight  a  herd  of  rams, 

151,  194. 
,  sight  a  herd  of  fifteen 

rams,  155,  156. 
,  a  ram  killed,  160,  249. 

,  Littledale     sights     a 

young  ram  and  ewes, 

161. 
Littledale    gets    one 

and  wounds  another, 

162. 
sight  a  herd,  164,  186, 

192,  246. 
wound  and  kill  a  ram, 

166,  167. 
find    skulls     on    the 

ground,  169. 
find  heads  on  ground, 

184. 
Littledale  sights  some 

ewes,  189. 
Littledale   secures    a 

fine  head,  191. 
wound  a  sheep,  197. 
pick  up  fine  head,  226, 

252. 
Littledale  gets  a  small 

head   and    sights    a 

herd,  253. 
spy  two  old  rams,  2  54. 
spy  five  rams,  257. 
Littledale  gets  a  fine 

head,  259,  286. 
Littlcdale's    record 

head,  260,  261. 


Ovis  ammon,  spy  three  rams,  268. 
„  six  old  rams,  275. 

Littledale    gets    two 
good  heads,  275. 
„  spy  some  ewes,  277. 

„  spy  ten  rams,  286. 

„  our  bag,  290,  291. 

Pamir  steppes,  1 10 
Parlovsky,  General,  20. 
Pekin,  174. 
Perm,  10,  174. 
Petnopavloosk,  23. 
Pine  forests,  31,  302. 

„     trees,  48,  295. 
Plants,  5. 

Platinum,  13,  20;  washings,  16,20. 
Plovers,  185. 
Ponies  bought,  62. 

„       prices  of,  89. 
Purdey  rifle,  102,  104,  167. 

Railways  of  Western  Siberia,  20,  23. 
Religion  of  the  Kalmuks,  56. 
Rhododendrons,  68. 
Rock-cherries,  32. 
Roe-deer,  13,  14,  56,  221,  297,  298, 

300-2,  304-8. 
Russia,  9,  19,  24,  28,  240. 

„       Emperor  of,  2>3i  240. 
Russian  colonists,  descendants  of, 
4i. 
„        convicts,  16,  30. 

Customs,  23,  29,  85,  290. 
.,        Empire,  4. 

„        Geographical  Society,  218. 
„        Government,  27,  31,  33,  41, 

54,  58,  78,  86. 
„        merchants,  26,  45,  49,  62, 

78,  84. 
„        missionaries,  56. 
,,       steppes,  150. 


INDEX 


323 


Russian  Turkestan,  4,  150. 

„        Tzar,  Ivan  the  Terrible,  16. 
Russian- Kalmuk  dictionary,  65. 
Russo-Chinese  divide,  97,  230. 
„  slopes,  1,  97. 

Sable,  15,  45. 
Saiga  Antelope,  150,  151. 
Saldjar  Pass,  68,  69,  81,  309. 
Salkhyn  (wind),  60,  157. 
Sardinian  Wild  Sheep,  95. 
Sarry-Kol  Lake,  302-4. 

„  our  camp  on,  303. 

Semenoff,  Mr.  P.,  4. 
Semiretchensk  country,  24. 
Shebalina,  49,  55. 
Sheleznaia   Goro  (iron  mountain), 

'3,  '7- 
Siberia,  16,  24,  28,  221,  240. 
Siberian  Altai,  68. 

„        Franzensbad,  47. 

frontier,  3,  26,  45,  58,  65, 
116,   153,  215,   222,  230, 
23;. 
,,        Railway,  6,  20. 
„        roe-deer,  13. 
steppes,  23. 
„        Taiga,  14. 

villages,  23,  27. 
Skinning  heads,  6. 
Slaviansky  bazaar,  5. 
Snow-bridge,  96,  97. 
Snow-cock,  196. 

Somoff,  a  rich  merchant,  28,  29. 
Sou  (water),  60. 
Squirrels  (Siberian),  15. 
Stores  bought  at  Barnaoul,  61. 
St.  Petersburg,  3,  5,  29,  174,  294. 

„  Museum,  4. 

Suite  (Antelope),  184. 
Sumdairik  River,  212,  222,  224. 
Valley,  2  n,  222. 


Suok  River,  142,  143,  147,  169,  181, 
182,    189,    199,   201  ;    camp 
on  banks,  143. 
„     steppe,  184,  192,  226. 
„     Valley,  164,  182,  192,  213. 
Swans,  83,  294. 

Taba,  the  author's  hunter,  87,  95 
107,  109,  112,  113,  117,  121,  122 
125,  129,  130,  133,  137,  138,  140. 
144,  147-57,  159,  l6°.  '63-9: 
183,  185-8.  190,  191,  193,  204 
221,  226,  230,  231,  233,  234 
237-9,  245-9,  256-9,  263,  265-8 
270,  271,  275-81,286-9,  296,  304 
308. 
Taganrog,  29. 

Taguil,  6,  10,  11,  13,  15,  19,  20. 
,,       arrive  there,  19. 
.,       description    of   the    village 

of,  13. 
,,       iron-works,  19,  21. 
.,       Lake,  13,  14. 
„       leave,  23. 
„        River,  13,  15. 
Takhua,  160. 

Tarantasses,  39,  40,  42,  48,  49,  310 
Tarkhaty  country,  2S2. 

„         River,  108,  275,  276,  277 

281. 
„         Valley,  276. 
Tartars  at  Kasan,  10. 
Tashkend,  309. 
Task  (rock),  60. 
Tchagan-Burgaza,  the,  83,  93, 

10S,  182,  277,  282,  286,  288. 
Tchagan-Burgaza  Valley,  96. 
Tchagan-Kol    River,   200-2, 
206-8,   215,   219,  226,  227.   2 
preparing  to  cross,  205. 
Tchagan-Kol  Valley,  227. 
Tchagan-Sou  (white  water),  14^ 


94, 


324 


INDEX 


Tcheliabinsk,  23. 

Tchergk,  48,  49. 

Tchibit,  a  tributary  stream,  81. 

Tchichatcheff  (a  Russian  traveller), 

34- 
Tchouia  Valley,  25,  78,  81,  294. 

,,        path,  26,  65. 

River,  68,  72,  75,  81,  82, 
84,  294. 
Teletzkoi  Lake,  36,  39. 
Tenga  Lake,  56,  60. 
Tents,  3. 

Tetraogalhts  (Snowcock),  196. 
Tezek  (dry  horsedung  for  fuel),  98, 

154,  162. 
Theodor.  Father,  27,  29. 
Tibet,  204,  227. 
Tibetan  plateaus,  84. 
Tiger  in  Barnaoul  Museum,  34. 
Tomsk,  27-30,  47. 

„        Governor  of,  25,  26. 
Trees,  25,  47,  48,  94,  200,  202,  213 

223,  295,  297,  302,  304,  305. 
Turki  dialect,  60. 

Uliassoutai,  26,  55. 

Ullar  (Snowcock),  196. 

Ural  Mountains,  6,  13,  16,  23,  25. 

„     borders  of  Siberia,  28. 
Urusoul  River,  66. 

Vassili,  the  cook,  20,  33,  61,  66,  92, 

98,  116,  154. 
Volga,  6,  7,  9,  10. 


Ward,  Mr.  Rowland,  1. 
West  Siberian  Railway,  20,  23. 
White  Fox,  15. 

Wild  Sheep  (see  also  Ovis),  82,  84, 
87,95,220,221,279. 
„  haunts,  87. 

„  horns    and    skulls    on 

bed  of  stream,  95. 
„  in  Barnaoul  Museum, 

34- 
Willow  bushes,  94,  200. 

„       Grouse,  132. 
Wissmann,  Major,  309. 
Wolf,  187. 

Wolves  attack  the  ponies,  143,  145. 
Woodcock  shooting  at  Taguil,  19. 
,,  habits  of,  19. 


Yakoub,  the  demitcha,  94,  139,  168. 

Yaks,  179,  180,  185. 

Yourts,  or  felt-covered  tents,  57,  66, 
75,  76,  78,98,  169,  171,  174,  177, 
181,  202,  213,  228,  276,  299,  301. 

Yulduz  Valley,  4. 

Yulientash,  307. 

Zaissans,  or  native  chiefs,  58,  59,  85, 
86,  89,  90,  93,  201,  231,  251,  284, 
290,  293,  299,  300,  301,  309. 

Zaissan  Semion,  85,  89,  92,  230, 
240-2. 

Zassedatel  Meyer  (see  Meyer),  310. 

Zeiss  glasses,  112,  1 13,  156,  159,  246 


A  SELECTED  LIST  OF  BOOKS 

OK 

(Sport,  TErabcl,  ant)  ^latutal  ^istorn 

PUBLISHED    BY 

ROWLAND    WARD,   limited 

"  THE  JUNGLE" 
1 66,    PICCADILLY,    LONDON 

Post  8vo.     Bound  in  leather.     Price  y.  6d.  net. 

GREAT  GAME  SHOOTING  AND  PRACTICAL 
TAXIDERMY 

Zhc  Sportsman's  Ibanoboofe 

TO  PRACTICAL  COLLECTING,  PRESERVING, 

AND 

ARTISTIC  SETTING-UP  OE  TROPHIES  AND  SPECIMENS 

TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED 

H  Synoptical  (Suioc  to  tbe  ibimting  (Srounos  ot  tbc  Wotli> 

WITH  MANY  ILLUSTRATIONS 

By    ROWLAND   WARD,  F.Z.S. 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,    limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,'-   166,   PICCADILLY 

V    2 


Royal  8jw,  477  pp.     Price  25J.  net. 

TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE  IN  SOUTH-EAST 
AFRICA 

BEING   THE    NARRATIVE    OF    THE    LAST    ELEVEN 

YEARS    SPENT    BY    THE   AUTHOR 

ON    THE    ZAMBESI    AND    ITS    TRIBUTARIES 

WITH 

AN    ACCOUNT    OF    THE    COLONIZATION    OF    MASHONALAND 

AND    THE 

PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOLD  INDUSTRY  IN  THAT  COUNTRY 

By   F.   C.   SELOUS 

GOLD    MEDALLIST    OF    THE    ROYAL    GEOGRAPHICAL    SOCIETY 
AUTHOR   OF    "A    HUNTER'S    WANDERINGS    IN    AFRICA" 

WITH    NUMEROUS    ILLUSTRATIONS    AND    MAP 


Demy  8vo,  288  //.     Price  ior.  6d.  net. 

SUNSHINE  AND  STORM  IN  RHODESIA 

BEING   A    NARRATIVE    OF    EVENTS    IN    MATABELELAND 

BOTH    BEFORE    AND    DURING   THE    RECENT 

NATIVE    INSURRECTION 

By   F.   C.   SELOUS 

GOLD     MEDALLIST    OF    THE    ROYAL    GEOGRAPHICAL    SOCIETY 
AUTHOR    OF     "TRAVEL    AND    ADVENTURE,"    ETC. 

FULLY    ILLUSTRATED 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,    limited 

"THE   JUNGLE,"    166,    PICCADILLY 


Post  Svo,  400  pp.      /'rue  7s.  Gd.  net  {cheap  edition) 

SEVENTEEN  TRIPS  THROUGH  SOMALILAND 

AND  A  VISIT  TO  ABYSSINIA 

A    RECORD    OF    EXPLORATION    AND    BIG   GAME 
SHOOTING,    1884  to    1893 

By   MAJOR    H.   G.   C.   S WAYNE,   R.E. 

FELLOW    OF    THE    ROYAL    GEOGRAPHICAL    .SOCIETY 
CORRESPONDING     MEMBER    OF     THE    ZOOLOGICAL    SOCIEIY 

WITH    NUMEROUS   ILLUSTRATIONS    AND    MAPS 


Post  4to,   134  //.      Price  "js.  6d.  net. 

THE  ENGLISH  ANGLER  IN  FLORIDA 

WITH    SOME    DESCRIPTIVE    NOTES    OF    THE    GAME 
ANIMALS   AND    BIRDS 

By    ROWLAND    WARD,    F.Z.S. 

AUTHOR    OK     "RECORDS    OF    BIG    GAME,"     "  SPORTSMAN'S     HANDBOOK,"     ETC. 

WITH    NUMEROUS    ILLUSTRATIONS 


London:    ROWLAND    WARD,    limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,''    166,   PICCADILLY 


Demy  Svo,  448  pp.      Price  2U.  net. 

ELEPHANT-HUNTING 
IN   EAST   EQUATORIAL   AFRICA 

BEING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THREE  YEARS'  IVORY-HUNTING 

UNDER  MOUNT   KENIA  AND  AMONG  THE   NOOROHO 

SAVAGES    OF   THE    LOROGI    MOUNTAINS 

INCLUDING 

A  TRIP  TO  THE  NORTH  END  OF  LAKE  RUDOLPH 

By   ARTHUR    H.    NEUMANN 

WITH    NUMEROUS    ILLUSTRATIONS    BY  J.   G.    MILLAIS,    E.   CALDWELL 
AND  G.   E.   LODGE. 

COLOURED    PLATE    AND    MAP 


Dany  8vo,  506  //.      Price  21s.  net. 

SPORT  IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  OF  KASHMIR 

BEING 

A    NARRATIVE    OF 

AN    EIGHT    MONTHS'   TRIP    IN    BALTISTAN    AND    LADAK 

AND    A    LADY'S    EXPERIENCES    IN    THE 

LATTER    COUNTRY 

Cogctbcr  witb  Ibtnts  for  tbe  (Suioancc  of  Sportsmen 
By   HENRY   ZOUCH    DARRAH 

INDIAN     CIVIL    SERVICK 

WITH   FIFTY-TWO  ILLUSTRATIONS  (FROM  PHOTOGRAPHS  BY   THE 
WRITER)  AND    TWO   MAPS 


London:    ROWLAND    WARD,    limited 

"THE   JUNGLE,"    166,    PICCADILLY 


Royal  8vo,  356  pages.     Price  8s.  6d.  net. 

SPORT  IN  EAST  CENTRAL  AFRICA 

BEING   AN    ACCOUNT    OF 

HUNTING    TRIPS    IN    PORTUGUESE   AND    OTHER 

DISTRICTS    OF    EAST    CENTRAL   AFRICA 

By   F.  VAUGHAN   KIRBY 
(maqaqamba) 

AUTHOR  OF  "IN  HAUNTS  OF  WILD  GAME" 

/  /  7  TH  IL  L  US  TR  A  TIONS 


Medium  8vo,  336  pages.     Price  21/-  net 

HUNTING  TRIPS  IN  THE  CAUCASUS 

By    E.    DEMIDOFF   (Prince  San  Donato) 

WITH  96  ILLUSTRATIONS   AND   MAP 


London:    ROWLAND    WARD,    limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"   166,   PICCADILLY 


Royal  Svo,  524  pages.      Price  30/-  net.     Third  edition 

RECORDS  OF  BIG  GAME 

WITH    THEIR    DISTRIBUTION,    CHARACTERISTICS 
DIMENSIONS,    WEIGHTS,    AND 

MEASUREMENTS    OF    HORNS 
ANTLERS,    TUSKS,    AND    SKINS 

By    ROWLAND    WARD,    F.Z.S. 

AUTHOR    OF    "THE    SPORTSMAN'S    HANDBOOK,"    ETC. 

WITH  ABOUT  217   ILLUSTRATIONS 
AND  FULL  INDEX  TO    THE  OWNERS  OF  THE  RECORDED  SPECIMENS 


Medium  \to,   350  pp.      Price  £$  5s.   net 

THE  DEER  OF  ALL  LANDS 

A    HISTORY    OF   THE   FAMILY   CERVID.F: 
LIVING    AND    EXTINCT 

By  R.  LYDEKKER 

Illustrated  by  Twenty-four  Hand-Coloured  Plates,  drawn  by  J.  Smit 

also  a  number  of  Process-Drawings  of  Horns,  as  well  as 

Photographic  Reproductions  of  living  Deer  in 

the  Woburn  and  other  Collections 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,  limited 

"THE   JUNGLE, "    i66,    PICCADILLY 


Uniform  with  "Deer  of  all  Lands."     Price  £S  5s-   nei 

WILD   OXEN,   SHEEP,   AND   GOATS 
OF  ALL  LANDS 

LIVING    AND    EXTINCT 

By   R.   LYDEKKER 

lustrated  by  Twenty-seven  Coloured  Plates,  drawn  by  J.  Smit 
and  the  late  Joseph  Wolf  ;  and  a  number  of  Drawings 
of  Horns,  as  well  as  Photographic  Reproductions 
of  living  Specimens 


Uniform  with  the  above.     612  //.      Price  £$  $s.  net 

THE  GREAT  AND  SMALL  GAME  OF  AFRICA 

BEING    A    FULL   ACCOUNT   OF 

THEIR  DISTRIBUTION,  HABITS,  AND  NATURAL  HISTORY 

With  Numerous  Experiences  of  their 
Pursuit  in  the  Field 

with  fifteen  hand-coloured  plates  and  numerous 
other  illustrations 

CONTRIBUTORS 


.MAJOR    A.   J.    ARNOLD 

H.    A.    BRYDEN 

T.    E.    BUCKLEY 

T.    W.    H.    CLARKE 

LORD   DELAMERE 

DK.    D.    G.    ELLIOT 

CAPT.    B.   T.    FFINCH 

H.    C.    V.    HUNTER 

J.    D.    INVERARITY 

F.   J.   JACKSON 

SIR    HARRY  JOHNSTON  MAJOR    H.    G.    C    SWAYNE 

F.    VAUGHAN    KIRBY  POULETT-WEATHERLEY 

R.    LYDEKKER 

General  Editor— H.  A.  BRYDEN 


CAPT.   JOHN    MARRIOTT 

A.    H.    NEUMANN 

A.    E.    PEASE 

G.    W.    PENRICE 

VISCOUNT   EDMOND   DE    PONCINS 

DR.    PERCY   RENDALL 

F.    C.    SELOUS 

ALFRED    SHARP 

LT.-COL.    WILLIAM    SITWELL 

A.    H.    STRAKER 


London:  ROWLAND  WARD,  limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"  166,  PICCADILLY 


I  'ni form  zvith  ''Deer  of  All  Lands."     Subscription  price  £4  4s. 

GREAT  AND  SMALL  GAME  OF  INDIA 
BURMA,  AND  TIBET 

BEING    A    FULL   ACCOUNT    OF    THEIR 
DISTRIBUTION,    HABITS,   AND    NATURAL    HISTORY 

WITH  NJNE   HAND-COLOURED   AND   OTHER   ILLUSTRATIONS 

By  R.    LYDEKKER,   B.A.,   F.R.S.,   F.G.S.,  F.Z.S. 
TlUlitb  Contributions  bv>  Sportsmen 


English  Edition  limited  to  200  numbered  and  signed  copies 
Price  £2,  105.  net 

SPORT  IN  SOMALILAND 

By    COUNT    JOSEPH    POTOCKI 

TRANSLATED   FROM   THE   POLISH 
By   JEREMIAH    CURTIN 

WITH   A    COLOURED  PORTRAIT  OF   THE  AUTHOR 
COLOURED  ILLUSTRATIONS,    IS  PAGE  PHOTOGRA  1  'URES 
7    TEXT  PIG  URES,   AND  MAP 


London:    ROWLAND    WARD,    limited 

"THE   JUNGLE,"    166,    PICCADILLY 


a*Ti& 


RETURN 


MAIN  CIRCULATION 


ALL  BOOKS  ARE  SUBJECT  TO  RECALL 
RENEW  BOOKS  BY  CALLING  642-3405 


DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 

JBOsm 

*«9& 

;,io^t- 

\'  r 


FORM  NO.  DD6 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
BERKELEY,  CA  94720 


UC.  BERKELEY  LIBI 


