:C7) 


ECO 


=  00 
ICO 


^CD 


CO 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/frompekintocalaiOOdewi 


FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS 
BY   LAND. 


l.ONBOIf 
PRINTED    BY    GII.BEKT   AMD    KITINGTON,    LIJIITED, 

ST.  John's  hotse,  clekken-wkll  uoad. 


I 


■•  -4 


# 


Fri03I  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS 
BY  LAND 


H.    DE    WINDT. 


WITH  ILLUSTRATIOXS  AND  MAP. 


'  Plus  Je  vis  I'etrangcr,  plus  J'aimai  ma  patrie.'  — De  Bdloy. 


LONDON— CHAPMAN    ai«;d    HALL, 

LIMITED, 

1889. 
\^All  rights  reserved,.'] 


ps 


ve- 


ry OF  t 


1087238 


THE    RAJA    OF    SARAWAK,    G.C.M.G. 


IX    EEMEMBRAXCE    OF    MA>T 


PLEASANT    HOURS     OF    TRAVEL    SPEXT    IX    HIS 


DOMIXIOXS    IX    THE    ISLAXD    OF    HORXEO. 


PEEFACE. 


There  are  two  Eiiglislimen  at  present  living  in 
Shanghai  who  have  travelled  overland  from  Europe 
to  China.  T  was  told,  when  there,  that  these 
gentlemen  are  continually  receiving  letters  from 
England  asking  for  information  relative  to  the 
journe}^  from  Petersburg  to  Pekin  and  cice  rersd, 
and  in  the  Gobi  Desert  and  Siberia. 

It  is  mainly  owing  to  this  circumstance  that  I 
publish  these  pages,  for  I  fear  the  general  reader 
will  find  little  to  interest  him  in  this  record  of  our 
monotonous  pilgrimage  through  Europe  and  Asia. 
I  feel  that  an  apology  is  needed  for  its  publication, 
and  need  hardly  say  that  it  does  not  aspire  to  the 
title  of  a  book  of  travel,  being  merely  a  record  of 
my  impressions  in  the  less  civilized  parts  of  China, 
and  in  that  weird  and  melancholy  country,  more 
perhaps  from  associations  than  aspect,  Siberia. 


VI 11  PfiEFACE. 

The  voyage  is,  though  somewhat  origmal,  sadly 
devoid  of  interest.  Urga  and  Irkoutsk  are,  no 
doubt,  well  worth  seeing,  but  a  passing  glimpse  of 
these  unique  cities  far  from  repays  the  discomfort, 
not  to  say  hardshi]),  which  must  be  undergone  on 
the  caravan  route. 

T  can  only  trust  this  book  may  deter  others  from 
following  my  example,  and  shall  then  liave  some 
satisfaction  in  knowing  that  its  pages  have  not  been 
written  in  vain. 

M.  Victor  Meio-nan  concludes  his  amusing^  work 
"  De  Paris  a  Pekin  par  terre,"  thus  :  — 

"  N'allez  pas  la  !     C'est  la  morale  de  ce  livre  !  " 

Let  the  reader  benefit  by  our  experience. 

H.  DE  W. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  I. 

PAGE 

Gravesend  to  Fekix 1 


CHAPTER  II. 
Pekix       .         .         , GO 

CHAPTER  III. 

Pekin  to  Kalgan   .         .         .         .         ,         .         .         .115 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Kalgan,  or  Ciiang-Chia-Kow  .         .         .         .         .147 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Desert  of  Gobi 187 

CHAPTER  VI. 
Ourga  to  Kiakhta  .......     208 

CHAPTER  Vir. 
Kiakhta  to  Iukoutsk .322 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

PAGE 

Irkoutsk 385 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Irkoutsk  {continued)        .......     422 

CHAPTER  X. 

Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk  471 

CHAPTER  XL 
Tomsk      . .         .573 

CHAPTER  Xn. 
Perm  to  Calais 626 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTEATIONS. 


A  Caravau        ....         .         . 

Frontispiece 

A  Street  in  Tartar  City — Pekin 

.  facing  pacje 

110 

A  Mule  Litter  ...... 

)i 

liO 

Da-Hun-Go      .... 

}) 

184 

Ourouni   ....... 

}) 

214 

My  Camel  Cart          .... 

}} 

222 

An  awkward  Moment 

J) 

252 

A  Street  Piayer-Avheel  at  Ourga 

^) 

288 

Our  Tarantass  with  "  Troika  "    . 

352 

A  Village  Ostrog — Convicts  on  the  March 

}) 

408 

A  Siberian  Criminal  Convict 

J) 

448 

A  Night  in  a  Post-house    . 

)y 

478 

The  Post-house  at  Easgonnaia    . 

i> 

492 

A  Siberian  Village  Street  . 

)) 

49G 

A  Prison  Barge  on  the  Obi  River 

)j 

614 

Map. 


PEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS 
BY    LAND. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GEAVESEND   TO    PEKIN. 

*'  Feom  China  to  France  overland  !  Why,  surely  it's 
impossible.  I  thought  one  could  only  get  to  China 
by  sea !  " 

Such  was  the  remark  made  by  a  young  lady 
whom  I  had  the  honour  of  taking  down  to  dinner  a 
few  days  previous  to  embarking  upon  the  voyage 
of  which  I  am  about  to  narrate  my  experiences. 
Although  I  trust  there  are  not  many  educated 
persons  who,  like  my  fair  friend,  are  unaware  that 
Pekin  and  Paris  are  actually  undivided  by  sea,  I 
imagine  there  are  but  few  who,  if  put  down  at 
Calais,  and  told  to  find  their  way  overland  to  Pekin, 
would  know  how  to  set  about  it,  fewer  still  who 
have  any  practical  knowledge  of  that  vast  but 
comparatively  unknown  country  separating  the 
Chinese  Empire  from  Russia  proper,  Siberia. 

VOL.    I.  B 


2  PROM    PEKIN    TO    OiVLAIS    BY    LAND. 

It  had  been  a  long-projected  voyage.  Lancaster, 
(a  fellow-traveller  in  many  lands,)  and  I  had 
talked  it  over  for  at  least  two  years  before :  in 
the  early  spring  of  1887,  we  finally  decided  to 
put  our  jjroject  into  execution,  and  start  for  the 
great  unknown. 

Unlike  most  voyages  which  in  these  days  of 
travel  are  an  accomplished  fact  as  soon  as  decided 
upon,  this  one  was  fraught  with  innumerable  delays 
and  annoyances.  Our  difficulties  commenced  at  the 
very  outset,  for  nowhere  in  London,  -or  indeed  any- 
where else,  could  I  glean  the  smallest  information 
respecting  the  journey ;  the  only  book  I  succeeded 
in  finding  on  the  subject  being  one  written  by  John 
Bell,  the  English  traveller,  in  1788,  but,  as  may  be 
imagined,   the   information  contained   therein   was 

somewhat  obsolete. 
.  Nothing     more     modern,     however,      could     I 

procure.     Jules  Verne's  amusing  and  clever  book, 

"  Michel   Strogoff,"    deals   largely   with  Irkoutsk, 

Lake   Baikal,    and  other   regions    we    were   about 

to  traverse,  but   I  hardly  felt   justified   in  taking 

that  versatile  author  as  a  travelling-guide.    That  we 

landed  at  Tientsin — China — and  saw  the  sea  again 

at  Calais — France — was  all  we  definitely  knew ;  of 


GRAVESEND   TO    PEKIN.  6 

the  time  it  took  to  do,  or  how  the  journey  was  to  be 
accompHshedj  we  were  quite  in  the  dark. 

About  a  week  before  our  departure,  however,  I 
had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  a  gentleman  connected 
with  the  Eussian  Embassy  in  London,  and  to  him 

I  confided  our  dijficulties.     M.  de was  indeed 

a  friend  in  need,  for  in  less  than  twenty-four 
hours  our  difficulties  had  vanished  like  snow  in 
the  sunshine.  Not  only  was  the  route  from  Pekin 
to  Moscow  clearly  laid  down  for  us,  but  we  were 
provided,  in  addition,  with  a  letter  of  introduction 
from  M.  de  Staal,  the  Russian  Ambassador  in 
London,  to  the  Eussian  Minister  at  Pekin.  Had  it 
not  been  for  this,  I  doubt  whether  we  should  ever 
have  got  further  than  the  celestial  city. 

The  route  (we  now  found)  was  as  follows  :  From 
Shanghai  to  Pekin  by  steamer  and  house-boat,  from 
Pekin  to  Kalgan  (or  the  Great  Wall  of  China)  by 
mule  litter,  and  thence  across  the  Great  Gobi  Desert 
to  Kiakhta,  the  Eusso-Chinese  frontier,  by  camel 
caravan.  From  Kiakhta  to  Tomsk,  via  Lake 
Baikal,  Irkoutsk,  and  Krasnoiarsk  by  tarantass  or 
Eussian  post  carriage,  and  thence  by  steam 
communication  on  the  Obi  and  Irtish  rivers  to 
Tobolsk  and  Tinmen.     From  the  latter   place  our 

B  2 


4  FEOM    P.EKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

journey  was  easy  enough.  Four  days'  sail 
and  seven  of  steam  would  bring  us  to  Moscow, 
practically  tlie  end  of  our  voyage.  As  to  tlie  time 
the  journey  would  take,  no  one,  even  at  the  Russian 
Embassy,  seemed  to  know.  So  much  in  this 
journey  depends  (as  we  afterwards  found)  upon  the 
weather,  the  facility  of  obtaining  camels  at  the 
Great  Wall,  and  last,  but  not  least,  the  state  of 
the  roads  in  Siberia.  We  were  starting  at  a  good 
time,  however,  and  with  luck  might  expect  to  reach 
Moscow  in  the  early  autumn.  If  detained  in 
Siberia  by  floods  or  other  casualties,  we  might  not 
arrive  in  Europe  till  the  new  year.  This  was  all  we 
could  ascertain,  and  with  this  somewhat  scanty 
information  were  forced  to  be  content. 

The  outfit  question  did  not  trouble  us  much.  A 
Terai  hat,  two  or  three  tweed  suits,  and  an  unlimited 
supply  of  cigars  and  tobacco  met  our  requirements. 
Everything  we  took  went  comfortably  into  two 
small-sized  leather  portmanteaus.  A  rifle,  fowling- 
piece  and  brace  of  double-barrelled  pistols  (not 
revolvers)  were  also  taken,  and  this  completed  our 
wardrobe  and  armoury.  I  often  wonder  what  the 
West  End  outfitters  would  do  were  it  not  for 
the   yearly  increasing   number    of  Globe-Trotters. 


GRAVESEND    TO    TEKIN.  5 

Be  it  understood  I  mean  Globe-Trotters,  not 
travellers,  for  there  is  a  vast  difference  between 
the  two.  I  have  often  been  amused  at  the  utterly 
useless  articles  forced  upon  the  unhappy  Gr. 
T.  by  the  Bond  Street  or  Piccadilly  haberdasher, 
who  probably  knows  rather  less  of  the  country  his 
customer  is  about  to  visit  than  the  Khan  of  Khiva 
does  of  Pall  Mall,  The  Globe-Trotter  pm^  et  simple 
is  seldom  (so  far  as  I  have  seen)  of  high  intellectual 
attainments,  but  one  I  met  a  few  years  ago,  while 
on  a  voyage  to  Sydney,  eclipsed  everything.  He 
had  provided  himself  with  enough  thick  clothes  and 
furs  to  fit  out  an  expedition  to  the  North  Pole.  On 
asking  him  the  reason,  he  replied,  "  Oh !  we  shall  get 
to  Sydney  at  Christmas,  you  know,  and  it  will  be  so 
awfully  cold  after  the  tropics  !  " 

Our  final  preparations  completed,  we  took 
passage  for  Shanghai,  and  the  rainy,  gusty  morning 
of  the  7th  of  April,  1887,  saw  us  steaming  down 
channel  with  half  a  gale  of  wind  in  our  teeth,  look- 
ing our  last  on  the  white  cliffs  of  England,  while  to 
our  left  was  just  visible  the  low-lying  coast  of 
France,  the  goal  we  hoped  to  reach  in  safety,  before 
the  following  winter,  and  from  which  we  were 
separated  by  the  length  of  Europe  and  Asia. 


6         FROM  PEKIX  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

I  will  not  inflict  a  description  of  the  voyage  out 
upon  the  reader.  It  would  be  superfluous  in  these 
days  of  travel,  when  a  man  secures  his  berth 
for  Sydney  or  Yokohama  with  much  the  same  in- 
difference as  twenty  years  ago  he  took  a  ticket  for 
Rome  or  Vienna.  The  life  on  board  a  P.  and  0.  ship 
is  familiar  to  most  of  us.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  our 
fellow-passengers  were  of  the  usual  kind :  the 
Colonial  bishop,  who  buried  himself  in  a  deep  theo- 
logical work  before  we  had  cleared  Land's  End,  only 
to  emerge  from  it  at  Colombo ;  the  Hong  Kong  mer- 
chant and  his  family  living  on  the  usual  terms  of 
armed  neutrality  with  the  Indian  Civil  Service 
official  and  his  wife,  an  Indian  Major- General, 
a  sprinkling  of  bank  clerks  and  coffee-planters, 
two  or  three  soldiers  rejoining  their  regiments, 
and  a  pretty  grass  widow,  returning  to  her  hus- 
band, an  Indian  Judge.  These,  with  half  a 
dozen  more  or  less  uninteresting  young  ladies 
"  going  out  to  be  married,"  completed  our  party. 
The  ages  of  the  latter  seemed  to  increase  in  pro- 
portion to  the  distance  they  were  going.  The  one 
whose  fortunate  fiance  resided  at  Hong  Kong  must 
have  been  fifty  at  the  very  least.  I  had  almost  for- 
gotten a  nearly  perfect  specimen  of  the  Globe-Trot- 


GRAVESEND   TO    PEKIN.  7 

ter,  who  joined  us,  resplendent  in  purple  and  fine 
linen,  at  Suez ;  a  young  gentleman  somewhat 
inclined  to  take  more  wine  than  was  good  for  him, 
and  who  was  going  abroad  for  the  good  of  his 
health — presumably  also  for  that  of  his  friends  and 
relations  at  home. 

There  is  a  very  false  impression  existing  among 
those  who  have  never  travelled  in  one,  as  to  the 
delights  of  a  voyage  in  a  P.  and  0.,  and  the  endless 
gaiety  and  amusement  on  board  these  floating  hotels. 
I  have  made  at  least  a  dozen  voyages  by  this  par- 
ticular line,  and  must  confess  that  the  gaiety  and 
amusement,  if  it  ever  existed,  has  escaped  my  obser- 
vation. Perhaps  I  have  been  unfortunate,  but  I  must 
own  that  I  have  invariably  found  the  life  on  board 
these  ships  deplorably  dull.  The  mere  fact  of  being 
cabined,  cribbed,  confined,  with  three  score  of  one's 
fellow-creatures,  the  majority  of  whom  have  not  a 
thought  or  feeling  in  common,  is  surely  suflScient 
to  account  for  a  lack  of  enjoyment.  At  the  same 
time,  to  the  casual  onlooker,  who  is  wise  enough  to 
keep  out  of  them,  the  petty  rows  and  scandals  on 
board  ship  are  amusing  enough.  How  Major- General 
Jones  has  had  the  audacity  to  take  the  seat  next  the 
captain  at  dinner,  instead  of  Commissioner  Brown, 


8  FRO^r    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND, 

wlio,  as  everybody  ought  to  know,  if  they  don't, 
always  takes  precedence  of  him  at  Brandypore ;  and 
how  Mrs.  Commissioner  Brown  has  felt  compelled  to 
cut  Mrs,  Major-General  Jones  in  consequence.  How 
the  wife  of  Surgeon  Squills,  of  the  Bengal  Staff  Corps, 
has  forbidden  her  daughter  to  speak  to  the  third 
mate,  and  that  matron's  subsequent  mortification  on 
discovering  that  the  tabooed  officer  is  the  second 
son  of  an  Earl.  How,  in  our  case,  one  of  the  future 
blushing  brides  (the  Hong  Kong  one)  only  wished 
that  poor  dear  Judge  could  see  how  his  wife  went 
on,  although  to  unbiassed  eyes,  that  cheery  little 
lady's  sole  crime  consisted  in  being  more  than 
pretty,  and  absurdly  good-natured.  How  the  Globe- 
trotter overcome  by  (let  us  say)  the  heat  in  the  Red 
Sea  offered  to  fight  the  captain  for  a  dozen  of 
champagne  on  his  own  quarter-deck, — all  this  could 
I  descant  upon  at  length,  but  fear  lest  I  weary  the 
reader,  forgetting  that  a  good  joke  at  sea  is  but  a 
sorry  jest  ashore. 

Light  and  favourable  winds  favoured  us  to  Malta, 
that  shadeless,  bustling  rock  so  happily  christened  by 
Byron  "The  little  Military  Hot-House."  A  few 
hours  here  allowed  of  a  stroll  ashore  and  a  visit  to  the 
mess  of  that  cheeriest  and  best  of  regiments,  the 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  9 

"  Black  "Watch."  Then,  after  dinner  at  the  club, 
and  a  chat  over  old  Cairo-days,  off  again  in  the 
moonlight  to  the  Bombay,  and,  three  days  later,  Port 
Said.  Here  an  unexpected  delay  awaited  us.  The 
P.  and  0.  S.S,  Borne  had  gone  ashore  (the  com- 
mencement of  a  series  of  disasters  for  the  Company  :) 
which  meant  a  detention  of  five  days,  at  least,  at 
the  glary,  unsavoury  canal  port. 

Small-pox  was  raging  in  this  deu  of  publicans 
and  sinners,  and  several  cases  having  occurred  on 
the  homeward-bound  P.  and  0.  ships,  we  were 
requested  by  the  captain  not  to  land,  if  we  could 
possibly  help  it,  during  our  stay.  A  prospect  of 
five  days  cooped  up  in  an  atmosphere  of  coal-dust 
and  sand,  to  say  nothing  of  the  noisome  odours  off 
the  shore,  was  anything  but  inviting,  and  eight 
o'clock  the  next  evening  saw  us  sitting  down  to 
dinner  in  the  cool,  comfortable'  dining-room  of 
Shepherd's  Hotel,  Cairo. 

There  is  a  charm  about  Cairo  peculiar  to  itself. 
Nowhere  else  do  we  find  that  strange  mixture 
of  western  civihzation  and  eastern  barbarism  that 
exists  in  the  Egyptian  capital,  which  seems,  by 
the  way,  to  be  yearly  increasing  in  popularity  as  a 
winter  resort.     Everything  in  the  place  is  original 


10  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  therefore  cliarniing,  and,  althoiigli  surrounded 
witli  every  European  luxury  and  comfort,  so  utterly 
unlike  Europe. 

A  telegram  was  received  during  our  stay  here, 
announcing  the  total  loss  of  the  P.  and  0.  Tasmania^ 
and  the  drowning,  among  others,  of  her  captain,  poor 
Perrins,  than  whom  no  more  popular  commander  or 
smarter  sailor  ever  lived.  We  were  continually 
seeing  or  hearing  of  wrecks  on  our  voyage  out. 
Besides  passing  three  lately  sunken  vessels  in  the 
Eed  Sea,  we  got  news  at  Colombo  of  the  largest 
ship  in  the  Nord-Deutscher  Lloyd  line  having  gone 
down  off  Cape  Guardafui ;  at  Shanghai  of  the 
sinking  of  the  M.M.  Steamer  Menzaleh  between 
that  port  and  Japan. 

We  had  a  favourable  passage  through  that 
exaggerated  bugbear  the  Eed  Sea,  which,  by  the 
way,  I  have  found  cooler  three  times  out  of  four 
than  the  Indian  Ocean.  Aden  was  not  touched  at, 
and  a  quick  run  of  nine  days  brought  us  to  Colombo, 
where  we  bade  adieu  to  the  Bomhay,  which  was 
proceeding  to  Calcutta,  and  embarked  on  board  the 
Piacenza,  a  vessel  considerably  smaller  but  as  com- 
fortable in  every  respect  as  the  leviathan  we  had  left. 

Twenty-four  hours  here  gave  us  time  for  a  run 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  11 

out  to  Mount  Lavinia,  where  we  received  a  hearty 
welcome  from  the  jovial  Grerman  Herr  (surrounded, 
as  usual,  by  a  menagerie  of  domestic  pets)  who 
manages  that  picturesque  seaside  hostelry.  A  com- 
fortable dinner  in  the  breezy  salle  a  manger  in  full 
view  of  the  cool  blue  sea  and  yellow  sands,  coffee  and 
a  quiet  cigar  in  the  verandah,  were  a  pleasant  change 
from  the  stuffy  saloon  of  the  Bombay.  Then  back 
again  to  Colombo  in  the  moonlight,  along  the 
palm-fringed  road,  heavy  with  the  scent  of 
jungle  flowers,  refreshed  inwardly  and  out- 
wardly, and  ready  for  the  long  weary  days  of 
sea  to  Shanghai. 

"We  had  the  Piacenza  pretty  well  to  ourselves. 
There  were  but  twenty  first-class  passengers  in 
all,  among  them  two  pretty  girls  fresh  from 
Devonshire,  with  the  good  looks,  and  clear,  fresh 
complexions  that  county  alone  seems  able  to 
produce.  It  seemed  a  sin  so  to  take  them  to 
a  clime  notorious  for  stealing  the  roses  from 
the  youngest  and  fairest  faces.  In  the  second 
class  were  some  ten  or  twelve  Protestant  female 
missionaries  bound  for  North  China,  whose 
religious  zeal  was  unparalleled.  They  were  for  ever 
hunting  up  lost  sheep  among  the  passengers,  hot  as 


12  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

it  was.  I  do  not  fancy,  however,  that  their  eiforts 
were  very  successful.  Only  one  of  thera  made 
converts.  She  was  eighteen,  and  very  good- 
looking. 

The  remainder  of  our  voyage  was  uneventful  and 
tedious  enough.  Hot,  sleepy  little  Penang ;  Singa- 
pore a  vision  of  green  hills  and  red  dust,  a 
sickly  odour  of  pepper,  cocoa,  nut-oil,  and  drains. 
Hong  Kong,  for  all  the  world  like  some  Spanish 
or  Italian  town  with  its  white  terraces,  and 
coloured  Venetians,  nestling  in  masses  of  dark 
green  foliage  at  the  foot  of  the  bare  rugged 
peak  ;  all  these  were  passed  without  incident 
worthy  of  mention  excepting  the  meeting  of  the 
fifty-year-old  bride  with  her  fiance  at  the  latter 
port,  which  was  affecting  in  the  extreme.  It  was  a 
relief  to  find  that,  at  any  rate,  the  bridegroom  was 
something  near  her  own  age.  Five  days  later,  on 
the  21st  of  May,  six  weeks  to  a  day  since 
leaving  Gravesend,  we  dropped  our  anchor  in  the 
broad,  muddy  waters  of  the  Yangzekiang,  whence 
a  small  tug  conveyed  us  in  six  hours  up  the 
narrower  and  still  muddier  Woosung  river  to 
Shanghai. 

Shanghai  cannot  be  called  a  picturesque  place. 


GRAVESEND   TO   PKKIN.  13 

Vast  alluvial  plains  of  rice  and  cotton  surround  it 
on  every  side,  while  the  view  from  the  bund  or 
esplanade  fronting  the  river,  is  not  unlike  the 
Thames  at  Blackwall,  with  its  flat  banks,  forests 
of  masts,  and  grey  stone  wharves  and  ware- 
houses. The  town  itself  consists  of  three  dis- 
tinct settlements,  English,  French,  and  American, 
divided  one  from  another  by  small  tributaries  of  the 
Woosung  river.  These  settlements,  quite  distinct 
from  the  native  Chinese  city,  were  formed  by  their 
respective  governments  in  1846,  and  occupy  a 
space  of  ground  rather  more  than  a  mile  square. 
Shanghai,  in  1883,  contained  a  population  of  four 
hundred  thousand,  of  whom  two  thousand  were 
foreign  residents,  and  an  idea  of  its  commercial 
importance  may  be  gained  by  the  fact  that  its  trade 
in  silk,  tea,  and  opium  now  equals  thirty  to  forty 
million  sterHng  value  of  imports  and  exports. 

Were  I  ever  condemned  to  live  in  the  far  East 
(which  Heaven  forbid),  I  should  certainly  choose 
Shanghai  for  a  residence,  for  besides  its  other 
advantages,  there  is  a  marked  absence  among  its 
European  inhabitants  of  the  ill-nature  and  scandal 
that  makes  anything  but  a  very  short  stay  in  other 
colonial  settlements   almost    intolerable    to    those 


14  FROM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

whose  occupation  does  not  compel  them  to  reside 
there.  Whether  it  is  the  effect  of  the  climate  on 
the  liver,  I  know  not,  but  for  envy,  hatred,  and 
malice  commend  me  to  the  European  communities 
of  China  and  the  Straits  Settlements. 

There  is  a  capital  club  (one  of  the  best  if  not  the 
very  best  in  the  East)  at  Shanghai,  of  which  (thanks 

to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  0 ,  to  whom  we  had  an 

introduction)  we  were  made  honorary  members,  no 
mean  advantage,  for  the  Shanghai  hotels  are  by  no 
means  models  of  comfort  or  cleanliness.  We  in- 
tended making  a  stay  of  at  least  ten  days  before 
going  on  to  Tientsin,  the  port  of  Pekin,  for  many 
things  had  to  be  thought  of  and  procured  for  the 
long  journey  across  the  Desert  of  Gobi,  which  we 
now  ascertained,  for  the  first  time,  is  nearly  a 
thousand  miles  across. 

There  seems  to  be  no  lack  of  amusement  at 
Shanghai,  and  the  merchants  and  other  Europeans 
located  there  appear  to  have  what  Americans 
would  call  a  "  real  good  time  of  it "  all  the  year 
round — so  far  as  regards  gaiety  and  sport.  For 
those  who  care  for  it  there  is  any  amount  of 
shooting.  In  winter  there  is  no  lack  of  duck, 
teal,    snipe,    and    other    wild    fowl.     Indeed   from 


GEAVESEND   TO    PBKTN.  15 

here  all  the  way  up  to  Pekin  the  country  teems 
with  game,  big  and  small,  the  former  including  wild 
boar  and  deer,  while  further  north  in  Manchuria  are 
found  lion,  tiger,  and  bear,  Nor  is  shooting  the 
only  sport,  for  there  is  a  capital  race-course,  polo 
and  cricket  ground.  I  attended  a  match  on  the 
latter,  in  which  was  playing,  in  Chinese  dress  and 
a  pigtail  (!)  a  lately  celebrated  English  cricketer,  well 
known  at  Lord's  and  the  Oval,  who  had  adopted  the 
native  costume  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the 
Mission  of  which  he  is  now  a  member.  The  loose 
clumsy  dress  did  not  seem  to  interfere  with  his  play 
much,  for  he  was  quite  in  his  old  form,  and  made 
over  a  hundred  runs  first  innings. 

But  the  Race  week  is  the  real  Shanghai  carnival. 
At  this  festive  season  offices  and  warehouses  are 
closed,  and  everyt.hing  given  up  for  the  business 
of  the  meeting.  Nearly  all  the  horses  engaged 
are  Mongolian  ponies,  and  half  the  fun  of  the 
thing  is  getting  a  "  hot  one "  down  from  its 
native  plains  and  keeping  it  dark  till  the  day 
of  its  engagement.  The  figures  paid  for  these 
little  animals  are  something  fabulous.  People 
at  home  have  no  idea  of  how  our  countrymen 
live    in  China.     "  Light    come,  light   go,"    seems 


16        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

to  be  the  motto  of  the  cheery,  hospitable  Shanghai 
merchants,  who,  although  they  make  such  enor- 
mous fortunes,  never  seem,  to  the  casual  visitor,  to 
have  anything  to  do  but  entertain  the  stranger  who 
has  the  good  luck  to  find  himself  within  their  gates. 
It  will  be  long  before  I  forget  the  kindness  they 
showed  us,  although  (before  we  met  Mr.  0.)  we  did 
not  know  a  soul  in  the  place. 

It  was  curious  sometimes  to  cross  the  iron  bridge 
separating  them  and  take  a  ramble  from  the  English 
into  the  French  town.  It  was  like  crossing  the 
English  Channel — indeed,  I  doubt  if  Dover  and 
Calais  present  a  more  striking  contrast  than  do  the 
settlements  of  their  respective  nations  at  Shanghai. 
One  left  the  broad  regular  roads,  asphalte  pave- 
ments and  severe,  business-like  architecture  that  the 
mercantile  Briton  takes  with  him  wherever  he  goes, 
to  emerge  the  other  side  of  the  narrow  stream  on  a 
boulevard,  that  first  thought  of  every  colonizing 
Frenchman — lined  with  cafes,  gaily  striped  awnings, 
and  little  zinc  tables,  at  which  Auguste  and  Alphonse 
sat  sipping  their  absinthe  or  "Mazagran,"  waited 
upon  by  bustling,  white-aproned  gargons.  The  sleepy 
looking  Douanier,  with  baggy  trousers  and  kepi,  the 
grass-grown  cobbled  streets,  the  dark  blue  enamelled 


GRAYESEND    TO    PEKIN.  17 

plates  at  the  street-corners,  with  Rue  de  la  Repub- 
lique,  Rue  de  Paris,  &c.,  thereon  in  large  white 
letters,  the  general  air  of  stagnation  and  idleness 
among  the  population,  seemed  to  carry  one  in  a 
moment  over  leagues  and  leagues  of  land  and  sea  to 
some  quiet  provincial  town  in  far-away  France.  It 
needed  not  the  tricolor  floating  from  the  mainmast 
of  the  ironclad  anchored  midstream,  off  the  Consulate, 
to  tell  us  that  we  were  no  longer  on  English  ground. 
The  Shanghai  bund  and  esplanade  on  a  fine  after- 
noon was  amusing  enough,  and  we  wbiled  away 
many  a  pleasant  half-hour  watching  the  motley 
crowd  that  assemble  there  for  a  ride  or  drive 
in  the  cool  of  the  evening.  Here  might  be  seen 
every  grade  of  colonial  society,  from  the  solemn  and 
portly  merchant  and  his  family  rolling  solemnly 
along  in  an  English-built  landau,  to  the  San 
Francisco  demi-mondatne,  all  powder  and  patches, 
dasliing  about  in  a  Victoria  drawn  by  a  pair  of 
pulling,  tearing  Mongolian  ponies.  Europeans  in 
buggies  and  on  horseback,  Japanese  in  rikshaws, 
Chinese  in  wheelbarrows  (the  reader  may  smile, 
but  this  is  a  public  conveyance  in  Shanghai),  crowds 
of  every  conceivable  nation  and  colour  strolling  under 
the  trees  by    the    water's   edge,   the  esplanade  at 

VOL.    I.  0 


18  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Shanghai  on  a  fine  evening  is  a  sight  to   see  and 
remember. 

At  night  electric  lights  every  twenty  yards  or  so 
convert  tlie  bund  into  a  perfect  fairyland.  The 
inauguration  of  the  Jablokoff  system,  however, 
was  attended  with  a  slight  contretemps.  Crowds 
of  natives  and  Europeans  turned  out  the  first  night 
to  see  the  effect,  but  for  a  good  hour  none  was 
apparent.  The  place  was  wrapped  in  total  darkness, 
and  the  expectant  crowd  beginning  to  show  signs  of 
impatience,  it  was  found  that  the  engineer  had  fixed 
the  lights  above  the  trees,  whence  the  dense  foliage 
very  naturally  obscured  it,  instead  of  under.  This 
trifling  mistake  was,  however,  soon  rectified,  and 
the  brilliant  illumination  so  took  the  fancy  of  the 
natives  that  all  the  principal  Chinese  thoroughfares 
are  now  lit  by  it. 

The  native  city  of  Shanghai,  is  walled  and 
separated  from  the  French  and  English  settle- 
ments by  a  deep,  muddy  moat.  Some  clumsy 
iron  cannon,  said  to  be  the  oldest  in  existence, 
are  mounted  upon  its  dilapidated  grass-grown 
battlements.  This  was  our  first  experience  of  a 
celestial  city,  and  we  did  not,  after  visiting  it, 
look  forward  with  unalloyed   pleasure  to   the  two 


GRAVESEND   TO    TRKIN.  19 

hundred  odd  miles  of  country  we  were  about  to  tra- 
verse between  Pekin  and  the  Great  Wall  of  China. 
But  I  did  not  then  know  that  Shanghai  is  renowned 
as  being  the  dirtiest  city  in  the  Chinese  Empire,  and 
certainly  w^e  never  afterwards  came  across  one  to 
equal  it  in  this  respect.  Pekin  itself  was  a  paradise 
in  comparison. 

The  streets  of  Shanghai  proper  are  none 
of  them  more  than  ten  feet  in  breadth.  Some 
are  even  considerably  narrower,  and  the  totter- 
ing, tumble-down  dwellings,  the  majority  built 
of  wood,  bend  forward  on  either  side  until  they 
nearly  touch  overhead.  The  thoroughfares  are 
thus  always,  even  on  the  brightest  day,  in  a  state  of 
semi-darkness.  The  pavements,  rough  and  uneven, 
are  formed  of  huge  stone  slabs,  some  of  them, 
judging  by  the  characters  inscribed  thereon,  many 
hundreds  of  years  old.  Worn  away  by  time  and 
use,  many  are  broken  away  in  parts,  revealing 
underneath  the  sewage  and  filth  of  years,  which, 
slowly  rotting  away,  infects  the  whole  city  with 
a  hot,  sickly  odour  of  putrefaction.  It  was 
a  hot,  muggy  day  when  we  visited  it,  and 
the  stench  from  these  places  was  something 
beyond   description.     I  was  not  surprised  to  hear 

c  2 


20  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    P.Y    LAND. 

that  cholera  and  typhus  number  their  victims  by 
thousands  at  times,  and  that  an  epidemic  (of  some 
sort  or  another)  always  exists. 

Yet  it  seemed  a  busy,  bustling  place,  and  we 
could  scarcely  make  our  way  along  the  sloppy 
streets  for  the  continuous  stream  of  traffic.  It 
was  exactly  like  a  human  bee-hive,  and  we  should 
very  soon  have  lost  ourselves  without  a  guide  in 
the  crooked,  tortuous  streets  that  ran  in  all 
directions  like  a  maze,  without  any  regard  to 
regularity  or  order.  We  came  suddenly  in  .the 
very  heart  of  the  city,  upon  an  oasis  in  this  desert 
of  filth  and  squalor,  a  space  about  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  square.  A  large  circular  lake  overhung 
with  weeping  willows  occupied  the  centre.  Great 
white  and  yellow  lilies  lay  here  and  there  on  the 
surface  of  the  smooth  clear  water,  in  which 
one  could  see  the  gold  fish  swimming  lazily  to 
and  fro  about  the  thick  green  weeds  and  stems, 
ten  or  fifteen  feet  deep.  About  fifty  yards  from 
the  shore,  and  connected  with  it  by  a  light 
bamboo  bridge,  stood  a  large  pagoda  gorgeous 
in  vermilion  and  gold,  with  countless  little  gilt 
bells  hung  around  the  roof,  which,  with  every 
breath   of  air   gave    out   a   sweet,    musical   jangle. 


GRAVE  SEND    TO    PEKIX.  21 

Seated  in  this  were  a  crowd  of  men  and  women, 
talking,  laughing,  and  drinking  tea.  All  were 
dressed  in  the  richest  silks,  the  men  in  dark 
blue  or  plum  colour,  the  women  in  lighter  shades 
of  green,  heliotrope,  or  orange,  their  necks  and 
arms  loaded  with  heavy  gold  ornaments,  their 
quaint,  impassive,  doll-like  faces  thickly  smeared 
with  paint.  On  the  banks  around  the  lake 
were  booths  for  the  sale  of  sweetmeats,  fans, 
silks,  cigarettes,  and  jewellery,  while  jugglers 
and  acrobats  plied  their  trade  among  the  busy 
crowd,  or  at  the  little  tables  set  out  by  the 
waterside  and  occupied  by  noisy  chattering 
tea-drinkers.  I  stood  for  some  time  watching 
the  curious  scene,  which  was  for  all  the  world 
like  a  bit  broken  out  of  a  willow-pattern  plate. 
It  seemed  so  odd  to  walk  suddenly  out  of  the  filthy, 
sewage-laden  streets  into  this  hidden  corner  of 
cleanliness  and  picturesque  revelry.  But  China  is 
full  of  such  contradictions.  I  afterwards  discovered 
that  we  had  strayed  into  a  tea-garden  (there  are 
a  dozen  such  in  the  city)  and  that  the  pretty 
pagoda  was  used  as  a  kind  of  private  box  for  the 
better  classes,  just  as  our  own  smart  people 
at    home     occasionally     patronize    the    Alhambra 


22  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  other  music-halls  to  gaze  at  a  respectful 
distance  on  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  "  Oi 
Polloi." 

The  Chinese,  I  found,  are  great  believers  in  the 
art  of  fortune-telling.  We  passed  on  our  way 
homewards  many  of  the  shops,  or  rather  boxes, 
in  which  the  professors  of  the  art  received  their 
subjects.  They  seemed  to  have  many  methods, 
but  the  favourite  one  consists  in  dipping  the  thumb 
into  a  piece  of  hot,  soft,  black  wax,  and  then  im- 
pressing it  firmly  upon  a  piece  of  parchment  or 
white  woodo  The  lines  thus  obtained  are  supposed 
to  predict  the  future.  The  professors  seemed 
to  be  doing  a  roaring  trade.  Their  fees  were 
not  extortionate ;  a  couple  of  cash  (about  ^d.)  each 
consultation. 

The  most  important  thing  we  now  had  to 
consider  was  the  purchase  of  stores  for  our  journey 
over  the  "  Great  Hungry  Desert,"  as  Gobi  is  called 
by  the  Chinese.  It  was  by  no  means  easy  to  decide 
how  much  or  how  little  to  take,  for  no  one  in 
Shanghai  seemed  to  know  whether  in  the  eight  hun- 
dred odd  miles  lying  between  the  Great  Wall  of 
China  and  Ourga  food  of  any  sort  or  kind  was  pro- 
curable.    However,  hearing  that  everything  in  the 


GEAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  23 

way  of  provisions  was  outrageously  dear  at  Tientsin, 
and  unprocurable  at  Pekin,  we  decided  to  lay  in  our 
stock  at  Shanghai,  and  curiously  enough  furnished 
ourselves  with  exactly  the  right  amount,  for  our 
stores  failed  the  very  day  before  we  reached  Kiakhta. 
The  claret,  whisky,  and  soda-water  gave  out  some 
time  before,  but  we  had  plenty  of  lime-juice,  which 
made  the  brackish  desert  water  drinkable. 

Were  I  to  do  this  journey  again,  I  should  certainly 
send  everything  of  this  kind  straight  out  from 
England,  for  the  camp  furniture,  saddlery,  and  stores 
we  bought  at  Shanghai  were,  besides  being  out- 
rageously dear,  of  very  inferior  quality.  On  opening 
the  cases  in  the  desert,  we  found  at  least  a  quarter  of 
the  provisions  uneatable.  The  American  firm  who 
furnished  us  must  make  a  good  thing  of  it  if  they 
do  business  with  all  their  customers  on  the  same 
terms. 

The  operation  of  packing  was  by  no  means  easy. 
As  the  reader  is  perhaps  aware,  the  weight  on  a 
camel's  back  must  be  quite  equally  distributed  on 
either  side,  otherwise  (in  Mongolia  at  least)  the 
animal  lies  down  and  utterly  declines  to  move  a 
step.  Eight  strong  wooden  chests,  with  padlocks, 
met  all  our  requirements,  and   having  made    our 


24  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

adieus  to  our  hospitable  friends,  we  embarked,  the 
31st  of  May,  on  the  coasting-steamer  Tungcliow  for 
the  port  of  Pekin,  Tientsin. 

^Ye  were  presented  before  leaving  Shanghai  with  a 
so-called  itinerary  on  the  journey  we  were  taking, 
written  by  an  Englishman  resident  in  China,  who  had 
travelled  the  caravan  route  from  Pekin  to  Europe 
in  1872.  Things  must  have  changed  considerably, 
both  in  Mongolia  and  Siberia,  since  those  days,  for 
almost  all  the  book  contained,  including  distances, 
was  so  inaccurate  and  misleading  that  we  discarded 
its  use  long  before  we  reached  Kiakhta. 

The  '*  Tungcliow  "  was  more  like  a  yacht  than  a 
cargo  boat,  and  the  run  up  coast  was  delightful; 
with  bright  sunshine  and  light  cool  breezes,  exactly 
like  Mediterranean  weather  in  early  spring,  though 
the  nights  were  very  cold,  and  one  was  glad  of  an 
overcoat.  We  passed  daily  numbers  of  fishing 
janks,  their  dark  brown  mat-sails  and  bright  red 
and  yellow  banners  standing  out  in  picturesque 
contrast  to  the  clear  blue  sea,  which  often  for  miles 
round  us  was  dotted  with  net  corks  and  men  in 
small  canoes.  A  gale  springs  up  in  a  few  minutes 
in  these  latitudes,  and  during  the  typhoon 
season  many  of   these  poor  fishermen,   unable  to 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  ZO 

get  back  to  the  junks,  are  blown  out  to  sea  and 
drowned,  their  companions  on  the  huge,  swirling 
craft,  being,  of  course,  unable  to  render  them 
any  assistance.  The  captain  of  the  Tiingchoiv  told 
us  that  many  lives  are  lost  annually  in  this 
manner. 

We  reached  Chefoo  late  at  night,  and  were 
therefore  unable  to  land,  as  we  were  off  again  at 
daybreak.  This  is  the  Brighton  of  Shanghai  and 
Pekin.  There  is  capital  bathing  here,  and  many 
good  hotels,  which  are  crowded  to  overflowing  in 
the  summer  months  by  Europeans  escaping  from 
the  damp,  steamy  heat  of  Shanghai,  and  the  no  less 
disagreeable  odours,  and  "  dust  fogs  "  (I  can  call 
them  nothing  else)  of  the  capital. 

The  coast  lying  between  Chefoo  and  the  mouth 
of  the  Peiho  river  is  strikingly  like  parts  of  Devon- 
shire. But  for  the  absence  of  houses  and  bathing 
machines,  one  .might  have  been  off  Torquay  or 
Dawlish.  Precipitous  red  cliffs,  with  smooth  green 
sward  growing  to  their  very  edges,  met  by  broad 
smooth  yellow  sands,  while  here  and  there  great 
masses  of  rock  run  out  for  a  considerable  distance  into 
the  clear  blue  water.  Further  inland  neatly  trimmed 
hedges,  clumps  of  fir-trees,  and  snug-looking  farm- 


26  f:?om  pekin  to  Calais  j)y  land. 

houses  surrounded  with  orchards  and  gardens, 
recalled  visions  of  clotted  cream,  and  pretty 
peasant  girls  in  that  loveliest  of  all  English 
counties,  the  true  garden  of  England :  Devon- 
shire. 

At  daybreak  on  the  3rd  of  June  we  passed  the 
celebrated  Taku  forts  and  entered  the  Peiho  river. 
It  was  a  bright  lovely  morning,  and  as  a  bend  of  the 
river  hid  it  from  our  sight,  and  we  looked  at  the 
blue  sunlit  ocean  for  the  last  time,  it  was  not  with- 
out some  misgivings  at  the  long  land  journey  before 
us.  The  thought  that  when  next  w^e  saw  the  sea, 
it  would  be  at  Calais,  made  us  realize,  perhaps 
more  than  we  had  as  yet  done,  the  difficulty  and 
length  of  the  voyage  we  had  undertaken  across  the 
breadth  of  Euroj^e  and  Asia. 

Unlike  most  rivers,  the  Peiho  seems  to  widen  as 
you  ascend  it,  being  considerably  narrower  at  the 
mouth  than  at  Tientsin,  thirty  miles  inland.  The 
town  of  Taku,  a  wretched-looking  place,  built  for  the 
most  part  of  mud  houses,  is  by  water  inaccessible  for 
five  months  of  the  year,  on  account  of  the  ice  in  the 
Peiho  and  Gulf  of  Pechili.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that 
although  Taku  is  so  cold  in  winter,  it  never  snows, 
and  there  is  usually  a  bright,  cloudless  sky  and  cutting 


GRAVE  SEND   TO    PEKIN.  27 

north-easter  blowing.  AYretclied  as  is  its  appearance, 
Taku  looks  a  busy  place,  and  contains  a  Chinese  naval 
dockyard.  The  Taku  forts  commanding  the  entrance 
to  the  river  have  been  greatly  strengthened  during 
the  last  ten  years,  the  work  being  carried  on  under 
the  personal  supervision  of  German  officers. 

We  were  rather  puzzled,  on  first  entering  the 
Peiho,  at  what  appeared  in  the  distance  like  a 
number  of  large  merry-go-rounds  scattered  over  the 
flat  swampy  plain  surrounding  the  towc,  and 
revolving  without  cessation.  It  was  only  by  the  aid 
of  glasses  that  we  made  them  out  to  be  salt-mills 
"worked  by  huge  mat  sails.  The  sea- water  is  pumped 
into  the  vats  by  the  aid  of  this  irrigation  and  allowed 
to  evaporate  in  the  sun.  The  salt  which  remains  is 
then  piled  into  large  stacks  and  covered  with  thick 
matting.  The  effect  at  a  distance  of  these  dozens  of 
huge  mills  revoMng  on  the  bare  desolate  plain  with 
not  a  living  object  near  them,  was  curious  in  the 
extreme.  The  river  scenery  from  Taku  to  Tangchow 
very  much  resembles  that  of  the  Nile,  the  houses  of 
dried  mud,  with  their  flat  roofs  and  terraces,  the 
absence  of  trees  except  occasional  palms,  remind 
one  not  a  little  of  an  Egyptian  landscape,  while  the 
uniform  dark  blue  garb  of  the  peasantry,  of  exactly 


28         FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

the    same  sliatle  as  that  worn  by    the    Fellaheen, 
lieightens,  at  a  distance,  the  illusion. 

Although  only  thirty  miles  distant  as  the  crow 
flies,  Tientsin  is  quite  eighty  by  river  from  Taku, 
for  the  Peiho  is,  towards  the  mouth,  the  most 
tortuous  river  in  the  world.  It  is  not  unusual  to 
steam  steadily  on  for  an  hour,  and  find  yourself,  at 
the  expiration  of  that  time  only  a  few  hundred  yards 
from  where  you  started.  The  effect  produced  by 
the  shipping  ascending  and  descending  the  river  is 
very  odd,  the  intricate  bends  of  the  river  giving 
the  steamers  the  appearance  of  moving  about  on 
dry  land.  The  marshes  I  have  mentioned  do 
not  extend  for  more  than  about  ten  miles  inland. 
They  are  then  succeeded  by  rich  fertile  plains  of 
rice  and  cotton  irrigated  in  the  Egyptian  manner  by 
means  of  "  shadoofs  "  from  the  waters  of  the  Peiho. 
The  country  seemed  pretty  thickly  populated. 
Some  of  the  mud  villages  by  the  water  side  must 
have  contained  quite  a  thousand  inhabitants,  but  in 
China,  where  the  population  is  so  enormous,  this  is 
looked  upon  as  a  small  hamlet ! 

There  is  a  laro;e  coal- wharf  a  short  distance 
from  Taku,  where  the  coal  from  the  Kai  Ping 
mine,    fifty   miles    distant,    is    brought   by   means 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  29 

of  a  small  railway  and  barges.  The  coal,  though 
rather  dustj,  is  excellent  for  steamer  purposes, 
and  the  private  company  working  it  make  a 
very  f\iir  percentage.  It  has  always  seemed 
curious  to  me  that  coal  is  not  more  extensively 
worked  in  the  Chinese  Empire,  when  there  are  more 
than  four  hundred  thousand  square  miles  of  it !  There 
are,  however,  but  very  few  mines  in  existence. 

Tientsin,  which  has  a  population  of  about  nine  hun- 
dred and  fifty  thousand  stands  at  the  junction  of  the 
Grand  Canal  with  the  Peiho  river.  It  is  not  a  pre- 
possessing place  at  first  sight,  nor  did  its  dusty, 
bustling  quays,  warehouses,  and  noisy,  perspiring 
coolies,  make  us  at  all  anxious  to  prolong  our  stay 
longer  than  was  absolutely  necessary.  The  trade  of 
Tientsin  is  not  great  when  compared  with  the  other 
treaty  ports.  Nearly  all  the  tea  exported  thence  goes 
to  Eussia  and  Siberia — occasionally  by  way  of  Pekin 
— but  in  most  cases  via  Kalgan  and  district  across 
the  Gobi  Desert  to  Kiakhta,  without  touchiug  at 
the  capital.  The  Russian  merchants  are  therefore 
nearly  as  numerous  as  the  English  at  Tientsin. 

The  settlement  boasted  of  but  two  hotels,  and  these 
of  a  very  fifth-rate  description.  Small-pox  having 
broken  out  in  one,  our  choice  was  limited,  for  we  did 


30  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

not  care  to  run  the  risk  of  being  laid  up  for  three  or 
four  weeks  in  the  native  hospital  at  Pekin.  Bidding 
adieu  to  our  genial  skipper,  who  cheerfully  expressed 
a  hope  that  he  might  see  us  again  one  day,  though 
he  very  much  doubted  our  ever  leaving  Siberia, 
we  made  our  way,  accompanied  by  a  yelling  crowd 
of  half-naked  coolies  bearing  our  luggage,  to  the 
American  Hotel,  an  uninviting,  dilapidated-looking 
hostelry  enough.  In  the  verandah,  reclining  on 
many  chairs,  and  at  intervals  refreshing  himself 
from  a  huge  beaker  of  brandy  and  soda,  was  an 
individual  pointed  out  to  us  as  the  proprietor  (a  fat, 
sleepy-looking  Yankee),  whose  welcome  was  hardly 
encouraging. 

"  Can  we  have  rooms  here  ?  " 

"  Sure  I  don't  know,  you'd  better  ask," 

"  But  you're  the  manager,  aren't  you  ?  " 

*•  Oh,  yes,  I'm  the  manager." 

A  pause,  during  which  our  friend  takes  a  long 
pull  at  the  brandy,  and,  emerging  considerably 
refreshed,  composes  himself  calmly  to  slumber. 

"  Who  are  we  to  ask  ?  " 

"  Who  are  you  to  ask  ?  "  half  opening  his  eyes  ; 
"  Oh  !  I  don't  know,  you  will  see  some  of  the  China 
boys    about.     How  should  I  know  who   you're  to 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  31 

ask?"  is  his  parting  shot  as  we  leave  him  and  cross 
tlie  dirty  sanded  billiard-room,  hung  with  tawdry 
prints,  and  redolent  of  stale  tobacco  and  spirits,  that 
precedes  the  entrance  to  the  "  bar." 

Here  we  glean  from  a  dishevelled,  greasy  German 
in  shirt-sleeves,  who  looks  as  if  he  slept  among  the 
sawdust  and  empty  whisky  bottles  that  litter  the 
floor,  that  no  rooms  are  to  be  had  that  night, 
or  for  the  next  week  to  come,  for  love  or  money. 
A  huge  travelling  circus  belonging  to  an  Italian, 
one  CLiarini,  has  taken  every  available  room  in 
the  place.  "  Then  could  we  have  the  billiard- 
table  ? "  "  No,  we  could  not  possibly  have  the 
billiard- table,  for  the  '  gentlemen '  connected  with  the 
circus  always  played  till  three  or  four  in  the  morning. 
Still,  we  could  have  it  then,  if  we  liked,  on  payment 
of  a  small  remuneration  to  him  (the  occupant  of  the 
bar),  but  we  must  keep  it  dark  from  the  boss." 

Our  experience  of  the  "  boss  "  did  not  quite  justify 
our  taking  this  course,  and  we  left  the  hotel,  sadly 
and  slowly  followed  by  our  string  of  sympathizing 
cooHes,  utterly  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  do  till 
the  bright  thought  struck  Lancaster  of  at  once 
hiring  the  house-boat  which  was  to  take  us  to 
Tungchow  (the  landing-place  for  Pekin),  and  living 


32  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

on  board  her  till  we  left  for  the  capital.  We  managed 
this,  not  without  some  difficulty,  for  we  had  to  get 
the  boat  through  our  friend  the  sleepy  Yankee.  He 
woke  up  a  little,  however,  at  the  prospect  of  swindling 
two  helpless  and  friendless  fellow-creatures,  and  by 
sun-down  we  had  everything  on  board,  and  the  boat 
snugly  moored  off  the  hotel  wharf.  AYe  were  along- 
side a  large  open  drain,  with  a  most  abominable 
stench,  and  there  was  always  the  possibility  of  being 
run  down  in  the  night  by  a  passing  ship,  but  one  could 
not  afford  to  be  particular.  The  sight,  however,  of  a 
large  passenger  steamer  bound  for  Japan  which 
passed  close  to  us  towards  sundown  was  depressing  in 
the  extreme,  the  cleanliness  and  luxury  on  board 
contrasting  so  painfully  with  our  own  surroundings. 
For  a  few  moments  we  almost  regretted  (by  no  means 
for  the  last  time)  that  we  had  ever  undertaken  this 
voyage,  the  discomforts  and  difficulties  of  which  now 
seemed  to  increase  with  every  day. 

Early  next  day  we  presented  our  letters  to  Mr.  S., 
the  Russian  tea  merchant,  who  was  to  provide  us 
with  letters  of  credit  for  his  agents  at  Irkoutsk  and 
Tomsk  in  Eastern  and  Western  Siberia.  Mr.  S.  did 
not  give  us  a  very  favourable  account  of  the  journey 
before  us.     Like  almost  every  other  Russian  we  met, 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  33 

first  question  was  "  Mais  que  Diable  allez-vous  faire 
en  Siberie  ?  "  We  got  into  the  way  at  last  of  never 
arguing  tliis  question.  In  the  first  place  it  was 
useless,  and  only  caused  waste  of  time ;  in  the 
second  we  had  literally  no  reason  to  give,  except 
perhaps  the  one  so  dear  to  most  Englishmen : 
"  The  country  had  been  crossed  by  so  few  travellers 
before !  " 

Among  other  pleasant  and  encouraging  items  of 
news,  we  now  heard  that  we  should  probably  meet 
with  serious  delay,  not  only  at  Kalgan,  the  Mon- 
golian frontier,  but  also  at  Pekin.  '*You  had 
better  not  think,"  said  Mr.  S.,  "  of  making  any  defi- 
nite plans  till  you  arrive  at  Kalgan.  This  is  the  worst 
time  of  year  you  could  have  chosen.  It  is  not  the 
caravan  season ;  the  camels  are  all  out  on  the  plains. 
It  may  be  two  or  three  months  before  you  are  able 
to  cross  the  Gobi,  and  then  you  will  get  into  Siberia 
at  the  very  worst  time  of  year,  when  the  roads  are 
next  to  impassable  from  rains  and  floods.  Any 
day  you  may  be  detained  by  a  broken  bridge  or  a 
landslip,  and  have  to  wait  in  some  dreary,  wretched 
village  in  the  wilds  of  Siberia,  till  the  snow  sets,  and 
enables  you  to  finish  your  journey  in  sleighs.  You 
cannot,  I  feel  sure,  have  rightly  estimated  the  diffi- 

VOL.    I.  D 


34  FliOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

culties  before  you.  "Why  go  to  Siberia  at  all, 
when  that  earthly  paradise  Japan  is  so  near  ?  "  &c., 
&c. 

We  at  last  succeeded  in  making  Mr.  S.  under- 
stand that  we  were  determined  to  get  as  far  as 
Pekin  at  any  rate ;  and,  our  interview  over,  had 
nothing  but  the  purchase  of  some  provisions  for 
our  river  journey  (our  Shanghai  store  was  not 
opened  till  we  reached  the  desert)  to  detain  us  in 
Tientsin.  Nor  were  we  sorry  to  get  away,  for  the 
dust  and  filth  of  this  city  were  almost  unbearable. 
We  had  not  then  experienced  the  odours  of  Pekin, 
which  would  accustom  one  to  cheerfully  live  in  a 
main  drain. 

Our  second  night  here  was  not  so  pleasantly 
passed  as  the  first.  A  shower  of  rain  at  sunset 
brought  out  legions  of  mosquitoes,  from  which,  not 
having  brought  curtains,  we  suffered  a  good  deal  of 
annoyance,  and  the  intolerable  stench  of  the  drain 
near  which  we  lay  was  so  increased  by  the  rain  that 
we  had  to  smoke  incessantly  till  past  3  a.m., 
almost  regretting  we  had  not  accepted  the  bar- 
keeper's offer  of  the  billiard-table  for  a  bed.  Even 
the  "  circus  gentlemen  "  would  have  been  preferable 
to    the    sewer.       We   got   to    sleep  about  4  a.m., 


GRAVESEND   TO    PEKIN.  35 

only  to  be  awoke  at  daybreak  by  a  crashing  sound 
and  to  find  the  water  rusliing  into  tlie  boat,  with 
an  unpleasant  conviction  that  our  craft  was  heel- 
ing over  at  a  very  uncomfortable  angle.  We 
had  become  entangled  in  the  hawser  of  a  large 
ocean-steamer,  which,  had  it  not  been  let  go  in  the 
nick  of  time,  would  have  upset  us  altogether.  We 
escaped  with  a  ducking,  however,  and  soon  got  the 
boat  righted  and  baled  out  again. 

The  distance  from  Tientsin  to  Pekin  is  rather 
under  eighty  miles  overland,  that  by  river  one 
hundred  and  forty,  viz.  one  hundred  and  twenty 
miles  to  Tungchow,  and  twenty  miles  thence 
by  road  to  the  capital.  Although  it  takes  two 
days  longer  (sometimes  three),  we  chose  the  water 
route  in  preference  to  the  other.  We  should,  we 
thought,  have  quite  enough  land- travelling  during 
the  next  five  months ;  besides  which,  the  Chinese 
inns  between  Tientsin  and  the  capital  are  even 
filthier  than  those  between  Pekin  and  the  Great 
Wall — which  is  saying  a  good  deal. 

It  was  about  ten  o'clock,  on  a  bright,  clear 
morning,  that  we  hoisted  the  huge  mat-sail,  and, 
with  a  favourable  breeze,  soon  left  the  bustling  city 
and  its  high  cathedral  towers  (where  the  Catholic 

D  2 


36  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

nuns  were  so  brutally  murdered  in  1870)  low  on 
the  horizon. 

The  traffic  on  the  Peiho  river  for  some  miles  above 
Tientsin  is  enormous.  We  must  have  counted  at 
least  four  hundred  boats  and  barges  in  the  space  of  an 
hour  the  afternoon  of  the  day  we  left,  while  the  whole 
way  to  Tungchow  the  river  was  alive  with  boats  of 
every  description  whenever  we  passed  a  village,  from 
huge  junks  to  tiny  sampans.  At  times,  near  Tientsin, 
one  could  have  crossed  the  river,  or  walked  three 
hundred  or  four  hundred  yards  up  it,  dry  shod  on 
the  boats. 

A  Chinese  house-boat,  though  comfortable  enough 
for  all  practical  purposes,  must  not  be  confounded 
with  the  luxurious,  flower-bedecked  craft  that  line 
the  banks  of  the  Thames  in  summer  time.  The 
Chinese  house-boat  resembles  the  English  only  in 
name,  for  there  was  no  attempt  at  decoration,  and 
very  little  at  cleanliness.  About  forty-five  feet  long, 
it  was  decked  completely  over,  except  in  the  centre, 
where  a  sort  of  well  covered  with  planks,  with  space 
enough  for  two  to  lie  or  sit  in,  formed  the  cabin. 

Our  crew,  five  in  number,  slept  in  a  kind  of 
nutch  under  the  deck  forward.  How  they  all 
managed  to  stow  themselves  there  at  once  was  a 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  37 

mystery  to  me,  for  tliey  were  great,  tall,  liiilking 
fellows.  We  sailed,  as  a  rule,  our  broad  mat-sail 
sending  the  old  tub  along  at  an  incredible  speed 
with  the  lightest  breeze.  AVhen  the  wind  dropped, 
the  men  rowed  incessantly,  day  and  night,  till  it  rose 
again.  The  amount  of  work  they  got  through  was 
simply  marvellous.  Nothing  seemed  to  tire  them  ; 
morning,  noon,  and  night  they  plied  the  heavy, 
awkward  sweeps  without  cessation,  except  to  eat  a 
dish  of  rice  and  fish  and  take  a  drink  of  cold  tea 
once  every  twelve  hours.  Cheery,  good-tempered 
fellows  they  were  too,  considering  the  small  wages 
they  got.  The  fare,  including  everything,  was  only 
$13,  and  our  Yankee  friend  must  have  got  at  least 
two-thirds  of  this  sum  as  his  own  share  of  the 
transaction. 

The  first  two  days  of  our  river  journey  were 
enjoyable  enough,  save  for  such  small  annoy- 
ances as  rats  and  cockroaches,  which  latter  took 
forcible  possession  of  our  cabin  at  night-time. 
But  the  delightful  weather  and  novel  scenery  amply 
atoned  for  such  small  discomforts  as  these.  The 
Peiho  is  a  thick,  muddy  stream.  Its  banks  are  con- 
tinually slipping  down  and  being  dammed  up  by 
the  natives,  which  accounts  in  a  great  measure  for 


38  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  dirty  pea-soup  colour  of  the  water.  These  land- 
sUps  are  not  of  weekly  or  even  daily  occurrence. 
They  occur  incessantly,  and  it  was  curious  to 
watch,  as  we  ascended  the  river,  the  continual 
dropping  away  of  the  land  on  either  side,  while,  here 
and  there,  gangs  of  men  repaired  the  damage  by 
means  of  cemented  bamboos.  The  riverside 
villages  were  hke  human  beehives,  so  crowded  and 
dense  did  the  jDopulation  of  them  appear,  even  at 
midday,  when  so  many  of  the  inhabitants  must 
have  been  out  at  work  in  the  fields.  One  could  not 
help  wondering  how  even  such  an  enormous  country 
as  China  can  support  such  a  dense  population, 
numbering,  by  the  last  census,  some  400,000,000. 
And  yet,  from  the  time  we  left  the  coast  till  we 
reached  the  Mongolian  border,  there  was  always 
vegetation  of  some  kind  or  other  to  be  seen,  and 
vast  fertile  plains  of  corn,  barley,  and  millet 
stretched  away  on  every  side  to  the  horizon.  Every- 
thing in  I^orth  China  is  on  such  a  large  scale  that 
for  a  few  days  one  scarcely  realized  how  enormous 
the  population  and  fertilization  of  this  huge  empire 
really  are,  how  great  its  resources  and  demands. 

Our   days  on  the  Peiho  were  amusing  enough. 
There   was  always    something   to   look  at  on  the 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKTN.  39 

bank,  and  a  capital  towing-path  to  walk  on  when 
one's  legs  got  tired,  and  cramped  in  the  boat,  so  that 
we  had  nothing  to  complain  of  in  the  way  of 
variety,  and  the  first  two  days,  bright  and  sunny, 
wore  away  as  idly  and  pleasantly  as  summer  days 
up  the  Thames  or  Wye  in  England.  It  was  plea- 
sant to  sit  out  in  the  evening  in  the  cool,  clear 
moonlight,  on  the  little  deck,  the  silence  unbroken 
save  by  the  regular  plash  of  the  oars,  or  twang  of 
Chinese  fiddle  or  guitar,  as  we  passed  some  lonely, 
riverside  cottage,  the  arms  of  the  solitary,  half- 
naked  musician  gleaming  white  in  the  moonlight,  as 
he  rose  and  waved  a  good-night  to  our  crew.  When 
we  passed  a  village  after  dark  it  was  like  some  weird 
transformation  scene,  for  up  to  midnight  these  water- 
side settlements  appeared,  from  the  river  at  least,  to 
be  given  up  to  revelry.  We  never,  however,  ventured 
into  one,  preferring  to  gaze  from  a  respectful  dis- 
tance upon  the  flaring  torches  throwing  counter 
effects  of  light  and  shade  over  the  quaint,  pictu- 
resque houses  and  pagodas,  the  hurrying  crowds  on 
the  banks ;  while  the  clashing  of  gongs  and  cymbals 
from  the  joss-house  or  theatre  heightened  the  effect 
of  the  strange  scene.  Then  on  again  along 
the  silent  moonlit  stream,  with  its  low  sedgj^  banks  ; 


40  J'KOM    I'EKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

nothing  to  mar  tlie  flat,  monotonous  outline  of  the 
moonlit  landscape,  but,  here  and  there,  a  huge 
square  mound  of  earth,  the  tomb  of  some  departed 
mandarin  or  village  magnate. 

But  the  morning  of  the  third  day  looked  dull  and 
overcast,  and  by  ten  o'clock  the  rain  was  pouring 
down  in  torrents.  There  was  no  keeping  dry,  for 
the  ramshackle  roof  leaked  like  a  sieve,  and  the 
floor  of  our  cabin  was  in  a  very  few  minutes  almost 
ankle-deep  in  water.  About  midday  a  terrific 
thunderstorm  broke  over  us.  The  lightning  was  so 
vivid  that  although  every  nook  and  cranny  of  our 
dilapidated  hutch  was  tightly  closed,  and  the  place 
in  semi-darkness,  it  almost  blinded  one.  I  have 
never,  even  in  the  tropics,  heard  the  thunder  so  loud 
and  continuous.  One  peal  lasted  quite  a  minute 
without  cessation. 

I  have  seldom  passed  a  more  miserable  day 
than  that  one  moored  by  the  muddy  banks 
of  the  Peiho,  for  progress  was  impossible.  Cook- 
ing or  lighting  a  fire,  too,  was  out  of  the  ques- 
tion. Everything,  including  matches  and  fuel,  was 
sopping  through  and  through.  Looking  out  of  our 
wooden  prison,  nothing  met  the  eye  but  grey,  driving 
mist,    and   steady,   unceasing   rain,   falling  with   a 


CKAVESKND    TO    PEKIN.  41 

persistence  and  violence  that  lashed  the  brown 
muddy  waters  around  us  into  a  sheet  of  grey- 
foam.  The  men  forward  were  battened  down, 
and  seemed  unconcerned  enough,  as  snatches  of 
sono-  risino-  from  below  and  occasional  whiffs  of 
smoke  emerging  through  the  chinks  in  the  deck 
testified.  "We  almost  envied  them  their  warmth, 
shivering  as  we  were  like  half-drowned  rats.  About 
five  o'clock  a  break  in  the  grey,  misty  sky  appeared, 
and  half  an  hour  later  the  sun  was  shining  in  a 
sky  of  cloudless  blue,  while  we  rapidly  cut  our  way 
through  the  water  before  a  light  but  piercingly  cold 
breeze,  so  sudden  and  complete  are  the  changes  of 
weather  in  these  latitudes. 

Early  the  next  day  a  chain  of  precipitous  moun- 
tains broke  the  horizon.  Beyond  them  lay  our 
destination,  Pekin.  We  were,  however,  still  two 
days  off,  for  the  river  here  shallows  considerably, 
and  we  frequently  stuck  hard  and  fast  during 
the  day.  At  these  times  the  whole  crew  w^ould 
divest  themselves  of  their  clothes,  and,  fasten- 
ing a  couple  of  stout  ropes  to  the  bows  of  the 
boat,  tow  us  off  again  into  deep  water.  Land- 
ing here  was  impossible,  for  one  could  not  get 
within  ten  yards  or  so  of  the  bank.      Some  of  the 


42  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

larger  junks  were  being  towed  by  as  many  as  thirty 
or  forty  men.  On  the  deck  of  one  a  huge  deal  case 
bearing  the  name  of  Maple  and  Co.,  London,  in 
large  black  letters,  looked  strangely  out  of  keeping 
with  the  uncivilized  surroundings. 

It  was  only  the  fifth  morning  after  leaving 
Tientsin  that  we  hove  in  sight  of  Tungchow,  a 
"  village  "  of  something  over  one  hundred  thousand 
inhabitants.  This  was  our  first  experience  of  a  real 
Chinese  town,  far  from  European  influence  ;  and 
we  were  rather  agreeably  disappointed,  for  at  a 
distance,  it  looked  clean  and  inviting.  A  closer 
acquaintance,  alas  !  somewhat  modified  first  impres- 
sions. 

Moored  alongside  the  flat  muddy  banks  were  a 
perfect  colony  of  junks,  two  thousand  or  three  thou- 
sand in  number ;  an  interval  of  flat  boggy  ground  cut 
up  by  innumerable  cesspools,  open  drains  and  dust- 
heaps  divided  these  from  the  town  wall,  which, 
standing  back  about  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  from 
the  water's  edge,  hid  the  town  from  view,  except 
where,  at  intervals,  a  tower  or  pagoda  overtopped  the 
loopholed  brick  battlements.  Although  the  sun  had 
but  just  risen,  the  banks  wore  crowded  with  people, 
and  the  keepers  of  hundreds  of  stalls  and  booths 


GEAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  43 

were  already  doing  a  brisk  trade  in  the  sale  of  cloths, 
pigtails,  tea,  sweetmeats,  and  fans  to  the  junk 
population,  while  here  and  there  a  barber  plied  his 
trade,  which  in  North  China  is  anything  but  an 
appetizing  one  to  look  upon.  Dirty  as  the  place 
and  people  were,  the  bright,  cloudless  sky  and 
sunshine  lent  a  gaiety  to  the  scene,  which  for 
colour  and  animation  I  have  seldom  seen  equalled 
in  the  most  picturesque  Turkish  cities  or  bazaars  of 
the  far  East. 

"We  were  ready  to  start  at  midday,  and  had  all 
the  baggage  safely  stowed  away  in  Pekin  carts,  a 
more  dirty  or  uncomfortable  vehicle  than  which 
does  not  exist.  As  it  is  of  the  same  construc- 
tion, although  smaller  than  the  carts  in 
which  we  crossed  the  desert,  I  will  leave  the  de- 
scription of  these  "  torture-boxes "  to  a  future 
chapter.  Seeing  with  the  naked  eye  whole  regi- 
ments of  vermin  crawling  over  the  one  destined 
for  our  reception,  we  preferred  to  ride  ahead, 
on  donkeys,  under  the  guidance  of  a  small  boy, 
whose  powers  of  conversation  were  limitless,  and 
who  talked  incessantly  the  whole  way,  frequently 
interlarding  his  conversation  with  the  words  "  Yaug 
Qweitze"    (Foreign    Devil),    the    uncomplimentary 


44         FROM  PKKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

title  bestowed  on  every  European,  of  whatever 
nationality,  in  tlie  less  civilized  parts  of  Cliina. 
Nor  was  the  filthy  state  of  the  carts  our  only 
reason  for  riding.  We  had  serious  misgivings  as 
to  whether  the  clumsy,  heavily-laden  conveyances 
would  reach  Pekin  before  nightfall,  in  which  case 
we  should  have  had  to  pass  the  night  ia  the  open 
outside  the  walls.  The  gates  of  the  city  are  shut 
at  sundown,  and  no  human  power  (short  of  the 
emperor's  special  command)  will  open  them  till  sun- 
rise the  following  day. 

It  took  us  nearly  an  hour  to  get  clear  of  Tung- 
chow  and  into  the  open  country.  The  town  is  (for 
China)  fairly  clean,  though  the  streets  are  narrow, 
tortuous  and  ill  paved,  and  in  some  places  there 
were  holes  two  or  three  feet  deep  in  the  centre  of 
the  roadway. 

The  natives  in  this  part  of  China  present  a 
striking  contrast  to  their  countrymen  at  Shanghai 
and  further  south ;  whereas  the  latter  are  for  the 
most  part  puny,  pasty-faced  creatures,  these  were 
fine,  strapping,  broad-shouldered  men,  with  healthy, 
ruddy  faces.  The  women  too  were  better-looking, 
though  doll-like  and  thickly  painted,  with  the  baggy, 
shapeless  figures,  deformed  feet,  and  stoop  peculiar  to 


GEAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  45 

their  race.  Many  of  the  shops  were  devoted  to  the 
sale  of  Manchester  goods  and  cheap  cutlery,  which 
find  great  favour  among  the  people  in  this  part  of 
Cliina.  Here  and  there  a  large  tea-house,  gorgeously 
decorated,  was  filled  with  customers  taking  their 
morning  draught  of  the  cup  that  cheers.  The  tea 
drunk  by  the  Chinese  is  as  different  to  our  idea  of 
that  beverage  as  it  can  well  be,  and  is,  to  a  European 
palate,  utterly  flavourless.  *'  Chacun  a  son  gout." 
Many  Russians  say  that  real,  unadulterated  tea 
never  finds  its  way  to  England,  nor  would  the 
English  drink  it  if  it  did. 

It  took  us  quite  an  hour  to  get  clear  of  Tung- 
chow,  for  the  streets  were  crowded  to  overflowing. 
Although  so  few  Europeans  are  seen  here,  the  people 
took  very  little  notice  of  us,  excepting  the  juvenile 
population,  ragged  little  wretches,  a  crowd  of 
whom  pestered  us  for  cash,  which,  when  refused, 
drew  down  upon  us  yells  of  derision  and  curses  on 
the  "  Yang  Qweitze  "  in  general. 

The  road  from  Tungchow  to  Pekin  lies  through 
a  fertile,  well-wooded  country,  and  is  for  the  first 
three  or  four  miles  raised  some  ten  feet  from  the 
ground  on  either  side,  and  paved  with  huge  stone 
slabs,  apparently  of  great  antiquity.     Although  now 


46         FEOM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

in  a  very  dilapidated  condition,  this  must  in  former 
times  have  been  a  splendid  thoroughfare.  It  re- 
minded one  of  one  of  the  old  Roman  roads,  some  of 
the  slabs  being  quite  ten  feet  long  by  five  feet  broad 
and  two  thick.  The  going  was  very  bad  in  places 
where  these  stones  had  fallen  away.  Turning  away  to 
admire  the  scenery,  I  was  somewhat  suddenly  recalled 
to  the  situation  by  finding  that  my  donkey  had 
slipped  into  one  of  these  chasms  about  four  feet 
deep.  We  got  out,  however,  with  nothing  worse 
than  a  few  bruises.  This  road  is  said  at  one  time  to 
have  extended  as  far  as  Pekin,  but,  with  characteristic 
carelessness,  the  Chinese  have  allowed  it  to  become 
so  dilapidated,  that  after  two  miles  or  so  it  ceases 
altogether,  and  our  way  lay  along  narrow,  raised 
paths,  running  through  millet  and  barley  fields. 
Eight  li  from  Tungchow,  we  passed  the  picturesque 
bridge  of  "  Palikao,"  from  which  the  French  general 
takes  his  name.  Hard  by  a  little  tea-house  cluster- 
ing in  the  shade  of  willow-trees  afforded  us  grateful 
shelter  for  half  an  hour,  and  we  dismounted  and 
took  a  few  cups  of  the  cool  refreshing  drink, 
for  the  road  was  dusty,  and  the  sun  very  power- 
ful. 

As  we  sat  on  mats,  enjoying  the  cool  breeze  from 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  47 

the  river,  half  a  dozen  soldiers  rode  by  with  a 
prisoner,  whom  they  were  taking  to  Tungchow,  to 
undergo  sentence  of  death  by  the  "  Ling  Chi."  The 
poor  wretch  looked  ghastly  pale,  and  well  he  might, 
for  this  is  perhaps  the  most  barbarous  and  revolting 
of  all  Chinese  punishments.  The  word  "  Ling  Chi " 
means  literally  to  be  cut  in  ten  thousand  pieces. 
As  the  reader  may  care  to  know  how  the  opera- 
tion is  performed,  I  will  give  a  brief  account  of  an 
execution  of  this  kind  which  took  place  at  Canton 
only  last  year. 

*'  As  soon  as  the  signal  was  given  the  victim  was 
stripped  of  his  clothing — the  process  of  binding 
and  gagging  being  made  unnecessarily  long.  By 
the  time  it  was  over  the  poor  wretch  was  almost 
fainting  with  terror.  Previous  to  the  commence- 
ment of  the  operation  a  draught  of  arrak  was 
given  him,  and  then  commenced  the  work  of 
butchery. 

"  Two  deep  cuts  over  each  eye  commenced  the 
operation.  Gashes  which  turned  great  pieces  of 
flesh  over,  and  left  the  bone  exposed.  Then  a  cut 
down  each  cheek,  and  a  deeper  one  across  each 
shoulder,  nearly  but  not  quite  severing  the  arm 
from  its  socket.     A  circular  cut  to  the  bone  in  each 


48  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

upper  arm  and  fore-arm  followed,  and  then,  stepping 
back  to  get  more  scope,  the  executioner  hacked  off 
the  right  hand  with  one  blow.  A  large  piece  of 
flesh  was  then  cut  or  rather  dug  out  of  each  thigh, 
and  from  over  each  knee,  and  the  flesh  torn  off  both 
kneecaps.  The  calves  of  the  legs  were  then  cut 
off. 

"  Up  till  now  a  straight  heavy  sword  had  been  the 
weapon  used.  The  human  devil  who  acted  as  exe- 
cutioner wielding  it  with  as  much  ease  and  dexterity 
as  if  he  had  been  carving  a  fowl.  The  sword  was 
now  put  aside,  and  a  thin-bladed  knife,  about  a 
foot  long,  driven  in  to  the  hilt,  under  the  right 
breast-bone,  the  executioner  working  it  slowly  round 
and  round  while  his  assistant  fanned  the  victim 
with  a  large  palm-leaf  fan  for  the  double  purpose 
of  keeping  the  flies  off,  and  hiding  the  contortions 
of  the  poor  wretch's  face,  who  was  not  yet  dead, 
as  evinced  by  the  twitching  of  the  fingers  of  his 
remaining  hand.  Ten  or  twelve  seconds  more  of 
this  diabolical  torture,  and  the  victim  was  cut 
down  from  the  cross,  to  fall,  inert  and  helpless,  on 
his  knees  and  face.  He  was  then  decapitated  and 
the  sentence  completed." 

These    barbarous    and    disgusting    proceedings 


GRAVESEND   TO    PEKIN.  49 

seem  the  more  awful  wheu  we  consider  that 
the  poor  wretch  whose  execution  I  have  described 
was  not  the  actual  author  of  the  crime  for  which 
he  suffered.  He  was  what  is  known  in  China  as 
a  "substitute."  There  are  many  in  this  strange 
land,  who  for  a  small  sum  of  money  will  cheer- 
fully die  for  the  pleasure  of  two  or  three  days 
spent  in  dissipation  and  riot.  The  murderer 
himself  was  probably  looking  on  with  the  crowd, 
unmoved  at  what  should  by  rights  have  been  his 
own  execution. 

There  are  other  Cliinese  punishments  quite  as 
revolting  as  the  Ling  Chi,  which*  do  not,  however, 
necessarily  end  in  death.  A  very  common  one  (to 
be  seen  almost  daily  in  the  streets  of  Pekin)  is  the 
"  Cangue,"  two  large  pieces  of  wood,  each  with  a 
semicircular  hole  in  the  middle,  which  are  worn 
round  the  neck.  The  hands  are  placed  at  right 
angles  through  other  holes  in  the  board,  which 
weighs  from  sixty  to  two  hundred  pounds  ac- 
cording to  circumstances.  This  is  worn  from 
three  days  to  two,  or  even  three,  months  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  crime.  The  "  Cage  "  is 
another  very  common  punishment,  and  is  used  for 
minor  offences.       The    wretched  occupant    of  this 

VOL.    1.  E 


50  FEOM   PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

can  neither  sit,  stand,  nor  lie  down.  Prisoners  are 
kept  in  this  position  for  a  period  varying  from  a  week 
to  a  month.  In  the  latter  case  they  are  usually 
rendered  cripples  for  life.  Another  favourite 
punishment  (often  used  to  punish  adultery)  is  pulling 
out  the  hand  and  toe  nails,  teeth,  eye-lashes,  and 
nostrils ;  but  perhaps  the  most  painful  of  any  is 
the  "  Wire  Shirt,"  a  thin  wire  garment  made  to 
fit  the  body  so  tightly  that  small  pieces  of  skin  are 
pressed  through  every  aperture.  A  sharp  razor  is 
then  passed  over  these  outside,  so  that  when  the 
shirt  is  removed  the  victim  from  head  to  waist  is 
one  piece  of  raw  quivering  flesh. 

Many  others  could  I  cite,  but  enough  of  this 
unsavoury  subject.  China  is  full  of  contradictions, 
and  none  are  more  striking  than  the  cruelty  and 
kindness  of  its  population,  for  there  exists  no 
kinder-hearted  or  more  liberal  being  than  the  China- 
man. There  are,  of  course,  exceptions ;  the  rebel 
Yeh,  for  instance,  who  was  degraded  by  the 
Emperor  for  treachery  in  1857,  when  brought  to 
Calcutta,  where  he  died,  confessed  to  havins:  exe- 
cuted  more  than  70,000  souls  while  he  was  in 
oflBce. 

We  rode  slowly  on  the  whole   afternoon  through 


GRAVES END    TO    PEKIN.  51 

fields  of  grain,  pretty  villages  asleep  in  the  sun, 
"with  no  sign  of  life  in  them  but  beggars  and 
dogs  lying  huddled  in  the  dusty  road,  under 
the  shade  of  wall  or  shed,  sleeping  away 
the  hot,  silent  hours  in  indolent  content.  It 
seemed  at  times  as  if  we  should  never  reach 
Pekin,  though  the  mountains  beyond  it  looked 
provokingly  close  in  the  bright  clear  atmosphere. 
The  heat  was  intense,  but  a  cool  breeze  now  and 
then  sprung  up,  and  made  it  not  unpleasant  travel- 
ling as  we  rode  through  some  of  the  prettiest 
scenery  it  has  ever  been  my  lot  to  look  upon. 
The  golden  fields  of  oats  and  barley,  the  pretty 
villages  dotted  here  and  there  over  the  plain,  the 
ruddy,  healthy-looking  peasantry  at  work  gathering 
in  the  harvest,  and,  here  and  there,  the  country- 
seat  of  some  wealthy  Mandarin,  with  its  broad 
avenues,  willow-fringed  lake,  and  deer  park, 
wore  a  happy,  civilized  look  strangely  at 
variance  with  one's  preconceived  notions  of  the 
remoter  parts  of  the  Celestial  Empire.  Had  it  not 
been  for  the  quaint  pagodas  and  temples  resplendent 
in  crimson  and  gold  carvings  that  we  passed  every 
mile  or  so,  one  might  have  fancied  oneself  in  some 
picturesque  corner  of  far  away  England. 

E   2 


52  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

One  circumstance  alone  considerably  marred  onr 
enjoyment  of  the  lovely  scenery — to  wit,  tlie  streams 
of  beo-gars    who   towards    evening     came    out    by 
hundreds  from  the  holes  and  corners  in  which  they 
had  been  lying  during  the  heat  of  the  day.     A  more 
importunate  or  determined  set  of  wretches  I  never 
saw.     Ranging  from  the  ages  of  five  to  fifty,  half 
naked  and  covered  with  sores,  the  wretches  refused 
to  be  driven  off,   and  insisted  on  accompanying  us 
in  unpleasant  proximity — some   of  them  for  miles. 
Now  and  anon  one  would  run  forward,  and  kneeling, 
beat  his  head  upon  the  ground — an  operation  called 
in  China  the  "  Koo-Too."     Passing  through  one  of 
the  villages,  I  fairly  lost  my  temper,  and  turning 
round,  shook  my  stick  at  the  yelling,  dancing  ruffians, 
who,  much  to  the  amusement  of  the  villagers,  almost 
barred  our  progress.     The  efi*ect  was  magical.     In 
a  second  their  demeanour  changed,  and  what  had 
been  a  crowd    of    cringing,    supplicating  wretches 
turned   to   a   hooting,    menacing    crowd.       Things 
looked  awkward  at  first,  and  I  thought,  for  a  few 
moments,    we    were   in    for    an    ugly    row.      Mud 
and     stones    were    showered    on    us    freely,    and 
one   gaunt  leprous-looking  individual,  half  naked, 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKIN.  53 

ran  up  on  liis  crutclies  and  seized  my  donkey's 
bridle.  Seeing  from  the  indifferent  and  lialf- 
amused  expression  on  the  bystanders'  faces  tliat 
we  should  get  no  help  from  them,  I  thought  discre- 
tion the  better  part  of  valour,  and  scattered  a 
handful  of  cash  among  our  persecutors,  which 
had  the  effect  of  slowly  dispersing  them.  This 
contretemps,  trivial  as  it  was,  showed  the  danger 
of  ever  for  a  moment  annoying  the  people  in  the 
country  we  were  about  to  travel  through.  Though 
good-tempered  and  hospitable,  the  Northern  China- 
man has  but  a  very  poor  idea  of  a  European, 
English  or  otherwise.  Indeed,  I  doubt  if  the 
majority  of  the  peasantry  had  ever  heard  of 
England. 

The  approach  to  Pekiu  from  Tungchow  is 
anything  but  imposing,  and  we  were  rather  dis- 
appointed at  our  first  sight  of  the  celestial  city. 
The  country  for  a  mile  or  so  before  reaching 
the  gates  is  so  densely  wooded  that  we  did  not 
know  we  had  reached  the  capital  till  we  found 
ourselves  actually  under  its  massive  crenellated 
walls.  The  latter  are  surmounted  by  lofty  square 
towers  which,  with  their  bright  apple-green  porce- 


54  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

lain  roofs  and  gaudy  facades  relieve  to  a  certain 
extent  the  barren  appearance  of  the  sandy  waste 
that  surrounds  Pekin.  Not  a  roof  or  tower  of  the 
city  is  visible  from  here,  nothing  but  the  high 
rugged  walls  which,  notwithstanding  their  great 
age,  are  in  good  repair.  There  was  nothing  to  tell 
one  that  on  the  other  side  of  these  there  lay  a  place 
almost  as  large  as  Paris  in  area  and  population. 
Nothing  but  the  hoarse,  subdued  murmur,  con- 
fused and  indistinct,  that  hangs  over  every  great 
city. 

A  few  hundred  yards  brought  us  to  the  gate  of 
the  Tartar  city,  and,  ye  gods  !  what  a  city  !  Upon 
first  entering,  it  seemed  as  if  a  dense  fog  had 
suddenly  descended  upon  one,  but  a  look  back 
at  the  bright  sunshine  outside  the  gates  soon 
dispelled  the  illusion,  and  explained  the  mystery  : 
it  was  nothing  but  dust,  the  black,  fine,  and  search- 
ing dust,  for  which  Pekin  is  famous.  Everything 
was  coated  with  it.  One  breathed  it  in  with  every 
inhalation,  till  eyes,  mouth,  and  nose  were  choked 
up,  and  breathing  became  almost  an  impossibility. 
No  one  seemed  to  mind  it  much,  though  our 
donkeys  laboured  through  it  nearly  knee-deep. 


GRAVESEND    TO    PEKTN.  55 

We  rode  for  some  distance  along  the  filthy,  dusty 
streets.  There  is  no  rule  of  the  road  in  Pekin, 
and  it  took  one  all  one's  time  to  steer  safely  through 
the  carts,  sedans,  mule  litters,  and  camel  caravans 
which  thronged  the  streets.  At  length  we  turned 
into  the  principal  thoroughfare,  a  broad  unpaved 
street,  raised  in  the  centre,  on  either  side  of 
which  one  saw  a  long  vista  of  low  roofed  houses, 
scrubby  trees,  and  gaudy  shop-signs,  lost  in  the 
distance  in  a  cloud  of  dust.  We  were  in  Pekin  at 
last. 

In  Pekin,  but  apparently  a  long  way  yet  from 
our  destination,  the  Hotel  de  Pekin ;  and  judging 
from  our  small  guide's  very  erratic  movements, 
we  were  not  likely  for  some  time  to  reach 
that  friendly  hostelry,  which  is  kept  by  an  enter- 
prising Frenchman,   M.  .      The    disagreeable 

suspicion  that  our  guide  had  lost  his  way 
became  a  certainty,  when  turning  down  a  narrow 
by-lane,  he  brought  us  up  all  standing  at  the 
door  of  a  filthy  tea-house.  It  was  not  a  pleasant 
predicament.  Imagine  a  Central  African  suddenly 
turned  loose  in  the  streets  of  London,  and  you  have 
our  position — with  this  difference,  that  the  African 


56  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

would  have  had  the  pull  over  us  in  the  shape 
of  a  friendly  policeman  to  take  him  to  the 
station.  Here,  in  this  city  of  nearly  two  million 
inhabitants,  it  seemed  unlikely  enough  that  we 
should  come  across  any  of  the  English-speaking 
inhabitants,  who  number  fifty  to  sixty  at  the 
most. 

Threats  of  punishment  and  vengeance  on  the 
small  boy  were  useless.  He  simply  seated  himself, 
and  calling  for  a  cup  of  tea,  informed  us  we  must 
find  our  way  ourselves,  he  did  not  know  it — at 
least  that  is  what  we  inferred  from  his  gestures, 
which  were  disrespectful  in  the  extreme.  With  a 
lively  recollection  of  our  escape  of  the  afternoon, 
we  did  not  care  to  risk  another  disturbance,  so, 
resigning  ourselves  to  circumstances,  dismounted 
and  called  for  tea. 

It  was  not  a  pleasant  half -hour,  for  we  were 
surrounded  in  less  than  five  minutes  by  a  crowd  of 
the  most  insolent,  dirtiest  ruflBans  imaginable. 
We  had  evidently  been  brought  to  one  of  the  very 
lowest  quarters  of  the  town,  and  were  not  sorry  to 
have  left  our  watches  in  the  carts.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  our  revolvers  and  a  few  cash  they  would 


GEAVRSr^ND    TO    PEKIN.  57 

not  have  been  mucli  tlie  richer  for  robbing  us.  I 
should  be  sorry  to  have  much  to  do  with  the  in- 
habitants of  the  Chinese  capital.  There  is  no  more 
obliging  and  hospitable  being  than  the  Chinese 
peasant,  no  more  insolent,  arrogant  thief  than  the 
lower  order  of  Pekinese.  The  victory  of  the  im- 
perial troops  over  the  French  in  Tonquin  is,  in  a 
great  measure,  responsible  for  the  insolence  dis- 
played by  the  inhabitants  of  Pekin  towards  Euro- 
peans. Insults  are  perpetrated  almost  daily,  and  in 
the  open  streets,  for  which  there  is  no  redress,  and 
it  is  only  necessary  to  go  for  a  very  short  walk  in 
the  streets  of  the  capital  to  see  that  the  lesson 
taught  the  Celestials  by  the  allied  troops  in  1860 
has  long  since  been  forgotten. 

"We  should  probably  have  had  to  pass  the  night  in 
this  unsavoury  den,  had  not  a  European  passed  and 
by  the  greatest  luck  caught  sight  of  us  through 
the  narrow  gateway.  Our  deliverer,  Mr.  P.,  an 
American  missionary,  himself  escorted  us  through  a 
labyrinth  of  crowded  streets  and  squares  to  Legation 
Street.  We  should  certainly  never  have  found  our 
way  otherwise,  for  there  were  no  outward  and 
visible  signs    even   here   of  European  inhabitants, 


58  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

till  just  before  reaching  the  hotel,  we  passed 
the  French  Embassy,  and  saw,  through  an  open 
gateway,  a  spacious  shady  garden  with  smooth- 
shaven  lawns,  cedars,  and  fountains,  while  over 
the  doorway,  in  large  gold  letters  on  a  vermilion 
ground,  were  the  words  "  Legation  de  France."  A 
couple  of  hundred  yards  further  on  we  pulled  up  at 
the  door  of  our  caravanserai.  Thanking  and  taking 
leave  of  our  friend,  we  entered  the  building,  and 
were  not  sorry  to  find  ourselves  in  the  cool,  grey- 
tiled,  flower-bordered  courtyard  of  the  hotel;  where 
a  whisky  and  soda  with  plenty  of  ice  washed  the 
dust  out  of  our  throats  and  refreshed  us  not  a 
little  after  our  long  and  somewhat  eventful 
ride. 

The  baggage  arrived  an  hour  after,  and  after  a 
bath  and  change  we  felt  well  disposed  to  do  justice  to 

the  excellent  dinner  provided  for  us  by  M. ,  the 

repast  being  graced  by   the  presence  of   his  wife, 

pretty  Madame  ,  and  her  sister.     Sitting  out 

after  dinner  in  the  little  moonlit  courtyard  redolent 
of  heliotrope  and  mignonette,  one  might  have  fancied 
oneself  hundreds  of  miles  from  the  dusty,  ill-smell- 
ing city,  and  its  barbaric   population.     The  smells 


GEAVESEND   TO    PEKIN.  59 

did  not,  thank  goodness,  penetrate  here ;  and  for 
the  first  time  since  leaving  Tientsin,  we  thoroughly- 
enjoyed  an  after-dinner  cigar,  not  a  little  relieved 
that  the  starting-point,  at  any  rate,  of  our  long 
land  journey  had  been  safely  reached. 


CHAPTER  II. 

PEKTN. 

It  was  only  in  the  year  1421  that  Pekin  became  the 
capital  of  the  Chinese  Empire.  It  was  up  to  that 
period  merely  the  cliief  town  of  Northern  China,  as  its 
name  "Pe,"  north,  "Ching,"  city,  denotes  ;  but  when 
Nankin,  the  ancient  capital,  was  abandoned,  the  seat 
of  government  was  transferred  to  its  present  situa- 
tion. A  worse  site  for  a  capital,  both  commercially 
and  socially,  can  scarcely  be  imagined,  for  although 
connected  by  canal  with  the  Peiho  river,  and  thus 
in  summer  with  the  rest  of  the  civilized  world,  the 
ice  in  winter  entirely  suspends  water  communica- 
tion. It  is,  therefore,  for  five  months  of  the  year, 
practically  a  prison  for  the  fifty  or  sixty  Europeans 
located  within  its  grass-grown  walls,  for  few  are 
rash  enough  to  attempt  a  journey  overland  to  Chefoo 
or  Shanghai. 

There  is  little  or  no  foreigfu  trade  with  Pekin, 


J 


PEKIN.  61 

and  with  one  exception  no  European  merchants  live 
there.  The  embassies  of  various  nations,  EngUsh 
and  American  missions,  and  professors  connected 
with  the  college  form  the  majority  of  the 
European  population.  A  good  deal  of  difference 
of  opinion  exists  as  to  the  native  population 
of  the  capital.  Some  say  it  is  a  million  and  a 
half,  others  not  more  than  nine  hundred  thousand. 

In  the  opinion  of  Professor  P ,  who  has  resided 

for  over  twenty  years  in  the  place,  and  is  well  up  in 
Chinese  matters,  it  is  considerably  over  a  million, 
of  whom  two-thirds  inhabit  the  Tartar  city.  The 
remainder  are  Chinese,  who  yearly  increase,  while 
their  Tartar  neighbours  are  diminishing  in  number. 
In  shape  Pekin  may  be  roughly  described  as  a 
square  within  an  oblong,  the  former  standing  for 
the  Tartar  city,  the  latter  for  the  Chinese.  The 
outer  walls,  which  are  about  sixty  feet  high  and  of 
immense  thickness,  stand  about  a  hundred,  and 
fifty  yards  from  the  city  itself,  the  space  between 
being  occupied  by  barren  sandy  waste,  along  which 
in  the  season  hundreds  of  caravans  may  be  seen 
daily  wending  their  way  to  or  from  the  Mongolian 
Desert  and  Manchuria.     Inside  this,  again,  are  two 


62  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    L.AND. 

smaller  walls,  also,  however,  of  considerable  height, 
enclosing  the  imperial  and  forbidden  cities,  that 
enclosing  the  latter  being  surmounted  with  bright 
yellow  tiles,  the  imperial  colour,  which  none  but  the 
Emperor  or  Queen  Regent  are  permitted  to  make  use 
of.  A  E/oman  Catholic  church  was  built  not  far  from 
the  walls  of  the  Imperial  Palace  two  or  three  years 
since,  and,  in  ignorance  presumably,  the  European 
architect  was  commencing  to  roof  it  over  with  tiles 
of  the  sacred  colour,  when  luckily  warned  of  the  risk 
he  was  running  by  one  of  the  European  residents ; 
not,  however,  before  it  had  come  to  the  Emperor's 
ears,  and  since  then  the  poor  priests  connected  with 
the  building  are  given  no  peace.  The  two  high 
western  towers  which  flank  the  buildinsf  are 
visited  night  and  day  by  a  mandarin,  to  see  that 
no  steps  have  been  built  up  them  by  the  foreign 
devils,  whence  they  may  survey  the  palaces  and 
gardens  of  the  imperial  city.  Latterly,  to  make 
assurance  doubly  sure,  the  walls  of  the  latter  have 
been  raised  to  the  height  of  the  church  towers  at 
the  point  where  the  latter  face  them. 

There  are  nine  gates  in  all  in  the  outer  wall, 
situated  in  various  parts  of  the  city,  and  called 
after  the  points  of  the  compass  at  which  they  stand ; 


PEKIN.  63 

viz.,  the  North  Gate,  South  Grate,  North-west  Gate, 
and  so  on.  These  are  closed  at  seven  in  summer, 
and  six  in  winter,  and  woe  to  the  luckless  wretch 
who  is  locked  out,  for  the  guard  dare  not  open 
under  pain  of  death  till  sunrise  the  following  morn- 
ing, be  it  in  the  height  of  summer  or  the  thermo- 
meter below  zero.  The  inhabitants  cannot  com- 
plain of  due  notice  not  being  given.  For  full  half  an 
hour  before  closing  time  there  is  at  every  guard- 
house or  gate  a  beating  of  gongs  and  clashing  of 
cymbals  that  would  awaken  the  dead.  Then  at  the 
hour  to  a  second  the  guard  give  one  long  unearthly 
yell,  and  the  ponderous  iron-bound  gates  are  thrown 
together  with  a  crash  till  six  or  seven  the  next 
morning. 

All  the  walls  are  built  facing  the  four  points  of 
the  compass,  and  the  principal  thoroughfares  and 
streets  run  parallel  to  them.  Notwithstanding 
this  apparent  regularity  and  simplicity  of  construc- 
tion, the  Chinese  capital  is  the  easiest  place  in  the 
world  to  lose  yourself  in,  as  we  frequently  found ; 
so  much  so,  that  after  the  first  time  we  always 
employed  a  guide  when  we  took  our  walks  abroad. 

Our  first  impressions  of  Pekin  were  not  favourable, 
for  a  dustier,  noisier,  dirtier  place  it  has  never  been 


64  FROM   PEKTN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

my  lot  to  visit.  Upon  entering  the  Hat  Ta  Men 
Grate  the  city  presents  more  the  appearance  of  a 
huge  fair  than  anything  else,  for  the  crowded  streets 
are  lined  with  canvas  booths  and  tents  as  well  as 
houses.  The  roads  are  very  broad,  some  so  much 
so  as  to  dwarf  the  low  rickety  dwellings,  gaudy  with 
gold  and  crimson  signs  and  waving  banners," into  in- 
significance. The  streets  are  unpaved  and  raised  in 
the  centre  to  a  height  of  three  or  four  feet  for 
carriage  traj0&c,  the  space  on  either  side  being  re- 
served for  foot-passengers,  though  there  did  not 
seem  to  be  any  marked  distinction,  the  carts  using 
both  ways  as  they  liked. 

In  dry  weather  the  streets  of  Pekin  are  over 
ankle-deep  in  dust,  in  wet  weather  are  simply  a 
morass.  Being  worn  away  in  places  into  holes  of 
two  or  three  feet  deep,  the  effects  of  the  clouds  of 
dust  or  showers  of  water  that  every  cart-wheel 
throws  up  and  around  may  be  imagined.  At 
intervals  of  about  fifty  yards  along  the  footway  are 
holes  eight  or  nine  feet  deep.  These  are  receptacles 
for  every  species  of  filth ;  in  fact,  serve  the  purpose 
of  stationary  sewers  (for  Pekin  is  not  drained), 
and  are  only  cleaned  out  when  quite  full  (about 
once   a  week).     In  very   dry  weather,  when  water 


PEKIN.  65 

is  scarce,  the  dust  is  laid  with  the  liquid  filth  they 
contain,  an  operation  hardly  tending  to  cool  or 
purify  the  atmosphere ! 

If  we,  in  England,  must  eat,  according  to  the 
proverb,  a  peck  of  dirt  before  we  die,  I  feel  •  con- 
vinced that  the  inhabitants  of  Pekin  swallow  at 
least  a  hundredweight  before  their  last  hour.  The 
dust  of  Pekin  is,  next  to  its  smells,  undoubtedly 
its  greatest  curse.  There  is  no  escaping  from  the 
fine,  brown  powder  that  chokes  up  eyes,  nose 
and  mouth,  and  finds  its  way  into  everything — • 
your  food,  your  clothes,  your  very  boots.  There  is 
a  saying  among  the  Chinese,  that  it  will  worm  its 
way  into  a  watch-glass.  Not  only  is  it  pro- 
ductive of  considerable  physical  discomfort  and 
annoyance,  but  it  gives  a  depressing,  gloomy  look  to 
everything,  which  on  a  really  dusty  day  makes  it 
impossible  to  discern  objects  one  hundred  yards  off. 
The  sun  may  be  shining  brightly  outside  the  city 
walls,  when  within  all  is  dark  and  murky  as  a 
thick  November  fog  in  London  could  make  it. 
Indeed  it  is  far  worse  than  tlie  latter,  which  you 
can,  at  any  rate,  shut  out  to  a  certain  extent  with 
closely  drawn  curtains  and  brightly-lit  rooms. 

Pekin    is  by   no  means  an  unhealthy  city,  not- 

VOL.    I.  F 


06  FROM   PEKIN   TO   GALATS    BY   LAND. 

withstanding  the  disgusting  and  uncleanly  habits 
of  its  po23ulation,  and  its  low  situation  (only 
one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  above  sea  level). 
Strange  to  say,  the  good  health  of  its  inhabitants  is 
attributed  in  a  great  measure  to  the  dust,  which 
acts  as  a  deodorizer  and  disinfectant  to  the  heaps 
of  filth  and  garbage  one  encounters  at  every  turn 
bleaching  and  rotting  in  the  sunshine.  The  climate 
is,  on  the  whole,  good,  the  only  really  unhealthy 
months  being  those  of  July,  August  and  September, 
when  the  rainfall  is  excessive.  The  extremes  of 
temperature,  however,  are  somewhat  trying  to 
Europeans  of  weak  constitution.  For  instance,  in 
July  the  thermometer  is  often  up  to  over  100°  in 
the  shade,  while  in  winter  it  frequently  falls  to 
below  zero.  When  an  epidemic  does  occur,  it  is 
severe,  for  the  Chinese  are  much  prone  to 
fright  and  panic  during  these  visitations.  Cholera 
broke  out  only  four  or  five  years  since,  and  carried 
off  an  average  of  twelve  hundred  daily.  The 
two  greatest  scourges  are  small-pox  and  diph- 
theria, and  an  enormous  number  of  deaths  occur 
annually  from  the  latter  disease  in  early  spring. 
Typhoid  fever  and  ophthalmia  (from  the  dust)  are 
also    prevalent    at    times,    but    small-pox    is    the 


PEKIN.  67 

commonest  disease  among  the  Chinese  themselves, 
who  look  upon  it  very  much  as  we  do  npon 
measles,  although  it  is  none  the  less  fatal  for  all  that. 
As  a  prevention,  the  native  doctors  inoculate  by 
blowing  a  quantity  of  the  virus  of  the  actual  disease 
up  the  nostrils.  I  was  made  unpleasantly  aware  of 
this  fact  by  one  of  the  hotel  servants,  who  spoke  a 
few  words  of  English.  Noticing  that  one  of  his 
nostrils  was  stopped  up  with  a  dirty  piece  of  cotton 
wool,  I  inquired  if  he  had  hurt  his  nose.  "  Oh, 
no,"  was  the  reply,  "  smol-pok  !  "  This  habit  has, 
no  doubt,  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  spread  of  the 
disease,  which  is  always  more  or  less  prevalent  in 
Pekin;  and  I  was  not  sorry  we  had  taken  the 
precaution  of  being  vaccinated  in  Shanghai. 

All  susceptibility  and  refinement  must  be  cast 
aside  when  walking  in  the  streets  of  Pekin.  I 
could  not  attempt  to  describe  one  quarter  of  the 
disgusting  sights  and  outrages  on  decency  that 
continually  met  the  eye  in  this  unfragrant  city,  even 
in  broad  daylight.  I  was  not  surprised  to  hear 
that  no  European  resident  ever  dreams  of  walking 
about  the  streets  of  the  capital  if  he  can  possibly 
avoid  it.  No  lady  could  possibly  do  so.  As 
any  one  who  has  ever  visited  it  must  know,  there 

F  2 


68  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

exists  no  dirtier  city  in  the  world  than  Pekiu,  no 
filthier  individual,  both  morally  and  physically, 
than  the  Pekinite.  Cleanliness  and  decency  are 
words  unknown  in  his  vocabulary.  As  for  washing, 
he  never  dreams  of  it.  In  winter  he  puts  on  five 
or  six  layers  of  clothes,  taking  them  off  by  degrees 
as  the  weather  gets  warmer,  until  he  is  reduced  to 
the  white  linen  shirt  and  trousers  that  he  wore  the 
preceding  summer.  With  the  approach  of  the  cold 
weather  he  gradually  resumes  his  winter  garb. 

Being  provided  with  letters  of  introduction  to  the 
British  and  Russian  ministers,  we  made  our  way  to 
the  former  legation  the  morning  after  our  arrival. 
With  the  exception  of  Belgium,  whose  minister  had 
been  recalled  about  two  months  before  we  arrived, 
nearly  every  nation  in  the  woi^d  has  its  represen- 
tative at  Pekin.  The  English  Embassy  is  a  perfect 
palace  and  stands  apart  from  the  other  legations 
on  the  banks  of  the  Grand  Imperial  Canal,  a  stream 
once  fringed  by  handsome  stone  banks  or  quays, 
which,  like  everytliing  else  in  Pekin,  have  long  fallen 
into  ruin  and  decay.  The  half-dry  canal  now  pre- 
sents more  the  appearance  of  a  dirty  ditch  of  stag- 
nant water  than  what  it  once  was,  an  imjDortant 
waterway. 


J'EKIN.  69 

It  was  quite  a  relief  to  get  out  of  the  dusty, 
ill-smelling  street,  as  passing  •  a  smart,  wliite- 
clad  English  sentry,  we  entered  the  cool,  shady 
grounds  of  the  Embassy.  The  building  was  for- 
merly the  palace  of  the  Duke  Liang  (a  relation  of 
the  former  Emperor),  but  was  ceded  to  the  British 
after  the  campaign  of  1860.  Probably  in  no  other 
part  of  the  world  does  the  English  Government 
possess  a  representative  building  so  thoroughly 
typical  of  the  country  it  is  in.  The  pavilions  of 
Chinese  architecture,  intricate  carvings  of  roof  and 
cornice,  vermilion  and  gold  pillars  that  form  the 
entrance  contrasted  strangely  with  the  interior 
where  the  cool,  dimly-lit  rooms,  fresh  with  the 
scent  of  flowers  and  replete  with  every  European 
luxury  and  comfort,  bore  witness  to  the  good 
taste  and  refinement  of  the  charming  "  Ambassa- 
drice,"  who,  fresh  from  Paris,  and  clad  in  one  of 
Worth's  cliefs-cVceuvre,  looked  strangely  out  of 
place  in  dirty,  dusty,  semi-savage  Pekin ! 

"  You  will   never,"  said    Sir  John  "W ,  "  get 

through  to  Kiakhta  without  an  interpreter.  I 
could  not  allow  you  to  attempt  it,  so  I  fear  you 
must  make  up  your  minds  to  remain  in  Pekin  for 
at  least  a  week.     By  that  time   1  shall  have  got 


70         FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

you  your  Chinese  passports,  and  I  hope  an  inter- 
preter to  accompany  you  as  far  as  the  Russian 
frontier.  I  must  tell  you  that  it  is  not  easy,  for 
the  Chinese  have  an  unaccountable  aversion  to 
crossing  the  desert  of  Gobi." 

Our  next  visit  was  to  the  Russian  minister,  M. 
Coumany,  to  whom  we  had  letters  of  introduction 
from  M.  de  Staal,  the  Russian  minister  in  London. 
He  was  (as  are  most  Russians)  kindness  itself, 
but  met  us  with  the  invariable  question,  "  Why 
Siberia  ?  "  The  picture  M.  Coumany  drew  of  the 
overland  journey  was  certainly  not  pleasant  or 
encouraging.  "  Here  are  letters,"  said  he,  "  for 
the  commissioner  of  Kiakhta  and  governors  of 
Tomsk  and  ISTijni  Novgorod.  General  Ignatieff  of 
Irkoutsk  is  now  away  on  leave.  But  let  me  ask 
you  to  think  twice  before  attempting  this  voyage. 
You  will  experience  nothing  but  annoyance  and 
privation,  the  whole  way  to  Nijni  Novgorod.  You 
will  find  the  monotony  and  fatigue  almost  unbear- 
able,— and  with  Japan  so  close  !  "  he  added,  using 
the  well-known  formula.  4 

But  we  managed  to  convince  our  host,  before 
leaving,  that  nothing  would  deter  us  from  at  least 
making   the    attempt   to    reach    Moscow   by    land. 


PEKIN.  71 

'*  Like  all  Englishmen,"  he  said,  smiling,  "you 
are  obstinate ;  and  as  you  are  determined  to  go,  let 
me  give  you  a  word  of  advice  :  Get  off  as  soon  as  you 
can,  and  out  of  Asia  by  October  at  latest.  Siberia 
in  autumn  is  a  hell  upon  earth." 

We  returned  to  our  hotel  somewhat  discouraged, 
for  we  had  hoped  that  three  or  four  days  at  the 
most  would  suffice  for  our  preparations.  How- 
ever, there  was  no  help  for  it,  so  to  lose  no  time 
we  set  about  g-ettingr  mules  and  litters  for  the 
four  days'  journey  to  the  Great  Wall,  the  first 
stage  of  our  voyage,  and  trusted  to  Providence 
that  "  the  Boy  "  (as  every  Chinese  servant  from 
eighteen  to  eighty  is  called  in  China)  would 
arrive  in  a  week  or  ten  days  at  the  latest. 

There  is  much  to  do  and  see  in  Pekin,  but  the 
heat,  dust  and  smells  detract  considerably  from  the 
pleasures  of  a  walk  through  the  city.  Moreover, 
the  Chinese,  since  their  Touquinese  victories  have 
become  so  arrogant  and  insolent  that  many  of  the 
most  interesting  temples  are  now  closed  to 
Europeans.  Our  favourite  walk  was  on  tbe  summit 
of  the  outer  wall,  where  one  could  enjoy  the  cool 
evening  breeze  out  of  the  dust  and  stenches  for  a 
while.     The  Tartar  or  outer  wall  is   a   wonderful 


72  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

piece   of     masonry    about    sixty    feet   liigh   by  as 
many   broad,   and,    considering    the    hundreds    of 
years     it     has   braved    wind     and    weather,    in    a 
wonderful     state     of    repair.      It    is    moss-grown 
on   the  summit,    and   the    wild    tangled    herbage 
grows    knee    deep.     Were    it    not   for    the     con- 
servatism, to  use  no  stronger  term,  of  the  Chinese 
Government    it  would    make  a   splendid   drive    or 
ride,  for  it  extends  unbroken  and  in  an   excellent 
state  of  repair  for  upwards   of    twenty-two  miles. 
To    show    the    jealousy  of    this    strange    race,  a 
European  minister   at  Pekin   once  remarked  to  a 
mandarin  what  a  pleasant    drive  it   would  make, 
adding  that  it  was  really  the  only  place  in  Pekin 
where  he  could  ever  walk  with  any  pleasure.     "  Oh  ! 
you  walk  there,  do  you?"  was  the  reply,  and  the  very 
next  afternoon,  on  arriving  for  his   daily  constitu- 
tional, he  found  the  gate  closed,  and  an  order  posted 
forbidding  all  Europeans  to  ascend  the  wall.     This 
order  was,  however,   cancelled  a   year    after,    for- 
tunately for  us,  and  we  enjoyed  our  evening  strolls 
undisturbed,  for  we  seldom  saw  a  soul  besides  our- 
selves.    It  was  pleasant  enough  here  in  the  cool  of 
the  evening,  out  of  the    dust  which    on  still  days 


PEKIN,  73 

liimg  over  the  great  city  like  a  huge  funeral 
pall.  When  clear  the  view  was  lovely,  the  rugged, 
precipitous  chain  of  hills  in  the  background,  the 
densely  packed,  dwarfish-looking  dwellings,  and 
rays  of  the  setting  sun  flashing  brightly  on  the 
green  porcelain  roofs  and  lofty  pagodas  of  the 
temples,  and  bright  yellow  tiles  of  the  Imperial 
Palace,  composed  a  picture  as  unique  as,  on  bright, 
clear  evenings,  it  was  beautiful.  As  a  rule,  however, 
the  dust  obscured  everything. 

There  is  an  observatory  on  this  wall  which  was 
erected,  as  far  back  as  a.d.  1279.  In  1674  a  Jesuit 
priest  (one  Father  Verbest)  superintended  its  restora- 
tion, and  from  that  day  to  this  it  has  remained  in- 
tact. On  a  kind  of  platform  above  the  level  of  the 
wall,  and  reached  by  an  iron  staircase,  are  a  quantity 
of  bronze  instruments — sextants,  globes,  quadrants, 
&c.,  mounted  on  massively  wrought  stands  represent- 
ing strange  birds  and  beasts.  Of  enormous  size, 
and  some  from  twelve  to  fourteen  feet  high  and  of 
immense  weight,  they  looked  a  little  distance  off  as 
if  a  single  man  could  lift  them,  so  beautiful  and 
delicate  is  their  moulding  and  workmanship,  and 
though  of  great  value,  were  left  untouched  when  the 


74  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

allies  entered  Pekin  in  1860,  probably  by  direc- 
tion of  the  commanders-in-cliief .  It  seemed  strange 
tliat  although  they  have  stood  in  the  open  for  so 
many  hundred  years,  uncared  for  and  uncleaned, 
they  bore  not  the  slightest  traces  of  decay  from 
time  or  weather — one  especially,  a  huge  globe  of  the 
heavens  in  bronze  with  the  constellations  thereon  in 
gold  and  silver,  looked  as  if  it  had  been  placed  there 
but  yesterday. 

From  the  summit  of  the  observatory  one  may 
look  down  into  the  Board  of  Examinations,  a 
walled  space  of  some  eighty  acres,  with  rows 
of  queer-looking  little  boxes  or  cells  for  students. 
Competitive  examinations  for  Government  appoint- 
ments are  held  here  every  three  years,  and  so 
severe  are  the  subjects  that  many  of  the  candi- 
dates go  mad.  During  the  examinations,  which  • 
last  three  days,  no  one  is  allowed  to  enter  or  leave 
the  building.  On  one  occasion  two  students  died, 
but  the  doors  were  not  opened.  Their  bodies  were 
hoisted  over  the  wall,  and  carried  to  the  burial- 
ground  by  the  friends  awaiting  them  outside. 

We  occasionally  returned  from  these  expeditions 
along  the  pieces  of  waste  land,  sandy  and  sterile, 
which  bound  the  city  walls,   and   frequently  came 


PEKIN.  75 

upon  groups  or  squads  of  Manchu  soldiery  at  target 
practice  with  the  bow  and  arrow.  The  men  are 
fine  strapping  fellows  and  well  set  up,  but  their 
weapons  wretched,  clumsy  things,  carrying  barely 
thirty  yards.  The  greater  portion  of  the  Chinese 
army  consists  of  these  Manchu  Tartars.  A  force  of 
eighty  thousand  quartered  in  Manchuria  under  the 
command  of  Grermans,  forms  the  backbone  of  the 
Chinese  army,  and  consists  of  cavalry,  artillery,  and 
infantry,  the  latter  armed  with  the  new  Berdan 
rifle.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  remainder  of  the 
Imperial  army  use  the  old  bow  and  arrow  of  their 
ancestors,  and  I  do  not  think  I  exaggerate  when 
I  say  that  there  is  not  a  rifle  among  the  soldiery 
in  Pekin. 

The  Chinese  are,  indeed,  a  strange  and  unac- 
countable race.  It  is  hard  to  credit  that  a 
nation  possessing  ironclads  and  the  latest  im- 
provements in  light  and  heavy  guns  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Peiho  river  still  clothes  its  soldiers  at 
the  capital  in  tiger-skins,  and  instructs  them 
in  the  art  of  making  faces  to  frighten  the 
enemy. ^  Clever  and  civilized  as  he  is  in  many 
things,    the    Chinaman's    forte    clearly   does    not 

'   A  fact. 


76  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

lie  ill  firearms.  A  German  officer  of  one  of  the 
Imperial  gunboats  told  me  that  a  consignment  of 
three  hundred  Martini-Henry  rifles  was  one  day 
received  on  board  his  ship,  with  one  hundred  rounds 
of  ammunition  to  each.  A  short  time  after,  returning 
from  a  week's  leave,  he  found  that  by  order  of  the 
Chinese  commander  they  had  all  been  thrown  over- 
board. The  ammunition  was  exhausted,  argued 
the  latter,  what  was  the  use  of  keeping  the  rifles  ! 

We  made  but  two  excursions  into  the  city 
itself  the  whole  time  we  remained  in  Pekin, 
and  after  the  first  time  on  foot.  I  only  rode 
in  a  Pekin  cab  once.  They  are  not  pretty  con- 
veyances to  look  at,  being  a  sort  of  box,  four 
feet  long  by  three  feet  broad,  fastened  to  two  long 
poles  or  beams,  and  supported  by  a  pair  of 
clumsy  ponderous  wooden  wheels  in  iron  tires. 
The  roof  is  of  thick  dark  blue  cloth,  with  two 
little  gauze-covered  windows  on  either  side. 
Most  of  them  are  drawn  by  mules,  an  animal  which 
is  looked  upon  in  Pekin  as  of  far  greater  value 
than  a  horse  or  pony,  and  fetches  far  higher  prices. 
I  do  not  think  I  have  ever  seen  finer  mules,  even 
in  Spain,  than  in  North  China. 

To    describe   the    celestial    capital    is    not    diffi- 


PEKIN.  11 

cult.     One   street   is    so  exactly  like  another,  that 
when    you    have    seen    a    bit    of    the    place     yoa 
have  seen  the  whole  of  it.       The  principal  street 
of  the  Tartar  city  may  be  described  in  very  few 
words.     A    broad    straggling   thoroughfare,    knee 
deep  in    dust,    with  low,  tumble-down    houses  on 
either  side,    hidden    at  intervals  by  dirty    canvas 
booths,    wherein  fortune-tellers,    sellers  of    sweet- 
meats,   keepers    of     gambling-hells,    and   jugglers 
ply    their    trade.     Deep    open    cesspools    at  every 
fifty  yards ;  crowds  of  dirty,  half -naked  men  and 
painted  women  ;  mandarins  and  palanquins  preceded 
by  gaudily-clad  soldiers  on  horseback  and  followed 
by  a  yelling  rabble  of  men   and  boys,  armed   with 
flags,    spears,    and  sticks,  on  foot;    Tartar  ladies 
in  mule  litters,  hung  with  bells   and  bright  cloths; 
dark,  savage-looking   Mongolians  from  the  desert, 
leading    caravans   of    camels ;    Chinamen   in   grey, 
green,  or  heliotrope  silk.  Chinamen  in   rags,  and 
Chinamen  in  nothing  at  all;  water-carriers,  soldiers, 
porters,  sellers  of  fruit  and  ice,  the  latter  coated  with 
dust,   like  everything  else,    and  looking  singularly 
uninviting ;     Chow-chow    and    sweetmeat    sellers ; 
camels,  mules,   ponies,    oxen  carts  thronging  the 
ruined  roadway ;  a  deafening  noise  of  bells,  cymbals, 


78  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

shouting  and  cursing ;  indecency  and  filtli  every- 
wkere,  with  a  dusty,  gloomy  glare  over  everything, 
even  on  the  brightest  day,  while  the  air  every- 
where around  is  poisoned  with  the  hot,  sickly 
smell  peculiar  to  Pekin.  Such  was  the  impression 
one  usually  retained  of  a  walk  through  the 
capital  on  a  summer's  day.  We  saw  many 
curious  sights,  but  most  were  of  such  a  nature 
that  I  cannot  describe  them.  A  Chinese  funeral 
we  passed  one  day  is  perhaps  worth  mention. 
An  enormous  procession,  nearly  a  mile  long,  bore 
witness  to  the  fact  that  the  deceased  was  a  man  of 
some  rank.  A  number  of  relations  clad  in  white 
(Chinese  mourning),  preceded  the  catafalque,  strew- 
ing flowers  and  burning  incense  before  it.  Every 
hundred  yards  or  so  a  halt  was  made,  and  a 
huge  white  sheet  spread  upon  the  ground  on 
which  the  mourners  lay  flat  on  their  breasts  and 
stomachs,  repeatedly  beating  their  heads  against 
the  ground.  Immediately  in  front  of  the  coflB.n 
was  the  deceased's  property,  his  horse,  hat,  pipe, 
&c.,  and  sedan.  The  latter  startled  one  some- 
what, for  seated  in  it  was  a  figure  which,  on 
closer  inspection,  we  discovered  to  be  a  waxen 
effigy    of    the    dead    man    himself,    clad    in    the 


PEKIN.  79 

clothes  he  had  worn  just  before  death.  The  huge 
oaken  coffin  was  so  heavy  that  it  took  sixty  or 
seventy  men  to  carry  it.  At  the  end  of  the  pro- 
cession of  relatives  and  friends  came  the  rabble 
and  "  followers  "  of  the  deceased.  The  Chinese 
custom  is  to  set  the  coffin  down  on  reaching  the 
burial-ground  with  a  light  layer  of  earth  over  it 
till  the  wood  begins  to  rot.  It  is  then  covered 
thickly  with  earth,  but  not  buried.  The  dead  in 
China  are  never  put  uuderground. 

The  quieter  and  less  frequented  streets  of  the  city 
were  not  so  bad  ;  narrow,  unpaved  byways  fringed 
on  either  side  with  high  white  walls  of  brick  and 
plaster,  enclosing  the  houses  of  well-to-do  mer- 
chants, or  the  better  class  of  tradesmen ;  quaint 
little  dwellings,  curiously  carved  and  gorgeous 
with  blue,  vermilion,  and  gold  facades,  having  neat 
flower-gardens  in  front,  and  willow-fringed  ponds. 
One  occasionally  caught  a  glimpse,  through 
an  open  porch,  of  the  proprietor,  his  day's  work 
over,  clad  in  a  light  and  airy  costume  consisting 
of  a  pair  of  drawers,  lazily  watching  the  gold 
fish  in  the  clear  lily-covered  water,  or  studying 
his  PeJcin  Gazette,  the  oldest  daily  paper,  by  the 
way,  in  existence.     Occasionally  Madame  was  visible 


80  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

sharing  tlie  joys  of  her  lord  and  master's  leisure- 
hours,  but  not  often  ;  for  when  you  visit  a  China- 
man he  seldom  presents  you  to  his  wife,  although  the 
latter  is  not  kept  at  all  secluded  or  under  lock  and 
key.  A  Chinese  woman  has  as  much  liberty  as  an 
English  one,  maritally  speaking,  though,  as  I  have 
said,  one  does  not  often  meet  them.  Most  are  said 
to  make  very  good  wives  ;  unlike  most  eastern  and 
other  nations,  they  have  not  the  love  of  intrigue 
so  inherent  as  a  rule  in  the  female  sex.  A  Chinaman 
may  have,  if  he  will,  one  hundred  concubines,  but 
only  one  wife,  who  is  the  ruler  and  head  of  his 
household. 

One  is  much  struck  with  the  good  looks  of 
the  Pekin  women  when  compared  with  those 
of  Southern  China.  Those  most  frequently  met 
with  are  Tartars,  who  do  not,  as  a  rule,  contract 
and  deform  their  feet.  It  is  only  in  the  Chinese  city 
that  one  meets  poor  creatures  rolling  about  the 
streets  with  their  arms  extended,  like  ships  in  dis- 
tress. In  some  parts  of  China  a  bride's  value  is 
reckoned  by  the  smallness  of  her  foot.  The 
operation  of  contracting  it,  which  is  performed  in 
early  youth,  is  not  painful.  Four  of  the  toes  are  bent 
under  the  sole  of  the  foot,  to  which  they  are  firmly 


PEKIN. 


81 


pressed,  and  to  which  they  grow  together,  the 
arreat  toe  bein^  left  in  its  natural  state.  The  fore 
part  of  the  foot  is  then  compressed  with  strong 
bandages  so  that  it  shoots  upwards  and  appears 
like  a  large  lump  at  the  instep,  where  it  forms  as  it 
were  part  of  the  leg.  The  lower  part  of  the  foot 
is  sometimes  not  more  than  four  inches  long  by 
one  inch  broad  !  This  practice  is,  however,  said  to 
be  dying  out,  even  among  the  Chinese. 

The  ornament  of  which  the  Celestial  is  so  proud, 
his  pigtail,  was  in  reality  introduced  into  China  by 
the  Tartars,  who  as  Mahometans  tried  to  force  the 
Koran  on  to  the  whole  of  China  at  the  commence- 
ment of  their  Dynasty.  To  this  the  Chinese 
would  not  submit,  but  an  edict  was  promulgated 
by  the  first  Tartar  ruler  that  every  subject  should 
shave  his  head  in  Mahometan  fashion,  leaving  only 
the  small  tuft  of  hair  by  which  the  Faithful  are 
supposed  to  be  dra'UTi  up  to  Heaven  when  they  die. 
The  Chinese,  artistic  in  all  they  do,  converted 
the  ridiculous  and  shaggy  tuft  of  hair  into  a  thick 
tail,  the  careful  plaiting  of  which  is  now  the  China- 
man's greatest  delight  and  pride.  It  is,  moreover, 
a  very  suitable  head-dress  for  Pekin.  We  found 
brushing  the  head  even   twice  a  day  quite  useless, 

VOL.  I.  G 


82  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

for  the  hair  was  thick  with  dust  ten  minutes  after 
the  operation. 

The  coinage  current  in  Pekin  is  to  a  stranger 
more  than  confusing,  consisting  as  it  does  of 
"  cash  "  and  bar  silver.  With  the  former,  small 
coins  of  which  about  fifty  go  to  a  halfpenny,  one 
has  little  to  do.  A  hole  is  stamped  through  the 
middle  for  greater  convenience,  and  one  frequently 
sees  in  Pekin  two  or  three  necklaces  of  these 
worthless,  but  weighty,  pieces  slung  round  a  man's 
neck,  who  is  struggling  along  under  the  value  of 
perhaps  eightpence  or  ninepence,  English  money. 
The  silver  is  in  bars,  and  cut  off  as  wanted. 
The  tad  is  not  a  coin,  but  a  weight  of  silver  made 
up  in  paper  packets  of  one,  three,  or  four  taels. 
A  mint  has,  I  believe,  been  opened  in  Pekin  since  our 
visit,  and  a  proper  coinage  will  be  issued  in  a 
few  months — no  small  advantage  to  future  visitors, 
for  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  "  change  "  at  present 
is  somewhat  great. 

It  is  curious  how  little  attention  a  European 
attracts  when  walking  in  the  streets  of  Pekin. 
Although  there  are  many  probably  in  that  great 
city  who  have  never  seen  a  white  face,  they 
eviuced   but  little  curiositv    when    we   visited    the 


PEKIN.  83 

gambling-hells,  opium-shops,  and  other  dens  of  a 
like  description,  and  we  passed  through  them  un- 
molested, if  not  unobserved.  Here  and  there  in 
the  lower  quarters  of  the  capital,  however,  the 
natives  evidently  preferred  our  room  to  our  com- 
pany. The  words  "  Yang  Qweitze "  fell  with 
uncomfortable  frequency  upon  the  ear,  and  on  one 
occasion  a  shower  of  stones  and  mud  hastened 
our  retreat  from  a  house  in  the  slums  which  our 
guide  had  imprudently  allowed  us  to  enter  and  take 
stock  of.  As  a  general  rule,  however,  the  natives 
were  civil  and  obliging  enough,  and  in  the  more 
aristocratic  eating  and  tea-houses  we  were  frequently 
invited  to  partake  of  a  cup  of  tea  free  gratis  by  the 
proprietor. 

The  "  Jeunesse  Doree "  of  Pekin  are  gay 
dogs.  Theatres,  restaurants,  and  tea-houses 
abound,  and  the  more  populous  quarters  of  the 
city  are  alive  with  revelry,  not  to  say  riot,  till 
four  or  five  o'clock  a.m.  A  good  deal  more 
champagne  and  other  alcoholic  liquors  are  con- 
sumed than  the  cup  that  is  popularly  supposed  to 
cheer  without  inebriating.  Intoxication  is  a  vice  to 
which  the  Chinese  masher  (if  I  may  so  call  him)  is 
particularly  prone,  although  a  very  wrong  impres- 

G  2 


8^  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

sion  exists  in  Europe  as  to  the  disgusting  animal 
food  Chinamen  are  said  to  be  in  the  habit  of  eating. 
Cats,  dogs,  and  even  rats  are,  by  many  in  England, 
supposed  to  be  devoured  promiscuously,  but  this  is 
not  the  case.  Dogs  and  rats  are  eaten,  no  doubt ;  in 
fact  I  have  myself  seen  the  dishes  in  question,  and 
very  good  they  looked  !  But  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  rats  are  fed  solely  on  farinaceous  food,  and 
carefully  brought  up  by  hand.  They  are  in  reality 
far  cleaner  than  our  domesticated  English  pig.  The 
"chow"  dog  is  a  race  of  itself,  and  the  only  one 
ever  eaten  by  the  better  classes.  The  lower  orders 
of  course  have  to  put  up  with  what  they  can  get.  A 
good  dog  or  rat  is  as  expensive  a  luxury  in  Pekin 
as  venison  or  turtle  at  home  ! 

Strong  drink  leads  to  high  play,  and  gambling 
in  various  forms  is  much  in  vogue  among  the 
gilded  youth  of  Pekin.  Cards  are  the  general  mode, 
but  a  sport  at  which  enormous  sums  are  won 
and  lost  is  cricket-fighting.  The  greatest  care  is 
lavished  on  these  little  animals,  and  large  sums 
of  money  paid  for  them.  The  trainers  are  brought 
up  to  the  profession,  and,  strange  as  it  may  seem, 
a  o'ood  cricket  in  Pekin  is  almost  as  valuable 
to   his   owner    as   a  useful  racehorse    in    England. 


PEKIX.  85 

The  insects  are  fouglit  in  little  boxes  like  miaiature 
rat  pits.  There  is  sometimes  intense  excitement  for 
weeks  before  an  event  in  which  two  well-known 
crickets  are  to  compete.  Game-cocks,  pigeons,  and 
even  quail  are  also  fought,  but  the  most  popular 
sport  is  undoubtedly  cricket-fighting.  It  is  probably 
also  the  most  ancient  of  them  all. 

We  strolled  into  a  doctor's  shop  one  evening  in 
the  slums — a  dirty,  gloomy  little  den — its  grimy 
walls  covered  with  phials  of  strange  shapes  and 
cruel-looking  instruments,  while  suspended  from 
the  ceiling  hung  a  number  of  dried  reptiles  and 
animals  which  looked  weird  and  uncanny  in  the 
dim,  uncertain  light.  In  a  dark  recess,  and  almost 
invisible  in  the  gloom,  sat  the  doctor,  a  large 
book  before  him,  his  wizened  old  face  just  visible  in 
the  rays  of  a  flickering  oil  wick  at  his  side.  It 
reminded  one  of  the  first  act  in  "  Faust,"  and  one 
instinctively  looked  around  for  Mephistopheles. 
Thouo^h  our  s^uide  informed  us  that  this  was  one  of 
the  most  successful  physicians  in  Pekin,  his  practice 
did  not  seem  extensive.  I  procured  with  difficulty 
the  following  Chinese  prescription,  though  for 
what  ailment  it  is  intended  I  am  ignorant  : — 

Decoction  of  centipedes,  one  frog  and  three  cock- 


86        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

roaches,  ten  grains  calomel,  three  grains  morphia, 
fifteen  grains  quinine ! 

Alas  !  for  the  poor  patient  who  had  to  swallow 
it.  Surely  the  deadliest  disease  would  be  prefer- 
able to  a  mixture  of  cockroach  and  calomel ! 

Most  of  our  waste  time  in  Pekin  (and  we  had 
plenty)  was  spent  in  the  numerous  porcelain  shops 
with  which  the  city  abounds.  It  was  curious  to 
walk  out  of  the  squalid,  filthy  streets,  knee-deep 
in  dust  and  reeking  with  sewage,  into  the  cool, 
luxurious  rooms  with  their  tesselated  pavements, 
fountains,  and  flowers,  and  hundreds  of  pounds'  worth 
of  beautiful  wares  laid  out  invitingly  before  one  in 
cloisonne,  jade,  and  porcelain.  We  found  it  hopeless 
as  a  rule,  to  think  of  getting  anything  at  a  reason- 
able price.  Japan  itself  can  produce  nothing  so 
beautiful  and  graceful  as  true  Pekin  work,  though, 
like  everything  else,  it  is  imitated,  and  there  has 
been,  of  late  years,  a  quantity  of  worthless  trash 
in  the  market.  Like  most  eastern  nations,  the 
dealers  "see  a  European  coming  "  and  raise  their 
prices  accordingly.  Unfortunately  also,  unlike  other 
eastern  nations,  they  steadily  refuse  to  lower 
them,  bargain  he  never  so  wisely.  It  made  one's 
mouth  water  to  look  round  the  shelves  of  one  of 


rtKiN. 


87 


these  sliops,  groaning  with  tliousauds  of  pounds' 
worth  of  treasure  in  porcelain  and  jade,  and  to  think 
of  the  looting  of  the  Summer  Palace  in  1860. 

I  had  always  imagined  the  latter  to  be  a 
building  of  Chinese  architecture,  a  great  rambling 
place  all  domes,  towers,  and  pagodas,  but  found 
it  more  like  a  very  perfect  imitation,  in  minia- 
ture, of  the  Tuileries.  The  morning  of  our  visit 
one  mio'ht  have  been  standinsf  on  the  banks  of 
the  Seine  and  looking  on  the  charred  and  blackened 
ruins  of  Napoleon's  beautiful  palace  after  the  fatal 
September,  1870,  had  not  the  red  and  yellow  temples 
dotted  at  intervals  round  the  sunlit  plains,  and 
Chinese  character  of  the  landscape  recalled  us 
to  a  sense  of  the  situation,  and  reminded  us  of 
the  distance  we  were  from  Fair  France !  Any- 
thing less  Chinese  than  the  architecture  of  the 
Summer  Palace  I  never  saw.  It  is  in  pure  French 
style  and  was  designed  by  Jesuits  at  a  time 
when  they  were  more  popular  in  China  than 
at  present.  Standing  in  the  midst  of  such  ^^ic- 
turesque  scenery,  surrounded  by  such  beautiful 
gardens,  park,  woodland,  and  lakes,  it  seems  a  sin 
to  have  ever  destroyed  a  building  which,  with  its 
characteristic  indolence,  the  Imperial  Government 


0»         FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

has  never  attempted  to  restore.  There  it  stands 
just  as  the  alhes  left  it  in  1860,  even  to  the  very- 
names  scrawled  by  Tommy  Atkins  and  the  French 
"  Piou-Pions "  on  its  smoke-blackened  walls  and 
terraces,  and  embellished  here  and  there  with 
verses,  the  work  of  some  French  or  English  canteen 
poet,  containing  language  more  forcible  than  polite 
as  to  the  ways  and  customs  of  John  Chinaman. 
To  say  nothing  of  the  enormous  value  of  the 
objets-d'art  and  furniture,  over  32,000/.  in  solid 
ingots  of  gold  were  found  at  the  looting  of  the 
Palace,  and  a  quantity  of  valuable  china  and  porce- 
lain cloisonne  wantonly  destroyed  and  left  on  the 
spot  by  the  troo])S.  The  Emperor  in  those  days 
was  a  liberal  and  merry  monarch.  The  Summer 
Palace  was  before  the  war  more  like  a  miniature 
Compiegne  than  anything  else,  with  its  theatricals, 
hunting-parties,  concerts,  and  revelry  of  other  and 
less  sober  kinds,  in  which  the  Emperor  himself  used 
freely  to  join  ;  a  very  different  existence  to  that  led 
by  his  harassed  and  melancholy  descendant  of  the 
present  day. 

The  now  reigning  sovereign,  "  Kwang-Su,"  is 
eighteen  years  of  age,  and  by  the  time  these  pages 
are  in  print  will  have  taken  unto  himself  a  wife, 
or  rather  one  will  have  been  taken  for  him  by  his 


PEKIN.  89 

aimt  the  Queen  Regent  who,  though  lier  nepliew 
has  come  to  years  of  discretion,  has  even  now  a  good 
deal  more  to  do  with  the  management  of  affairs 
than  the  Emperor.  She  is  an  arbitrary,  ambitious 
woman,  and,  rumour  has  it,  knows  considerably  more 
about  the  death  of  the  late  Emperor  than  she  cares 
to  own.  "  Kwang-Su,"  cannot,  like  the  Pope,  be 
said  to  lead  a  liappy  life.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is 
literally  not  liis  own.  Everything  must  be  done  by 
rule  and  under  supervision  of  the  court  officials,  even 
to  eating  and  sleeping.  The  poor  boy  gets  little  of 
tbe  latter  luxury,  as  frequent  cabinet  councils  are 
held  at  four  in  the  morning,  the  Chinese  ministers 
averring  that  the  head  is  clearer  at  that  hour  of 
tbe  day  than  at  any  other.  I  hardly  think  this 
plan  would  always  succeed  in  Europe. 

One  can  scarcely  wonder  that  "Kwang-Su"  is 
ill-tempered,  morose,  and  subject  to  fits  of  passion, 
during  which  he  defies  his  aunt,  destroys  every- 
thing within  his  reach,  and  declares  he  will  not 
be  Emperor,  but  will  escape  and  go  and  work  in 
the  fields,  anything  rather  than  be  shut  up  like  a 
dog  in  the  Forbidden  City.  And  truly  it  must  be 
a  wretched  existence.  Every  day  is  planned  out 
beforehand.  Not  a  detail  is  omitted,  even  to  the  very 
clothes  he  wears.     It  must  be  more  than  annoying 


00  FROM    J'EKIN    TO    CALAIS    LV    LAND. 

to  be  given,  say  a  mutton  chop,  when  one 
particularly  wants  a  beefsteak,  champagne  when 
you  know  it  disagrees  with  you,  and  you  much  prefer 
claret,  or  a  thin  suit  of  clothes  when  you  feel  cold  and 
require  a  thick  one.  The  Emperor's  studies  take  up 
about  nine  hours  of  the  day.  His  great  joke  when 
we  were  atPekin,  was  to  beg  his  tutors,  the  constant 
relays  of  whom  annoyed  him  to  desperation,  to  let 
him  look  at  their  watches.  No  sooner  were  they 
handed  to  him,  than  they  were  violently  dashed 
on  the  ground  and  stamped  upon.  By  this  means, 
Kwang-Su  argued,  they  would  not  know  what 
time  to  come  another  day.  Since  his  Majesty's  new 
"  game,"  however,  most  of  the  professors  sent  to 
Shanghai  for  Waterbury  watches.  Gold  and  silver 
ones  became  expensive. 

Riding  or  walking,  hunting  in  the  green  fields 
and  shady  forests,  or  fishing  in  the  blue  willow- 
fringed  lakes  of  the  Forbidden  City,  although 
as  far  removed  from  the  turmoil  and  foul 
smells  of  Pekiu  as  the  desert  of  Gobi  itself, 
the  Emperor  is  never  alone.  There  is  always  a 
retinue  followins;  him  to  tell  him  what  to  do  and 
when  to  do  it :  to  remind  him,  for  instance,  when  at 
four  o'clock  he  is  enjoying  his  favourite  pastime 
of  fishing,  and   has    forgotten   for    a   brief   period 


PEKIN.  91 

tlie  carking  cares  of  monarchy,  that  at  4.15  he 
must  abandon  the  pursuit  for  a  deer-hunt,  or  a  walk 
(always  accompanied  by  a  suite),  in  a  specified  part 
of  the  ^rounds  of  the  citv.  The  latter  must  be  a 
curious  place,  for  the  eye  of  the  white  barbarian  is 
never  allowed  to  look  within  its  walls,  save  when,  at 
very  rare  intervals,  the  European  ministers  are  ad- 
mitted to  audience  in  a  particular  part  of  the  palace. 

It  was  in  1873  that  the  Grreat  Audience  question 
was  finally  settled  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  the 
European  powers,  and  their  representatives  pre- 
sented to  the  Emperor  "  Tung  Che  "  in  the  European 
manner.  It  had  beea  argued  ever  since  the  mission 
of  Lord  Amherst  in  181-1,  and  unsuccessfully.  On 
that  occasion  the  envoy  returned  without  seeing  the 
Emperor,  the  latter  insisting  that  he  could  only  do  so 
on  condition  that  he  prostrated  himself,  but  this,  as 
the  king  of  England's  representative.  Lord  Amherst 
declined  to  do,  and  returned  to  England. 

Even  at  the  present  time  audiences  are  extremely 
rare,  and  only  occur,  if  at  all,  on  the  most 
important  occasions.  Even  the  Duke  of  Edin- 
burgh, when  he  visited  Pekin  in  1869,  was  refused 
one.  The  Chinese  ministers  themselves  are  not 
allowed  to  approach  the  imperial  presence  nearer 
than  a  distance  of  about    sixty  or  seventy  yards. 


92        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

The  Emperor  sits  at  the  end  of  a  long,  narrow, 
funnel-like  passage,  wliile  his  ministers  prostrate 
themselves  in  a  small  apartment  at  the  end  of  it. 
The  Empress  Regent  is  still  more  unapproach- 
able, for  when  she  holds  a  reception,  it  is  from 
behind  a  lars^e  screen.  On  one  occasion  she 
became  so  excited  during  an  argument,  that 
her  head  appeared  over  the  top,  and  the  ministers 
were  able  to  gaze  (if  for  an  instant  only)  on  the 
sacred  features.  The  Emperor  is  the  sole  male 
inmate  of  the  Forbidden  City,  a  gigantic  harem,  be- 
side which  even  the  seraglios  of  Stamboul  pale  into 
insignificance,  for  the  moon's  cousin  is  surrounded 
within  his  golden  tiled  walls  by  a  population  of  no 
less  than  three  thousand  women  and  eunuchs. 

Kwang-Su  has  very  little  notion  of  what  his 
capital  is  like.  When  he  is  taken  for  a  drive,  it 
means  weeks  of  careful  preparation,  the  sums  of 
money  devoted  to  patching  up  the  streets  through 
which  he  passes  are  fabulous.  Were  one  half  of 
the  millions  which  are  supposed  to  be  expended  on 
the  keeping  in  order  of  the  city  honestly  laid  out, 
Pekin  would  be  a  very  different  place  to  what  it  is. 
But  so  long  as  the  filching  and  robbery  carried  on 
by  the  mandarins  and  others  in  office  continue,  the 
Cliinese  capital  must  always  remain  the  dirty  dust- 


PEKIN.  •  93 

heap  it  now  is.  A  case  in  point  came  under  my 
notice  while  in  Pekin,  and  is  one  illustration  of  tlie 
enormous  sums  that  yearly  find  their  way  into  the 
pockets  of  the  mandarins.  A  drain  had  to  be  built 
from  the  French  Embassy  to  the  Imperial  canal,  a 
distance  of  about  three  hundred  yards.  For  this 
the  Government  was  charged  twenty-three  thou- 
sand taels,  the  European  contractor  being  paid 
three  thousand  five  hundred  taels.  The  mandarins 
pocketed  the  balance ! 

When  Kwang  Su  takes  an  airing  all  European  resi- 
dents are  warned  by  their  ministers  to  remain  within 
doors,  or  at  any  rate  away  from  that  part  of  the  city 
through  which  the  Emperor  is  to  pass,  and  the  most 
stringent  precautions  are  taken  that  no  man,  European 
or  native,  may  look  upon  the  features  of  the  sovereign. 
The  doors  and  windows  of  the  houses  are  closed, 
and  rich  silks  and  tapestries  hung  from  their 
walls,  the  streets  are  carefully  swept  and  watered, 
every  hole  carefully  filled  up,  every  scrap  of  litter  or 
offal  carried  away  far  from  where,  at  a  stated  hour, 
and  punctual  to  the  moment,  the  royal  train  rolls 
slowly  along  through  the  empty,  deserted  streets. 
The  Emperor  must,  therefore,  have  very  different 
ideas  of  Pekin  from  the  ordinary  run  of  mankind. 
Save  for  the  dust,  which  is  of  course  unavoidable,  it 


94         FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

must  seem  a  fair  place  enough  to  Kwang-Su.  Could 
he  but  see  it  as  we  did,  I  doubt  if  he  would  ever 
again  wish  to  leave  the  palaces  and  gardens,  the 
deer-parks  and  lakes  of  his  beautiful  prison. 

The  preliminaries  for  Kwang-Su's  nuptials  were 
being  carried  out  when  we  were  at  Pekin.  They  are 
curious  enough.  The  bridegroom  is,  or  ought  to 
be,  the  chief  party  concerned  in  the  choosing  of  a 
wife ;  not  so  the  wretched  Kwang-Su.  The  sharer  of 
his  joys  and  sorrows  is  chosen  by  the  Empress  Regent 
out  of  some  three  hundred  or  four  hundred  girls 
(daughters  of  mandarins  and  others  of  high  position), 
sent  up  to  Pekin  from  all  parts  of  China  for  the  pur- 
pose. Nor  is  the  Emperor  allowed  to  see  his  fiancee's 
face  even  for  a  moment  till  the  evening  of  the  wedding 
day.  Though  the  Emperor  is  allowed  but  one  actual 
wife,  he  can  make  his  choice  and  select  as  few  or 
many  concubines  as  he  pleases,  four  hundred  or  five 
hundred  of  the  latter  being  sent  to  the  capital  on  the 
occasion  of  an  Imperial  marriage.  The  majority  of 
them  are  women  of  low  birth,  though  some  of  the 
higher  officials  who  wish  to  curry  favour  at  court 
also  occasionally  send  their  daughters. 

It  seems  scarcely  probable  that  China  will  be- 
come civilized  for  many,  many  years  to  come,  as  long 


TEKIX.  95 

as  the  Emperor  and  bis  ministers  continue  to  set 
their  faces  against  improvement  of  any  kind,  espe- 
cially if  it  be  what  they  regard  as  an  innovation  of 
the  "  foreign  devils."  For  instance :  a  company 
was  formed  a  few  years  since  to  construct  a  railway 
from  Tientsin  to  the  capital — a  line  which  would 
have  enormously  improved  and  benefited  the  trade 
of  the  latter,  but  the  Government  would  not  hear  of 
its  construction.  Permission  was,  however,  granted 
to  carry  a  line  from  Shanghai  to  Woosung  on  the 
Yantzekiang  river  in  1877,  an  enterprise  which 
under  European  management,  succeeded  admirably 
till  when  one  fine  day,  not  a  year  after  its  comple- 
tion, an  order  came  down  from  Pekin  for  its  imme- 
diate removal — and  this  command  the  unfortunate 
share-holders  were  of  course  compelled  to  comply 
with. 

The  Emperor's  father  was  lately  induced  to  make 
a  trip  to  Tientsin  at  the  invitation  of  the  European 
merchants  living  there.  It  was  hoped  that  seeing 
something  of  the  outside  world  might  open  his  eyes 
to  the  foolish  and  lamentable  practices  of  the 
Imperial  Court.  Every  honour  was  shown  him — a 
salute  fired  from  the  French  and  English  gunboats. 
Balls,  parties,    receptions,    dinners    were    given — 


90  FROM    rEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

everything  in  short,  that  money  could  buy  was  pro- 
cured to  fete  him,  and  it  was  confidently  hoped,  so 
agreeable  and  pleasant  did  he  make  himself,  that  his 
week's  visit  would  send  him  back  toPekin  a  wiser  man 
— also  that  some  of  this  wisdom  would  be  imparted 
to  his  son  the  Emperor.  But  it  was  all  in  vain.  All 
he  did  on  his  return  to  the  capital  was  to  set  to  work 
and  write  a  number  of  satirical  poems  in  Chinese, 
descriptive  of  his  trip,  and  anything  but  compli- 
mentary to  his  hosts,  the  White  Barbarians.  These 
poems  were  published,  and  had  an  enormous  sale 
in  Pekin. 

The  long  sunny  days  dragged  wearily  by.  A 
week,  a  fortnight  elapsed,  and  still  no  boy.  Our 
passports  for  China  and  Mongolia  were  in  order, 
mules  and  litters  procured  for  the  journey  to  the 
Great  Wall — everything  in  readiness  for  a  start, 
which,  however,  Sir  John  W.  would  not  hear  of  our 
making  without  an  interpreter.  It  was  tedious 
work  waiting.  We  seldom  left  the  hotel  after  the 
first  week,  except  to  dine  at  the  Embassy,  or  spend 
the  afternoon  in  its  cool,  shady  grounds,  where 
one  could  while  away  the  weary  hours  with  books 
and  papers  from  the  well- stocked  library.  We 
did    not    often  dine   out,  but   when   we    did,    pre- 


PEKIN.  97 

ferred  ploughing  through  the  dust  or  mire,  on 
foot,  to  going  in  a  Pekin  cab,  a  circumstance  our 
neighbours  at  dinner  ought  to  have  been  grateful 
for,  for  these  vehicles  are  crawling  with  vermin. 
It  was  necessary  to  take  lamps  on  these  occa- 
sions, for  the  less  frequented  streets  of  the 
city  are  unlit,  and  to  be  well  armed  with  thick 
sticks  for  protection  against  the  dogs,  whose  name 
is  legion,  and  who  prowl  about  the  city  at  night 
in  large  numbers  in  search  of  food.  Although 
of  great  size,  they  are  mangy,  wi^etched-looking 
creatures.  In  gangs  they  are  dangerous,  and 
frequently  attack  solitary  and  unarmed  wayfarers ; 
but,  like  the  Turks  at  Constantinople,  the  Pekinese 
do  not  harm  them,  for  they  are  capital  scavengers, 
though  the  din  they  make  at  night  is  very  trying 
to  a  nervous  constitution,  and  sleep  in  Pekin  for 
the  first  two  or  three  nights  is  an  impossibility. 

I  have  said  much  against  Pekin  in  this  chapter, 
enough,  perhaps,  to  deter  the  reader  from  ever  wish- 
ing to  pay  it  a  visit.  I  must  at  the  same  time  give 
it  its  due,  for  it  is  undoubtedly  exempt  from  many 
of  the  pests  and  annoyances  of  other  Eastern  cities. 
There  are  no  mosquitoes  to  speak  of,  nor  sand-Hies, 
nor  does  that  most  irritating    plague    of    all,  the 

VOL.    I.  H 


98        FROM  PBKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAI^D. 

common  fly,  torment  you  day  and  night  as  it  does  in 
other  hot  climates.  Indeed,  it  is  not,  on  the  whole, 
such  a  bad  residence  for  Europeans  as  many  places 
I  could  name  in  India  and  other  parts  of  the  East. 
The  life  is,  of  course,  frightfully  monotonous  during 
the  summer  months,  when  those  connected  with  the 
Legations  who  can  spare  the  time  betake  themselves 
to  the  hills,  some  fifteen  miles  distant,  where  some 
old  temples  have  been  fitted  up  to  form  rough  though 
comfortable  summer  retreats  for  those  who  are 
compelled  to  inhabit  the  dusty,  stench-ridden 
capital  in  the  hot  season. 

The  European  population  of  Pekin  is,  as  I  have 
said,  a  very  small  one,  probably  not  more  than  sixty 
or  seventy  in  all.  It  consists  exclusively  of  the 
various  Legations,  Missionary  Houses  and  College. 
There  is  but  one  mercantile  establishment :  the 
agency  of  the  Hong  Kong  and  Shanghai  Bank. 

In  winter  there  are  many  worse  places  in  the 
world  than  this.  It  is  only  then,  indeed,  that  the 
European  community  ever  make  any  effort  to  rouse 
themselves.  Sleighing  and  skating-parties,  lawn 
tennis,  by  day — and  theatricals,  dances,  and  dinner- 
parties by  night,  are  the  order  of  the  day. 

Pekin    is    fairly   healthy,    even   in   summer,  for 


PEKIN.  99 

Europeans,  except  for  those  inclined  to  be  nervous. 
In  such  cases  the  extremely  rarified  atmosphere  often 
precludes  sleep  and  induces  insomnia  and  other 
nervous  diseases.  The  sun,  too,  is  more  dangerous 
here  than  in  any  place  (including  Borneo)  that  I 
have  ever  visited  in  the  East.  It  knocks  you  over 
in  a  second,  and  deaths  from  sunstroke,  even  among 
the  natives,  are  frequent. 

Living  in  Pekin  though  dear  is  excellent,  and 
our  host  gave  us  little  dinners  that  would  not 
have  disgraced  a  Paris  restaurant.  Although  not 
manufactured,  that  greatest  luxury  of  the  East,  ice, 
is  cheap  and  abundant.  It  is  cut  (out  of  the  canals) 
in  winter  in  huge  blocks  and  stored  in  early  spring 
in  large  caves  just  outside  the  city  walls.  Fresh 
fruit  is  also  stored  and  preserved  in  the  same 
manner,  and  I  have  eaten  a  bunch  of  grapes  in  the 
month  of  July  that  had  been  stored  the  previous 
October  as  fresh  as  if  they  had  just  been  cut  from 
the  vine. 

We  resolved,  after  a  weary  fortnight  of  waiting,  to 
take  matters  more  philosophically.  It  was  useless 
chafing  and  worrying,  either  the  boy  would  come  or 
he  wouldn't.  "  Tout  vient  a  point  a  celui  qui '  sait ' 
attendre,"  was  a  proverb  we  were  always  quoting 

H   2 


100  FROM    PEKIX   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

with  an  assumed  calmness  we  were  far  from  feeling. 
It  was  no  great  hardship  waiting  with  such  com- 
fortable quarters,  we  argued,  but  the  time,  that 
seemed  to  crawl  unless  our  thoughts  turned  to 
Siberia,  when  it  flew  with  the  speed  of  lightning, 
was  what  daily  and  nightly  harassed  and  worried 
us.  Our  host  and  his  pretty  wife,  however, 
did  all  they  could  to  make  us  comfortable,  and 
thoroughly  succeeded.  Sitting  out  after  dinner 
with  a  cigar  in  the  cool  moonlit  courtyard,  redolent 
of  verbena  and  mignonette,  staring  up  at  the  patch 
of  starry  heaven  overhead,  and  hstening  to  the 
distant  and  soothing  tinkle  of  madame's  piano,  things 
would  have  seemed  pleasant  enough  had  we  not 
known  that  every  day,  every  hour  was  of  the 
utmost  importance.  The  Russian  minister's  words, 
too,  would  keep  cropping  up,  spoiling  one's  diges- 
tion and  upsetting  patience  and  equanimity :  "  Get 
off  as  soon  as  you  can ;  Siberia  in  early  autumn  is  a 
hell  upon  earth."  Alas  !  we  now  began  to  realize 
that  another  mouth  of  delay  would  land  us  there 
at  this  very  season. 

We  spent  Jubilee  Day  at  Pekin.  A  full-dress 
reception  was  held  at  the  British  Embassy  in  the 
afternoon,  while  at  night  the  gardens   were  illu- 


PEKIN.  101 

minated  with  hundreds  of  coloured  lamps,  the 
two  entrance  pavilions  turned  into  reception- 
rooms,  and  a  ball  given  to  the  European  com- 
munity. It  was  hard  to  realize  that  one  was  really 
in  this  hidden  corner  of  the  earth.  With  so 
many  smart  go\\ns  and  pretty  faces  around,  one 
might  have  been  in  a  London  or  Paris  ball-room, 
and  though  the  number  was  very  limited,  the  even- 
ing was  none  the  less  agreeable  for  that,  for  Pekin 
has,  or  had  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  more  than  its 
fair  share  of  female  beauty  when  compared  with 
Shanghai  or  Hong  Kong. 

The  dancing  wound  up  with  a  display  of 
fireworks  (Pekin  made)  in  the  grounds,  and  though 
of  native  manufacture  the  most  loyal  English  subject 
could  not  have  found  fault  with  the  excellent 
portrait  of  her  Majesty  (in  fireworks)  that  drew  forth 
enthusiastic  applause  from  the  crowd  of  natives  at  the 
gates  and  wound  up  the  proceedings.  Though  day 
was  dawning,  dancing  was  still  in  full  swing  when 
we  left  the  Embassy  and  took  leave  of  our  kind 
host  and  charming  hostess,  without  whose  kindly 
aid  and  hospitality  we  should  indeed  have  felt  lost 
those  long  weary  days  of  delay  and  enmti  in  the 
dusty  capital. 


102  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Though  advised  not  to  attempt  it,  we  resolved 
to  ride  as  much  as  possible  across  the  Gobi  Desert. 
We  had  not  yet  seen  a   camel  cart,  but  had  heard 
quite  enough  of  its  miseries  to  determine  us  never 
to  occupy  it  longer  at  a  time  than   was   absolutely 
necessary.     So  having  taken  the  trouble  to  bring 
saddles  out  with  us,  we  resolved  to  chance  the  loss 
of   the   ponies,   and    managed   to   get  two    strong 
wiry-looking  Mongolian  ones,  about  fourteen  Lands 
high,  for  81.  English  apiece.     We  tried  many  before 
pitching  on  the  right  sort.     Lancaster's  first  attempt 
at  a  purchase  was  not  a  lucky  one.     The  brute  lay  on 
its  side   the  moment  he  mounted,   and  resolutely 
refused  to  move,  much  to  the  delight  of  the  crowd 
who  had  assembled  to  see  what  the  "  Yang  Qweitze  " 
were  about.   However,  after  many  and  varied  experi- 
ences lie  managed  to  pick  up  a  smart -looking  bay 
pony  only  four  years  old.     Mine  was  considerably 
older,  but  they  were  both  sturdy,  plucky  little  beasts; 
looked  up   to   any  amount  of  fatigue — and  as  we 
afterwards    found   by   no   means   belied   their   ap- 
pearance. 

Our  host  rushed  in  one  bright  sunny  morning 
with  a  beaming  countenance,  before  we  were  out  of 
bed.     **  Courage,  messieurs,  your  boy  has  arrived," 


PEKIN.  103 

at  the  same  time  handing  me  a  blue  envelope 
containing  a  note  from  the  Embassy.  "  Boy  will 
arrive  to-day  from  Tientsin."  This  was  wel- 
come news  indeed,  and  I  turned  round  for 
another  snooze  with  a  blessed  feeling  of  relief  and 
gratitude.  All  would  now  be  well.  To-morrow 
morning  would  see  us  en  route  for  the  Great  "Wall. 
We  had  saved,  by  the  skin  of  our  teeth,  detention 
in  Siberia.  With  any  luck  November  would  see  us 
in  Moscow. 

At  5.30  *'  the  boy "  arrived ;  a  tall,  forbidding- 
looking  Chinaman,  with  a  sullen,  hang-dog  expres- 
sion that  inspired  but  little  confidence.  I  saw  in  five 
minutes  the  kind  of  gentleman  we  had  to  deal  with. 
Sulky,  obstinate,  and  as  sly  as  a  fox,  with  a  shifty, 
restless  eye  that  could  not  look  you  in  the  face 
for  two  seconds  together. 

"  Well,  so  you've  come  at  last !  What  has  kept 
you  so  long  at  Tientsin  ?  " 

"  Jubilee  !  " 

The  bare  idea  of  this  human  scarecrow  assisting 
at  a  festival  of  any  sort  was  too  funny.  But  I  knew 
the  man  lied. 

"*  Will  you  come  with  us  to  Kiakhta  ?  " 

"  All  depend  what  get.     No  can  go  for  less  than 


104  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

$300.     If   no    take   me,   master   get   no  one.     All 
afraid  go  desert.     Afraid  Mongol  man." 

The  insolent,  swaggering  tone  of  the  man  annoyed, 
nearly  as  much  as  the  exorbitant  price  he  asked 
surprised,  me.  I  knew  it  was  out  of  all  reason. 
But  the  wretch  was  well  aware  of  our  helpless 
position,  and  all  my  hopes  of  a  speedy  start  for  the 
desert  sank  below  zero.  To  give  the  price  he  named 
would  have  been  not  only  absurd  but  fatal.  We 
should  have  been  mercilessly  swindled  at  every 
village  we  came  to,  if  not  attacked  by  robbers, 
when  the  news  of  our  liberality  and  wealth  became 
known,  as  things  do  in  China  in  an  incredibly 
short  space  of  time.  We  had  besides  this  reason, 
a  far  better  one  :  we  could  not  afford  it. 

"  It  is  for  you  to  accept  an  offer,  not  for  you  to 
make  one,"  I  replied,  placing  $6  on  the  table.  "  Now 
listen.  Here  are  $6  for  your  fare  back  to  Tientsin 
if  you  do  not  come  to  my  terms ;  and  you  must 
decide  at  once.  I  will  give  you  exactly  $120,  and 
not  one  cash  more,  to  accompany  us  to  Kiakhta 
and  find  your  own  way  back.  Accept  or  refuse ; 
and  if  the  latter,  make  yourself  scarce,  for  I  shall 
not  change  my  mind." 

My  sulky  friend's  only  reply  was  to  carelessly 


TEKIN.  ]  05 

take  up  the  money,  pocket  it,  and  without  another 
word  calmly  leave  the  room.  I  watched  him  slink 
slowly  down  the  little  courtyard  and  out  of  the 
gate,  half  hoping  he  would  think  better  of  it  ;  but 
no  !  He  never  even  once  looked  behind  him,  and 
as  I  watched  his  tall,  gaunt  form  vanish  slowly 
in  the  dusk,  I  felt  that  now,  indeed,  our  last 
hope  was  gone,  and  retiring  to  my  room,  threw 
myself  on  the  bed  in  despair,  and  wondered  what 
on  earth  we  were  going  to  do  next. 

To  reach  Siberia  by  way  of  the  Gobi  Desert  was 
obviously  impossible,  for,  judging  by  past  expe- 
rience, we  could  not  reasonably  expect  to  find 
another  English-speaking  boy,  under  another  month 
or  so.  It  would  then  be  too  late  to  attempt  the 
journey  vid  Mongolia,  that  is,  without  risking  im- 
prisonment of  a  couple  of  months  in  some  lonely 
Siberian  village — hardly  a  pleasant  prospect,  judging 
from  all  we  had  heard  of  that  melancholy  country. 

There  was  now  but  one  course  to  pursue — to 
return  to  Tientsin,  and  embark  thence  on  the  first 
vessel  for  Nicolaiefsk  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amour 
River,  thus  altogether  avoiding  the  Mongolian 
desert,  and  gaining  Irkoutsk  by  way  of  Khabarofka, 
Stratensk,  and  Chita,  instead  of  Urga  and  Kiakhta. 


106  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

It  was  a  great  disappointment.  We  had  looked 
forward  to  the  desert  journey  far  more  than  to  any 
other  part  of  the  voyage.  There  would  have 
been  some  novelty  and  excitement  in  crossing 
the  wild  desolate  plains  lying  between  the  Great 
Wall  of  China  and  Siberia,  but  none  whatever  iu 
the  cut-and-dried  route  from  Nicolaiefsk,  from 
which  port  a  comfortable  and  well-found  steamer 
takes  the  traveller  a  distance  of  about  fifteen 
hundred  miles  up  the  Amour  river  to  Stratensk. 
From  here  he  proceeds  by  tarantass  or  sleigh 
(according  to  season)  to  Verchui  Udinsk  and 
across  Lake  Baikal  (by  steamer  if  in  summer)  to 
Irkoutsk,  which  city  is  distant  about  one  thousand 
odd  versts  from  Stratensk.  There  is  but  one 
main  post-road  across  Siberia  from  Irkoutsk 
to  Tomsk.  But  the  come  down  fi-om  a  journey 
in  a  camel  caravan  across  the  great  Gobi  Desert 
to  an  ordinary  steamer  and  posting  carriage 
along  a  dull,  uninteresting  river  and  monotonous 
road  with  a  post-house  every  twenty  versts,^  was 
a  severe  blow  to  one's  feelings  and  anticipa- 
tions. 

Dinner   that  night  was    a   sad   meal ;   even   the 

^  A  verst  is  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile. 


PEKIN.  107 

champagne,  wbicli  our  host  insisted  upon  pro- 
ducing, failed  to  enliven  it.  Our  party  was  in- 
creased by  three  Russians  from  Shanghai,  who  were 
on  their  way  to  Manchuria  for  a  month's  shooting. 
One  of  them  had  done  the  Amour  journey,  and 
devoutly  hoped  he  might  never  have  to  do  it  again. 
For  monotony  and  lack  of  interest  that  great  river 
was  (according  to  his  account)  unrivalled.  But 
we  had  made  up  our  minds,  and  it  must  be  done. 
Fortunately  enough,  a  vessel  would  be  leaving 
Tientsin  for  ISTicolaiefsk  in  four  or  five  days'  time, 
which  would  give  us  plenty  of  time  to  retrace 
our  steps  to  Tientsin  and  embark.  To  bemoan 
one's  fate  under  such  circumstances  is  worse  than 
useless,  and  we  retired  to  rest  resigned,  if  not 
cheerful.  The  Gobi  was  impossible,  "  Vogue  pour 
*r  amour'! " 

But  the  proverb  that  it  is  ever  "  darkest  before 
dawn,"  was  exemplified  next  morning  when,  about 
ten  o'clock,  and  on  the  eve  of  departure  for 
Tientsin,  the  welcome  news  was  brought  us  that 
a  boy  had  been  found  !  and  by  whom  but  our  good 
angel,  M.  Tallien,  who,  moved  to  compassion 
by  our  woe-begone  faces  the  previous  evening, 
had  himself  searched  Pekin  high  and  low,  and  run 


108  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  article  to  earth  within  the  very  walls  of  the 
Kussian  Embassy.  No  ordinary  "boy"  was  this 
either,  but  an  excellent  cook,  speaking  English, 
Russian,  and  Mongolian  fluently,  and  who,  best 
of  all,  was  willing  to  go  to  Kiakhta  and  find  his 
own  way  back  again  for  $100  all  found.  I 
could  have  .fallen  into  Tallien's  arms  and  em- 
braced him.  Perhaps,  being  a  Frenchman,  he 
would  have  taken  such  a  proceeding  as  a  matter  of 
course. 

Our  new  acquisition,  Jee  Boo  by  name,  a  nice, 
quiet-looking   fellow  of    about  30,  had  been  cook 

and   servant  to  Prince ,  one  of   the  Russian 

attaches,  for  some  time.  Under  ordinary  circum- 
stances we  should  perhaps  have  asked  for  his 
character,  but  dreading  another  delay  we  deter- 
mined to  chance  it,  take  him  as  he  was,  and  ask 
no  questions.  We  were  armed  and  he  was  not, 
which  is  always  satisfactory  in  case  of  a  disagree- 
ment. He  was,  at  any  rate,  a  very  different  stamp 
of  man  to  our  Tientsin  friend,  who,  it  now  appeared, 
had  taken  the  trouble  to  find  him  out  and  advise 
him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  us,  for  if  he  did 
he  would  never  get  paid.  We  should  be  sure  to 
repudiate  our  debt  on  arrival  at  Kiakhta  and  leave 


PEKIN.  109 

liirn  stranded  in  a  foreign  land  without  friends  or 
money.  That  was  why  he  had  himself  refused  to 
entertain  our  offer,  &c.,  &c. 

"We  soon  convinced  Jee  Boo,  however,  of  the 
honesty  of  our  intentions  by  making  M.  Tallien  his 
banker  for  the  amount  of  $80,  the  remaining  $20 
to  be  paid  him  on  arrival  at  Kiakhta,  with  an 
additional  §20  if  he  behaved  himself.  Having 
thus  arranged  things  to  everybody's  satisfaction, 
we  gave  Jee  Boo  leave  to  absent  himself  for  the 
day,  and  (not  without  misgivings  of  another 
disappointment)  made  preparations  for  a  start  at 
six  the  followino^  morning. 

The  same  afternoon,  while  we  were  busily  engaged 
fixing  our  heavy  baggage  to  the  mule  packs,  two 
of  the  most  extraordinary  beings  I  ever  beheld 
rode  up  to  the  hotel  gate.  Both  might  have  been 
any  age  from  nineteen  to  ninety,  and  were  dressed 
in  suits  of  loud  tartan  check  (not  unlike  that 
worn  by  Jack  Spraggon  in  that  best  of  sporting 
novels  "Soapy  Sponge"),  enormous  pith  sun-hats 
with  long,  flowing  puggarees  and  green  spectacles. 
We  put  them  down  at  a  glance  for  what  they 
unmistakably  were,  "globe-trotters,"  sent  out  by 
their  mammas  (or   mamma,  for  they  were  like  as 


110  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

two  peas),  to  see  the  world  and  improve  their 
mind  (if  they  had  any).  How  they  had  drifted 
to  Pekin,  goodness  only  knows.  It  is  not  a  city 
much  affected  by  the  genus.  Tlie  comforts  are  not 
up  to  their  standard. 

They  had  ridden  from  Tungchow  under  a  burn- 
ing sun  and  at  full  gallop,  and  their  weedy, 
miserable-looking  ponies  looked  ready  to  drop. 
The  latter  evidently  only  yearned  (like  the  Irish- 
man's horse),  for  a  wall  to  lean  up  against  and 
think,  and  looked  almost  as  disconsolate  as  their 
riders,  which  is  saying  a  good  deal. 

They  stood  for  some  time  without  making  a 
remark.  Then,  dismounting  slowly  and  cautiously, 
one  of  them  approached  Tallien,  who  was  assisting 
us  with  the  packs,  and  in  a  mild  and  quavering 
voice  inquired  if  he  was  manager  of  the  hotel ; 
and  on  receiving  a  reply  in  the  affirmative,  if 
he  and  his  friend  could  have  a  bedroom,  and 
whether  there  were  any  objects  of  interest  to  be 
seen  in  the  neighbourhood  ? 

"The  Great  Wall  of  China,  messieurs,"  repHed 
Tallien  ;  "  but  you'll  find  it  rather  a  long  ride  in  one 
day." 

"  Oh,  never  mind  !  we  must  go  and  see  it.     Can 


'.'l!       '  ' 


'ft; 


PEKIN.  ill 

you  get  us  a  guide  at  once  ?  We  liave  to  be  in 
Tientsin  again  the  day  after  to-morrow,  to  sail  for 
Japan." 

It  was  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  they 
were  persuaded  to  defer  their  visit  to  "  the  Great 
Wall"  till  next  day. 

At  dinner  that  evening,  they  were  great  on  the 
subject  of  their  travels ;  had  been,  they  informed  us, 
to  Gibraltar,  Malta,  Port  Said,  Cairo,  Suez,  Aden, 
Colombo,  Singapore,  and  Shanghai,  giving  us  their 
impressions  and  ideas  of  each  port,  and  the  customs 
of  its  inhabitants,  in  a  manner  -  which,  in  more 
ways  than  one,  was  highly  entertaining.  They 
were  now  going  to  see  the  "  Great  Wall  of 
China,"  because  their  mamma  had  written  to  say 
that  the  Times  said  there  was  none,  and  she  was 
sure  there  was,  because  her  grandfather  (who  was 
a  sailor)  had  told  her  so,  and  he  had  seen  it. 
Then  they  were  going  to  Japan,  San  Francisco, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  New  York,  then  to  Liverpool 
and  then  London  ;  "  and  I  don't  think,"  said  the 
elder  of  the  two  sadly  and  wearily,  "  we  shall  ever 
care  to  go  abroad  again !  " 

Judging  from  the  ideas  this  youth  formed  of  the 
countries  he   visited,   one  could  not  help  thinking 


112  FROM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

he  would  not  lose  very  much  by  this  determina- 
tion. 

They  were  up  and  away  next  morning  long 
before  we  were  stirring,  on  the  same  wretched 
animals  that  had  brought  them  from  Tungchow, 
and  with  a  guide  of  their  own  finding,  a  rascally 
Pekinese,  who  probably  made  a  good  thing  out  of 
them.  Where  the  scamp  took  them  remains  a 
mystery.  I  have  since  heard,  they  returned  the  next 
day  quite  proud  of  their  achievement,  remarking 
at  dinner  that  evening,  that  the  "  Wall  was  a  fine 
sight."  The  fact  that  it  is  a  long  five-days'  journey 
from  the  capital  never  occurred  to  them,  and  they 
left  Pekin  quite  satisfied,  having  probably  been 
shown  the  ramparts  of  some  suburban  town  or 
village.  I  have  often  wondered  since  if  they  wrote 
to  that  long-suffering  paper  the  Times. 

It  was  past  seven  o'clock,  and  the  sun  was  high 
in  the  heavens  before  we  had  completed  our  pre- 
parations, saddled  the  ponies,  and  packed  the 
luggage  and  provisions  into  the  litters.  Our 
party  consisted  of  but  three  mule-litters,  and 
our  two  ponies.  The  heavy  baggage  had  preceded 
us  the  day  before,  and  we  did  not  expect  to 
come  up   with  it  till  we  reached  Kalgan,  the  last 


PEKIN.  113 

Chinese  city  on  the  borders  of  Mongolia.  Two 
Chinese  muleteers  accompanied  us,  also  Jee  Boo,  who 
bustled  about  and  made  himself  generally  useful  in 
a  way  that  augured  well  for  the  future. 

A  final  cafe  cm  lait  and  "  chasse  "  with  our  host, 
who  was  almost  as  keen  about  the  expedition  as  we 
were  (indeed,  where  should  we  have  been,  had  it  not 
been  for  his  timely  aid  ?),  and  we  were  ready  to  start. 
Early  as  it  was,  madame  and  her  sister  were  at 
the  gate  to  bid  us  farewell  and  wish  us  a  prosperous 
journey.  One  could  not  help  thinking,  as  one 
looked  at  their  pretty  French  faces  and  neatly  clad 
figures,  how  long  it  might  be  ere  one  would  look 
upon  their  like  again ! 

A  few  moments  more  and  we  had  taken  leave  of 
our  friends,  and  were  riding  down  the  narrow 
dusty  street  for  the  last  time,  half  sorry  (so  perverse 
is  man)  to  leave  the  place  we  had  been  for  three 
long  weeks  moving  heaven  and  earth  to  get  away 
from.  The  feeling  of  regret  did  not  last  long,  how- 
ever, and  before  we  had  crossed  the  stone  bridge  over 
the  Imperial  canal  no  one  would  have  recognized  in 
us  the  despairing  wretches  of  two  days  ago.  We 
left  Pekin  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  by  the  Anting 
Gate,  and  for   the   following   three   hours    skirted 

VOL.  I.  i 


114  TROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

closely  along  the  sandy  plains  tliat  bound  the  city 
walls.  Here  we  passed  some  three  or  four  hundred 
camels,  a  caravan  inward  bound  from  the  desert, 
going  at  a  pace  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour. 
The  Tartars  in  charge  were  all  asleep,  but  the 
camels  seemed  to  know  their  way  ;  indeed  the  track 
here  is  pretty  clearly  laid  down,  being  in  the  direct 
route  to  and  from  Kalgan.  An  hour  later  we  had 
entered  a  fertile  plain  of  millet,  corn,  and  rye,  inter- 
spersed with  huge  fields  of  pasture,  and  bounded 
on  the  horizon  by  a  rugged,  precipitous  chain  of  hills, 
partly  covered  with  forest,  from  which  brightly 
coloured  temples  and  pagodas  stood  out  here  and 
there  in  bright  relief,  glittering  in  the  sunshine. 
All  was  life  and  animation  ;  our  very  ponies  seemed 
to  rise  in  spirits,  and  plunged  and  danced  about  under 
the  influence  of  the  keen  air  and  bright  sunshine,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  unusually  large  feeds  of  corn  they 
had  been  given  of  late. 

An  hour  later  we  stopped  to  look  back  across  the 
emerald  green  plain  to  where,  on  the  horizon,  a  thin 
brown  line,  faint  and  indistinct,  broke  the  bright 
blue  sky-line.  "We  were  looking  om*  last  on  the 
walls  of  Pekin  :  the  long  land  journey  across  Europe 
and  Asia  had  commenced  in  real  earnest. 


CHAPTER  III. 

PEKIN    TO    KALGAN. 

We  had  decided,  upon  leaving  Pekin,  to  spend  the 
greater  part  of  the  day  in  the  sedans.  The  very- 
name  of  this  vehicle  has  a  luxurious  sound,  and  we 
looked  forward  to  pleasant  hours  of  travel  at  any 
rate  as  far  as  the  Great  Wall  of  China.  But  man 
is  doomed  to  disappointment.  For  fatigue  and  dis- 
comfort, amounting  at  times  to  sheer  physical  pain, 
commend  me  to  a  Chinese  mule  litter,  which  is  simply 
a  kind  of  box  or  covered  chair,  hung  on  two  long  and 
slender  poles.  To  it  are  harnessed,  before  and 
behind,  two  mules  gaily  caparisoned  with  feathers, 
highly- coloured  trappings  and  bells.  The  latter, 
which  keep  up  a  loud  and  incessant  jingle,  are  sup- 
posed to  relieve  the  monotony  of  the  journey.  To 
the  Chinese  mind,  perhaps,  they  do.  The  motion, 
to  those  not  subject  to  sea-sickness,  is  not  disagree- 
able, nor  would  it  be  tiring,  had  not  the  occu- 
pant to  keep  constantly  in  the  same  position,  as 

I  2 


116  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

in  a  canoe  or  outrigger,  for  the  slightest  movement 
to  the  right  or  left  overturns  the  whole  concern. 
Also,  should  the  leading  mule  fall,  a  not  unfrequent 
occurrence,  the  passenger  is  almost  certain  to  get  a 
nasty  fall;  should  the  hind  one  make  a  false 
step,  he  finds  himself  helple-ss,  with  his  feet  in 
the  air  and  at  the  mercy  of  the  leader's  heels,  for 
the  front  and  sides  of  the  litter  are  open.  With 
these  trifling  exceptions,  the  mule  litters  have  no 
discomforts,  always  excepting  the  vermin  that  infest 
them. 

We  halted  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  at  a 
wayside  inn,  on  the  banks  of  a  clear  pebbly 
stream.  In  front  of  the  inn,  under  the  shade  of 
some  willow-trees,  were  some  twenty  or  thirty  men 
and  women,  seated  at  marble  tables,  drinking 
tea  and  a  kind  of  white  compound,  in  which 
floated  huge  lumps  of  ice,  out  of  pretty  transparent 
porcelain  cups.  Curiosity  prompted  me  to  taste  the 
latter,  which  I  found  simply  delicious,  and  not  un- 
like French  "  orgeat "  or  barley  water.  A  troop  of 
cavalry  passed  while  we  were  discussing  our  frugal 
meal,  a  little  way  apart  from  the  noisy,  chattering 
crowd,  who,  after  the  usual  inspection  of  our  clothes 
and  arms,  left  us  in  peace.     On  the  arrival  of  the 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  117 

soldiers,  tall,  swarthy  fellows,  clad  in  dark  blue 
uniform,  flat  round  hats,  with  streaming  peacock 
feathers,  and  armed  with  rusty  old  flintlocks,  we 
prepared  to  start  without  delay.  We  had  been 
warned  at  Pekin  and  Shanghai  against  the  Chinese 
military,  had  been  told  that  they  invariably  in- 
sulted and  sometimes  outraged  Europeans,  when 
out  of  the  protection  of  their  legations.  If  so, 
these  were  a  decided  exception  to  the  rule,  for  not 
only  would  they  not  hear  of  our  proceeding  on  our 
journey  till  we  had  "  chin-chind  "  with  their  oflQ.cer,  a 
cheery,  nice-looking  lad  of  eighteen  or  twenty,  but 
as  we  left,  all  shook  hands,  Chinese  fashion 
(clasping  the  hands  and  lifting  them  up  and  down 
in  front  of  the  breast),  and  gave  us  rendezvous  at 
Kalgan,  w^hither  they,  as  well  as  we,  were  bound. 

We  were  away  again  before  four  o'clock,  by  which 
time  the  heat  had  lessened  and  the  fierce  heat  of 
the  sun  somewhat  decreased  in  power.  A  ride  of 
half  an  hour  in  the  litters  had  convinced  us  that 
anything,  even  walking,  was  preferable  to  those 
cranky  conveyances  ;  though,  thanks  to  our  sturdy 
little  steeds,  we  were  never  driven  to  take  to  Shank's 
mare.  One  of  the  pleasantest  recollections  I  have 
retained  of  that  weary  journey  is  that  of  the  little 


118  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

beast  who  carried  me  so  pluckily  across  a  third  of 
Asia !  I  verily  believe,  had  it  been  a  question  of 
stamina  and  endurance,  and  not  of  time,  I  could 
have  ridden  him  to  Moscow  in  eight  months,  or 
even  less.  Good  as  "Karra"^  was  in  other  ways, 
he  was  not  what  is  called  a  pleasant  hack, 
having,  like  most  Mongolian  ponies,  but  two  paces  : 
a  walk  and  a  canter,  or  rather  gallop,  for  the  instant 
he  broke  into  a  canter  he  would  take  the  bit  in 
his  teeth  and  bolt.  It  was  sheer  fun,  however,  for 
unlike  most  of  his  breed,  he  had  not  an  atom  of 
vice  in  his  composition. 

I  have  seldom  seen  lovelier  scenery  than  we  rode 
through  that  day.  The  dark  wooded  mountains 
in  the  distance  standing  out  in  striking  contrast 
to  the  green  plains  of  maize  and  barley,  the 
clear  sparkling  streams,  spanned  by  picturesque 
bridges  glittering  with  enamel  and  porcelain.  The 
park-like  domain  of  some  mandarin,  fringed  with 
belts  of  dark  forest,  and  relieved  by  patches  of 
light  green  sward,  on  which  the  deer  and  cattle  were 
browsing,  composed  a  very  different  picture  to  that 
with  which  we  had  always  associated  these  so-called 
uncivilized  regions.  The  country  in  North  China  is 
'  Mongol  for  black. 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  119 

densely  populated.  The  whole  way  from  Pekin  to 
Kalgan  one  was  never  out  of  sight  of  human  beings. 
"We  must  have  ridden  through  at  least  twenty  villages 
the  first  day — villages  only  in  name — for  eacli  must 
have  contained  quite  four  or  five  thousand  souls, 
though  deserted  when  we  passed  through  them,  for 
the  men  and  women  were  out  at  work  in  the  fields 
and  the  narrow  streets  given  up  to  dogs  and  naked 
children  rolling  about  together  promiscuously  in 
the  dusty  roadway.  It  was  only  towards  sunset 
that  we  passed  through  avenues  of  happy,  con- 
tented-looking peasants,  sitting  at  tbeir  doorways 
discussing  tea  and  iced  drinks,  and  dreaming  the 
hours  away  till  bed-time,  after  the  heat  and  labour 
of  the  day.  The  agricultural  labourer  in  China  is 
better  off  than  his  European  brother. 

The  natives  evinced  but  little  surprise  at  our 
appearance  the  first  day.  All  seemed  good  tempered, 
friendly  fellows,  but  (at  the  same  time)  not  at  all  the 
kind  of  people  to  stand  any  nonsense.  They  were 
the  finest-built  men,  physically  speaking,  I  have 
ever  seen,  excepting  perhaps  in  parts  of  European 
Russia. 

Towards  the  latter  part  of  our  first  day's  journey, 
a  great  portion  of  the  road  or  pathway  was  paved 


120  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

with  enormous  blocks  of  granite  in  mucli  the  same 
way  as  that  on  the  outskirts  of  Tungchow,  and 
described  in  a  former  chapter.  Here,  however,  it 
was  in  better  repair — and  presumably  not  so  old — 
for  the  road  in  parts  was  as  smooth  and  unbroken  as 
asphalte.  Bell,  the  traveller  (1720),  narrates  that 
some  eight  hundred  years  since,  a  terrible  earth- 
quake occurred  here  and  laid  waste  the  whole  of  the 
country  lying  between  Pekin  and  the  Great  Wall 
of  China,  occasioning  great  loss  of  Ufe.  It  seems 
curious  that  no  shocks  of  earthquake  have  ever 
been  felt  since  in  these  latitudes,  though  they  are  of 
frequent  occurrence  in  other  parts  of  the  Chinese 
Empire,  as  many  as  seven  shocks  having  occurred 
at  Shanghai  alone  in  1847. 

It  was  past  seven  o'clock  and  nearly  dark  when 
we  reached  "Koo-ash,"  our  first  resting-place,  a 
pretty  Alpine-looking  village  nestling  under  a  chain 
of  hills,  about  four  hundred  feet  high,  bare  of  trees 
and  vegetation,  and  composed  of  huge  granite 
boulders.  The  heat  of  the  day  and  fatigue  of  a  ten 
hours'  ride  made  the  shelter  of  even  a  Chinese  inn 
acceptable,  though  the  stench  of  the  place  was  awful, 
and  the  flies  positively  maddening.  (The  latter, 
though  of  the  common  household  kind,   were    the 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  121 

largest  I  have  ever  seen.)  Floor  and  walls  were 
black  with  them,  and  one  crushed  them  as  one 
turned  on  the  stone  slab  that  did  duty  for  a  bed. 
It  may  be  as  well  to  give  the  reader  a  brief  de- 
scription of  the  hostelry  in  which  we  took  our  first 
night's  rest — for  one  native  inn  is  precisely  like 
another  throughout  the  Chinese  Empire.  The  inn 
at  "Koo-ash"  was,  luckily  for  us,  the  best  that 
exists  on  the  road  to  the  Great  Wall.  Had  it 
been  as  bad  as  the  one  we  reached  the  next  night  at 
"KwiLaShai',"  I  verily  believe  we  should  have 
turned  tail,  and  returned  to  Pekin  without  setting 
eyes  upon  that  euphoniously  named  city.  Coming, 
so  to  speak,  into  shallow  water  before  we  tried  deep, 
saved  us  from  ignominious  defeat. 

A  Chinese  inn,  then,  is  usually  constructed  of 
dried  mud,  whitewashed,  and  built  round  three  sides 
of  an  open  courtyard,  as  a  rule  knee  deep  in  filth  and 
garbage,  in  which  pigs,  sheep,  cows,  and  poultry  roam 
about  at  leisure.  An  open  cesspool  usually  occupies 
the  centre.  The  buildings  on  the  right  and  left  are  the 
kitchen,  innkeeper's  room,  cart-shed,  stables,  &c., 
that  at  the  farthest  end,  and  facing  you  on  entry,  is 
that  set  apart  for  the  guests.  It  is  usually  a  bare 
dirty  room,  about  eighteen  feet  l^y  eighteen,  a  third 


122  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

of  which  is  separated  by  a  bamboo  screen  or  parti- 
tion, four  or  five  feet  high,  for  more  favoured  guests 
who  wish  to  be  separated  from  the  common  herd. 
Sometimes  the  screen  is  dispensed  with,  and  the 
partition  made  by  a  chalk  mark  on  the  floor !  This 
cheerless  apartment  is  devoid  of  furniture  save  for 
a  "K'ang"  or  stove  bed,  a  broad  ledge  of  brick 
covered  with  matting.  In  winter  a  fire  is  lit  under 
the  "  K'ang,"  which  is  built  to  accommodate  ten  to 
twelve  sleepers.  The  flooring  of  the  room  is  of 
uncarpeted  brick,  and  there  is  no  furniture  of  any 
kind.  At  Koo-ash,  however,  there  were  two  inlaid 
chairs  of  the  most  delicate  and  beautiful  workman- 
ship I  have  ever  seen.  They  would  have  fetched  50Z. 
or  601.  in  England.  Most  of  these  gruesome  apart- 
ments swarm  with  rats,  a  circumstance  that  annoyed 
me  more  than  all  other  discomforts  put  together,  for 
I  have  always  had  a  loathing  for  this  animal.  But 
I  had  not  then  been  to  Siberia. 

We  had  our  own  food,  of  course.  ISTo  European 
stomach  could  stand  the  cuisine  in  these  parts. 
Tea  was  the  only  thing  drinkable — sweet,  washy 
stuff,  as  unlike  our  idea  of  that  beverage  as  can 
well  be,  and  drunk  out  of  tiny  cups  holding  about  a 
couple  of  tablespoonsful.      Our  greatest    difficulty 


PEKIN    TO   KALGAN.  123 

was  to  obtain  permission  to  use  the  kitchen  in  these 
caravanserai  to  cook  ourselves  a  tin  of  soup  or 
preserved  meat.  It  was  somewhat  disheartening  to 
have  to  put  up  with  a  biscuit  smeared  over  with  a 
spoonful  of  jam  after  a  hard  day's  work  in  the  blazing 
sun — but  this  was  often  the  case.  There  is  no  race 
in  the  world  so  obstinate  as  the  northern  Celestial ; 
and  in  these  parts,  unlike  in  the  south,  even  filthy- 
lucre  will  not  tempt  them. 

Still  we  had  nothing  to  complain  of  on  this  score 
at  Koo-ash.  The  proprietor,  a  big,  burly  China- 
man, clad  in  a  pair  of  short  wLite  drawers  (and 
nothing  else),  superintended  our  culinary  arrange- 
ments himself,  and  turned  us  out  a  smoking  dish  of 
Irish  stew  in  no  time,  served  upon  plates  that 
would  not  have  disgraced  a  dinner-table  in  the 
height  of  the  London  season.  I  tried  to  buy  one  of 
them,  of  transparent,  violet  porcelain  of  the  most 
delicate  tint  imaginable.  But  mine  host  would  not 
part  with  it  on  any  consideration.  It  was  an  heir- 
loom. "  Drop  it  on  the  floor  and  break  it," 
whispered  Jee  Boo.  "  He  will  sell  it  you  then,  and 
you  can  get  it  mended  in  England."  I  admired  the 
astuteness  of  the  Pekinite,  but  did  not  feel  justified 
in  risking  the  experiment.     To  say  nothing   of  my 


124  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

scruples,  we  were  no  longer  within  reacli  of  English 
protection  ! 

A  couple  of  glasses  of  whisky  and  water  revived 
the  inner  man,  and  we  clambered  into  the  "  K'ang," 
where,  in  spite  of  the  hardness  of  this  novel  kind 
of  bed,  we  were  soon  in  oblivion  and  back  again  in 
our  dreams  to  less  desolate  regions.  I  was  some- 
what startled  in  the  middle  of  the  night  by  a  dark, 
cold  mass  being  thrust  into  my  face  until  by  the  dim 
light  of  the  moon  struggling  in  through  the  paper 
window,  I  realized  what  the  intruder  was — a  calf 
from  the  cattle-shed  next  door,  who  was  making  a 
nocturnal  expedition  in  search  of  food.  I  lay  awake 
the  remainder  of  that  night,  for  the  enemy  were 
upon  me,  and  had  evidently  been  for  some  hours, 
judging  from  the  intense  irritation  and  itching  of 
my  face  and  hands.  Had  it  not  been  for  them,  how- 
ever, I  should  have  been  equally  wakeful ;  for  the 
cheering  spectacle  of  a  couple  of  large  rats  dis- 
porting themselves  on  the  further  corner  of  the 
"K'ang"  successfully  murdered  sleep  till  the 
morning. 

Splendid  weather  favoured  our  journey.  Though 
the  heat  at  mid-day  was  intense,  and  the  fierce  sun 
compelled   us    to   seek   shelter   in   the    litters,   the 


PEKIN   TO    KAI.GAN.  125 

mornings  and  evenings  were  cool  and  delicious. 
We  left  Koo-ash  the  following  day  at  five  a.m. 
Our  bill  for  the  night  was  certainly  not  ruinous 
eighty  cash,  or  something  under  7d.,  for  the  whole 
party. 

The  road  ceases  after  leaving  Koo-ash,  and  our 
way  the  second  day  lay  through  a  succession  of 
small  paths  or  raised  footways  running  in  all  direc- 
tions through  rice  and  cotton-fields.  How  the 
muleteers  kept  on  the  right  track  is  a  mystery  to 
me,  for  there  was  apparently  nothing  to  guide  them. 
The  paths  or  boundaries  of  the  fields  seemed  to  have 
been  constructed  with  a  view  to  leading  wayfarers 
astray,  like  the  maze  at  Hampton  Court.  There 
seemed  to  be  no  lack  of  water,  the  plains  being  cut  up 
into  squares  of  various  sizes,  and  the  water  brought 
by  means  of  small  canals  or  ditches  from  the  nearest 
stream  or  river.  The  method  of  pumping  is  the 
same  as  in  Egypt :  a  couple  of  buckets  worked  by  a 
swing  beam  handled  by  one  or  two  men.  A  sheet 
of  water  some  inches  deep,  is  by  this  means  kept 
over  the  surface  of  the  rice-fields,  which  are  so 
numerous  in  parts  as  to  give  the  country  the 
appearance  of  being  in  a  state  of  inundation. 

We  reached  the  city  of  Nankow  at  mid-day,  but 


126  FROM    TEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

did  not  bait  there,  preferring  to  go  straight  through 
and  take  our  mid-day  meal  (if  a  piece  of  chocolate 
and  a  biscuit  can  so  be  called),  in  the  open  country. 
A  large  wall  runs  through  Nankow,  often  regarded 
by  tourists  as  the  Great  Wall  of  China.  Many 
Europeans  are  brought  here  from  Pekin,  and  return 
thoroughly  satisfied  in  their  own  minds,  that  they 
have  seen  the  Great  Wall,  when,  in  fact,  they  have 
done  nothing  of  the  kind.  The  wall  at  JSTankow  is 
simply  an  offshoot  of  the  real  thing,  and  runs  at 
right  angles  to  it ;  moreover,  the  former  is  not  so 
high,  and  its  stones  are  cemented,  which  those  of  the 
Great  Wall  are  not.  I  trust  I  am  not  a  kill- joy  to 
those  who,  reading  these  pages,  have  seen  the 
Nankow  wall,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  two  are 
as  different,  both  in  construction  and  appearance, 
as  black  to  white. 

We  were  forced  to  take  refuge  in  our  litters 
traversing  the  city  (which  is  one  of  some  fifty 
thousand  inhabitants),  for  the  unwonted  sight  of 
Europeans  in  their  midst,  appeared  to  give  the  Nan- 
kowites  great  umbrage  for  some  reason  or  other.  In- 
deed, this  was  the  sole  instance  of  our  being  treated 
with  anything  but  courtesy  and  good  temper. 
The    streets   were    so    crowded    as   to    make    our 


PEKIN   TO    KALGAN.  127 

progress  extremely  difficult,  for  it  was  market-day, 
and  half  the  roadway  was  taken  up  with  canvas 
booths  and  stalls  for  the  sale  of  silks,  tea,  crockery, 
and  hardware,  or  fish,  vegetables,  and  fruit,  while 
every  fifty  yards  or  so,  the  fumes  from  "  Kabob  " 
stalls  poisoned  the  air  with  a  sickly,  greasy  odour. 
We  were  not  sorry  to  get  within  sight  of  the  outer 
gate.  Near  here  was  an  open -air  theatre  in  full 
swing,  adding  its  quota  of  drums,  clashing  cymbals, 
and  squeaky  reed-pipes,  to  the  general  din.  Some 
two  or  three  hundred  struggling  men  and  women 
occupied  the  partition  in  front  of  the  stage,  meant 
to  hold  about  half  the  number.  No  attempt  had 
been  made  to  shelter  the  audience  from  the  blazinof 
sun,  and  the  smell  that  arose  from  this  human 
cattle-pen,  beggars  description.  Some  six  or  seven 
performers  in  grotesque  garments  and  hideous 
masks,  were  twisting  their  bodies  about,  singing 
through  their  noses,  and  endeavouring  by  their 
united  efforts  to  drown  the  instruments  at  the 
back  of  the  stage,  in  which  they  were  only  partly 
successful.  The  play,  Jee  Boo  informed  us,  had 
been  going  on  for  a  week,  and  was  only  half  over. 
We  stopped  for  a  few  minutes  to  watch  the  per- 
formance, the  audience  being  too  much  engrossed 


128  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    EY    LAND. 

with  it  to  pay  any  attention  to  us.  Most  of  tlie 
action  seemed  to  consist  exclusively  of  fighting  and 
love-making.  The  scenes  dealing  with  the  latter, 
were  certainly  more  realistic  than  refined.  There 
was  no  scenery,  and  apparently  no  dressing-rooms. 
One  of  the  performers,  after  being  slain  by  his  ad- 
versary, got  up  again  in  a  few  seconds,  and  retiring 
to  the  back  of  the  stage,  changed  all  his  clothes  in 
full  view  of  the  audience,  an  operation  that  necessi- 
tated his  appearing  in  a  state  of  complete  nudity, 
after  which  he  calmly  returned  to  the  front  to  repre- 
sent another  part.  There  is  apparently  no  Chinese 
Lord  Chamberlain. 

It  took  us  nearly  two  hours  to  get  clear  of  the 
city.  Shortly  afterwards,  we  entered  the  Nankow 
Pass,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  bits  of  scenery  we 
passed  through.  The  going  was  terribly  rough,  so 
much  so  that  we  had  to  dismount  and  lead  the 
ponies,  while  the  mule-litters  plunged  and  rolled  about 
among  the  boulders  like  ships  in  a  storm.  The  road 
is  simply  formed  by  a  kind  of  water-bed,  about  150 
yards  across,  which  is  in  summer  rendered  almost 
impassable  by  the  huge  rocks  and  boulders  that  bar 
the  way  at  every  step.  In  winter  it  becomes  a 
raging  torrent,  sweeping   all  before   it,    and   after 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  129 

heavy  rains  does  considerable  damage  to  life  and 
property.  The  pass  (which  is  a  gradual  ascent  the 
whole  way,  and  about  thirteen  miles  long)  compares 
very  favourably  with  some  of  the  grandest  scenery  in 
Switzerland  or  the  Tyrol.  Rugged,  precipitous  rocks 
overhang  the  defile  on  either  side,  great  crags  of 
granite  that  look  as  if  a  touch  would  send  them 
crashing  into  the  valley  a  hundred  feet  below. 
Although  not  a  leaf  or  tree  is  visible,  the  different 
shades  of  colour  taken  by  the  rocks  are  even  more 
beautiful  than  any  vegetation  could  make  them. 
As  we  neared  the  end  of  the  pass,  little  bits  of 
verdure  became  visible  :  oases  of  rich  grass  and  cul- 
tivated flower-gardens  banked  round  with  bamboos, 
looking  almost  as  if  they  were  hanging  perpen- 
dicularly on  the  steep  grey  walls;  while  tiny 
streamlets  seemed  to  spring  up  from  under  our  very 
feet  to  lose  themselves  a  few  yards  lower  down  among 
the  crevices  formed  by  the  huge  rocks  and  boulders. 
After  two  hours'  hard  work,  we  emerged  on  a  vast 
plain  again,  a  plain  of  waving  corn  and  barley, 
relieved  here  and  there  by  brown  villages  and  gaily 
coloured  temples,  while  a  glance  behind  showed  us 
the  city  of  Nankow  spread  out  like  a  map  at  our  feet, 
the  rice  and  cotton  plains  we  had  passed  through, 

VOL.    I.  K 


130  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  the  distant  village  of  "  Koo-ash,"  its  temples 
and  pagodas  sparkling  like  diamonds  on  the  far 
horizon. 

A  strange  apparition  appeared  as  we  ate  our  soli- 
tary meal  by  the  roadway.  A  tall  gaunt  European, 
bestriding  an  attenuated-looking  mule,  an  individual 
who  by  his  dress  might  have  been  anybody.  A 
rough  grey  coat  with  yellow  facings^  a  red  hand- 
kerchief tied  round  the  head,  a  pair  of  short  thin 
cotton  drawers  reaching  to  the  knee,  and  bare 
legs  and  feet,  is  hardly  the  costume  with  which 
we  are  wont  to  associate  a  courier  of  the  Czar  I 
but  such  the  stranger  proved  to  be.  He  eyed 
our  whisky  bottle  wistfully  as  he  passed  us,  and 
reined  up  the  melancholy  mule  with  a  jerk. 
"  Kouda  ?  "  ("  whither  ?")  he  asked.  "  Moscow,"  we 
replied,  at  the  same  time  filling  him  a  bumper  of 
Glenlivat,  a  proceeding  that  seemed  to  interest  him 
much  more  than  our  probable  destination.  "  Fran- 
zouski?"  (French).  "Mete:  Anglis-ki."  "Ah,"  he 
replied,  with  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and,  tossing 
off  the  tumbler  of  raw  whisky  without  a  wink, 
rode  off  again,  with  the  remark,  "YaPekin"  (I 
am  for  Pekin),  but  not  a  word  of  thanks.  This 
was  our   first  experience  of  the  Russian   Cossack, 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  131 

and  I  was  afterwards  glad  to  find  this  rude  boor  an 
exception  even  to  the  lowest  orders  of  that  cheery, 
hospitable  race, — better  fellows  than  whom  it  would, 
as  a  rule,  be  hard  to  meet. 

The  country  towards  evening  became  flatter  ; 
the  rice  and  cotton  having  given  way  to  a  bare 
sandy  plain,  stretching  away  on  either  side  as  far 
as  the  eye  could  reach  without  a  break.  The 
glare  of  the  sun  became  very  painful  after  the 
first  hour  or  two,  and  we  suffered  a  good  deal 
that  day  from  our  eyes,  a  complaint  that  seems  very 
prevalent  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  villages 
in  this  sterile  region.  The  people,  too,  seemed  very 
different  in  appearance  and  manner  to  those  we  had 
left  in  the  plains  below  Nankow.  Instead  of  the 
cheery  "  good-day"  and  smile  with  which  many  of  the 
latter  had  greeted  us,  we  were  now  looked  upon  only 
with  a  sullen  stare :  a  kind  of  ocular  "  What  do  you 
want  here?"  This  was  all,  however,  for  after 
Nankow  we  experienced  no  incivility  whatsoever 
up  to  the  Great  "Wall. 

This  was  perhaps  the  hardest  day's  work  we  ex- 
perienced throughout  the  whole  voyage.  Leaving 
Koo-ash  at  -5  a.m.,  we  travelled  incessantly,  save  for 
a  halt  of  twenty  minutes  at  mid-day,  till  eight  at 

E  2 


132  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

night.  Over  fourteen  hours'  hard  work  on  a  stick 
of  chocolate  and  a  glass  of  whisky  and  water  is 
not  calculated  to  raise  one's  spirits  under  ordinary 
circumstances ;  but  had  we  known  what  was  before 
us  we  should  have  been  even  more  depressed  than 
we  were,  when,  towards  seven  o'clock  the  towers 
and  battlements  of  Kwi-La-Shai  appeared  on  the 
horizon,  and  we  knew  that  our  day's  journey  was 
nearly  over. 

The  sun  was  setting  as,  crossing  the  river  that 
flows  past  the  walls  of  Kwi-La-Shai,  we  drew  up 
at  the  eastern  gate  of  the  city  and  awaited  the 
permission  of  the  guard  to  enter.  But  for  fatigue 
and  stiffness,  I  would  willingly  have  remained  out- 
side the  walls  till  the  sun  had  disappeared.  I  have 
seldom  seen  a  lovelier  picture.  It  was  like  a  scene 
from  fairy-land.  The  broad,  swift  stream  at  our  feet 
had  caught  the  reflection  of  the  western  sky,  which, 
one  glow  of  rose  colour,  brought  out  the  frowning 
walls  and  battlements  of  the  city  black  and  distinct 
as  a  pen-and-ink  drawing.  The  whole  vault  of 
heaven  was  one  flush  of  ever-changing  hue,  varying 
almost  imperceptibly  from  the  faintest  shades  of 
pink  and  gold  in  the  west  to  where  in  the  east  stars 
were  already  glimmering  in  the  steel-blue  horizon. 


PEKIN   TO    KALGAN.  133 

The  black,  frowning  walls,  the  desolate  landscape 
around  us,  the  confused  and  indistinct  murmur  of 
the  huge  population  of  which  one  could  see  nothing, 
made  one  almost  wonder  whether  one  was  not 
di^eaming  and  would  not  presently  awake  in  a  com- 
fortable bed  resolving  never  again  to  commit  the 
imprudence  of  a  late  supper.  It  was  not  without  a 
weird  feeling  that  we  rode  into  the  city  and  heard 
the  heavy  iron  gates  close  with  a  crash  behind  us. 
One  felt  so  utterly  at  the  mercy  of  the  inhabitants 
of  these  remote  cities,  who,  as  they  have  so  often 
shown,  are  angels  one  minute  and  devils  the 
next. 

The  streets  were,  as  usual,  crowded,  for  the 
night  was  hot,  and  the  population  had  apparently 
turned  out  en  masse  to  take  the  air,  and  what  air ! 
Like  many  other  beautiful  things  in  this  world,  Kwi- 
La-Shai  is  best  seen  at  a  distance,  for  we  found 
it  on  closer  acquaintance  worse  even  than  Pekin 
in  point  of  stenches  and  filth.  It  is  called  in  China 
a  "village,"  which  means  that  it  is  rather  larger 
both  as  regards  size  and  population  than  Birming- 
ham. Though  the  streets  were  unlit,  we  managed 
to  get  to  the  inn  by  the  aid  of  a  guide,  and  once 
there,  found  no   lack   of  light — indeed  the  court- 


134  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

yard  was  one  blaze  of  Chinese  lanterns — nor  of 
society  either,  for  there  must  have  been  at  least  fifty 
men  crowded  into  the  small  guest-room,  to  say 
nothing  of  camels,  oxen,  ponies,  and  carts,  that 
crowded  the  muddy  courtyard. 

We  rode  into  the  3'ard  and  waited  while  Jee  Boo 
went  to  interview  the  proprietor  of  this  den,  which 
for  squalor  and  filth  I  have  never  seen  equalled  in 
the  worst  slums  of  London  or  Paris.  We  soon 
saw  by  the  light  of  the  lanterns  that  our  fellow- 
lodgers  were  not  Chinamen.  Their  quaint  bar- 
baric dress,  to  say  nothing  of  swarthy  flat  faces 
and  beady  black  eyes,  at  once  proclaimed  them 
Mongols.  Twenty  or  thirty  of  them  were  round 
us,  in  less  than  five  minutes  after  our  arrival, 
squatting  on  their  hams  in  the  mud  and  pass- 
ing their  opinions  on  our  appearance.  Many  of 
them,  Jee  Boo  said,  had  never  seen  a  European 
before.  They  annoyed  us  not  a  little,  too,  by  con- 
tinually feeling  our  clothes,  boots,  and  even  faces, 
with  their  hot  grimy  hands,  a  proceeding  that, 
tired  and  hungry  as  we  were,  with  no  prospect  of 
rest  or  food,  did  not  tend  to  improve  the  temper. 
A  pair  of  velvet  cord  breeches  that  Lancaster 
wore    came    in    for    the    greater    share   of    their 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  135 

attention,  which  I  was  (selfishly,  I  own)  not  sorry 
for. 

Two  half -naked  men,  who  had  been  attending 
to  a  couple  of  large  cauldrons  in  a  kind  of  out- 
house, now  summoned  our  inquisitive  friends,  much 
to  our  relief.  We 'saw  them  enter  the  shed,  where 
each  man  having  produced  a  wooden  platter  they 
set  to  and  left  us  in  peace,  at  any  rate,  for  a 
time. 

Jee  Boo  returned  soon  after. 

"  Big  caravan  from  Mongolia.  No  can  have 
room,"  was  his  first  remark.  "  Money  no  good," 
he  added,  on  my  suggesting  a  few  dollars  as 
bribery ;  anything  for  a  fairly  clean  place  to  lay 
our  weary  bones.  "What  was  to  be  done  ?  We 
could  not  sleep  in  the  courtyard,  that  was  very 
certain,  when  a  bright  thought  suddenly  struck  me 
— the  litters. 

Alas  !  they,  too,  were  gone,  and  the  muleteers 
with  them,  in  quest  of  lodgings  elsewhere.  They  had 
fortunately  omitted  to  take  our  box  of  provisions 
with  them.  Jee  Boo  had  meanwhile  disappeared, 
but  soon  after  returned  with  the  information  that  on 
payment  of  $8  we  could  have  the  room  of  the  chief 
of  the  caravan.     "A  very  good  place,"  urged  our 


136  FBOM   PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

interpreter,  who,  was  evidently  standing  in  with  the 
Mongol.  However,  we  should  have  been  only  too 
glad  to  pay  double  the  price  for  a  dog-kennel  that 
night.  Anything  to  lie  down  upon,  and  get  away 
from  the  attentions  of  the  Mongols,  who  had  by  this 
time  finished  their  meal,  and  were  again  issuing 
from  the  kitchen,  lighting  their  pipes,  and  pre- 
paring for  another  examination  of  the  "  White 
Devils." 

It  was  only  after  a  good  deal  of  demur  that  the 
good  gentleman  I  have  mentioned  turned  out  of  his 
lair — a  place  about  nine  feet  square,  with  a  raised 
wooden  platform  upon  which  he  had  been  reclining, 
and  upon  which  he  was  thoughtful  enough  to 
leave  us  several  souvenirs  which  I  need  not 
mention.  To  say  the  place  was  dirty  conveys  but 
a  very  poor  impression  of  the  filth  that  lay  thickly 
on  the  walls,  and  the  nameless  abominations  that 
strewed  the  sleeping-place — half  a  dozen  rough 
boards  about  a  foot  from  the  floor.  There 
were  luckily  two  large  holes  in  the  rafters 
which  would  give  us,  at  any  rate,  some 
ventilation,  for  the  glazed  paper  window  was 
not  made  to  open.  Cooking  was,  of  course,  out 
of   the   question,   but   we   managed   to   boil   some 


PEKIN   TO   KALGAN.  137 

water  in  the  spirit-lamp,  and  get  a  basin  of 
Liebig.  Our  Valentine  meat-juice  had,  un- 
luckily, gone  on  with  the  other  stores.  It 
would  have  been  priceless  that  night,  and  never 
again  will  I  embark  on  a  journey  of  this  kind 
without  it. 

We  had  reckoned  without  our  host  when  we 
thought  that  bolting  and  barring  the  door  would 
ensure  us  privacy.  First  a  finger,  then  a  thumb, 
then  a  whole  hand  was  pushed  through  the  paper 
window,  notwithstanding  all  our  protestations. 
We  did  not  like  to  use  threats,  or  show  firearms, 
for  an  Englishman  more  or  less  would  have  been 
of  little  moment  to  the  good  people  of  Kwi-La-Shai. 
So  we  had  to  sit  and  suffer  in  silence,  until  one  of 
our  tormentors,  more  pushing  than  the  rest,  who  had 
chmbed  upon  the  roof  to  obtain  a  bird's-eye  view, 
came  crashing  through  the  rickety  rafters  on  to 
our  heads.  We  certainly  did  bundle  him  out  with 
scant  ceremony,  and  banging  the  door  after  him, 
blew  out  the  light  and  composed,  or  tried  to  com- 
pose ourselves,  to  slumber. 

But  no  sooner  was  the  light  out  than  we  were 
attacked  by  vermin  in  myriads.  A  quarter  of  an 
hour  of  it  nearly  drove  us  mad,  and  we  resolved  to 


138  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

strike  a  light,  rising  only  to  find  that  we  had  no 
matches,  and  that  all  in  the  yard  was  now  dark  and 
silent  as  the  grave.  So,  resigned  to  our  fates,  we 
lay  still,  and,  like  the  shipwrecked  mariner,  prayed 
for  dawn  !  Tired  and  worn  out  as  we  were,  five 
minutes'  sleep  was  out  of  the  question.  We  had 
good  cause  to  remember  Kwi-La-Shai ;  indeed,  it 
was  a  good  three  weeks  before  we  were  entirely 
free  from  the  animal  nocturnal  visitors  of  that 
unsavoury  city. 

The  caravan  had  already  started  on  its  way  to 
Pekin  when  we  set  off  at  six  the  next  morning. 
Our  mule-driver  and  Jee  Boo  had  evidently  made 
a  night  of  it  on  the  proceeds  of  their  bargain,  for 
the  former  only  arrived  on  the  scene  five  minutes 
before  the  hour  fixed  for  departure,  and  our  inter- 
preter turned  up  hopelessly  fuddled  just  as  we  were 
getting  the  mules  in  and  ponies  saddled.  We  were 
amply  avenged,  though,  for  the  day  was  the  hottest 
we  had  yet  experienced,  and  Jee  Boo  suffered  the 
tortures  of  mal  de  mer  in  a  litter  the  greater  part 
of  it! 

The  road  now  lay  through  deep  sand,  in  which, 
however,  the  caravan  track  was  distinctly  discernible. 
A  boisterous  and  hot  wind  made  it  very  unpleasant 


PEKIN   TO    KALGAN.  139 

travelling,  and  we  were  not  sorry  to  reach  the 
village  of  Tchiian-Ha-Ho  at  midday,  where  we  in- 
sisted on  a  halt  of  five  hours  at  least,  for  the 
purpose  of  indulging  in  a  "  square  meal,"  as 
Americans  say,  and  a  rest,  of  which  we  were  much 
in  need.  Just  before  reaching  the  town,  we  passed 
a  string  of  over  two  hundred  camels  laden  with 
Siberian  furs  for  Pekin.  Also  a  drove  of  some 
three  hundred  or  four  hundred  Mongolian  ponies. 
Some  of  the  latter,  though  small,  were  remark- 
ably well-shaped  and  good-looking. 

Tchuan-Ha-Ho  is  the  only  place  I  retain  a  pleasing 
recollection  of,  lying  between  Pekin  and  the  Great 
Wall  of  China.  The  inn  was  fairly  clean,  and  the 
proprietor  not  only  suggested,  but  cooked  us  a  dish 
of  excellent  poached  eggs.  Rarely  have  I  enjoyed 
a  meal  as  I  did  that.  One  must  have  fasted  for 
nearly  thirty-six  hours  as  we  had,  to  really  appre- 
ciate food.  It  is  worth  all  the  tonics  in  the  world. 
"We  felt  much  tempted  to  stay  here  the  night,  but 
our  mule-drivers  were  inexorable.  They  had  con- 
tracted to  get  us  to  Kalgan  by  a  certain  date,  and 
at  Kalgan,  on  that  date,  dead  or  alive,  we  must 
be! 

The  sandy  desert  ceased  after  leaving  Tchuan  - 


140  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Ha-Ho,  and  we  again  entered  a  fertile  country,  set 
apart  apparently  for  the  exclusive  cultivation  of 
the  poppy.  White,  red,  and  blue — poppies  were 
everywhere — the  plain  presenting  a  succession  of 
waves  of  colour  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach. 
Beyond  this  lay  Ching-Miug-Ying,  lying  under  a 
perpendicular  rock  about  800  feet  high.  This 
village,  which  contains  seven  thousand  inhabitants, 
is  strongly  walled  and  fortified.  The  rock  or 
mountain  is  on  three  sides  sheer  precipice.  Not- 
withstanding this,  there  are  some  twenty  or 
thirty  houses  on  the  extreme  summit,  built  so 
near  the  edge  that  their  sides  actually  form 
part  of  the  precipice.  Seventy  or  eighty  human 
beings  live  on  this  eminence,  though  the  path  up  is 
dangerous  to  any  but  experienced  mountaineers,  and 
the  area  of  the  summit  but  three  hundred  yards 
square.  This  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most 
interesting  and  curious  sights  of  the  whole  voyage, 
for  there  are  men  and  women  over  forty  years  of 
age  living  upon  this  mountain  that  have  never 
descended  to  the  plains  below.  Supplies  and 
stores  are  taken  up  by  men  kept  specially  for  the 
purpose. 

Coal  is  worked  out  of  the  base  of  the  Ching-Ming 


PEKIN    TO    KALGAN.  141 

YiDg  mountain  by  the  Chinese  Government,  to  whom 
the  mines  belong.  It  seemed  to  be  put  out  in  a 
very  desultory  sort  of  way.  Some  thirty  men  only 
were  engaged  in  the  mines,  though  with  their  usual 
contradictory  spirit  the  Government  had  provided 
the  manager  or  overseer  with  a  palatial  residence 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  embowered  in  bright 
flower-gardens  and  willow-trees. 

The  weather,  which  had  up  till  now  been  bright 
and  clear,  now  grew  overcast,  and,  shortly  after 
leaving  Ching-Ming-Ying  the  rain  came  down  in 
torrents,  rendering  travelling  very  unpleasant,  not 
to  say  dangerous.  Our  way  now  lay  along  a  road 
hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock,  by  the  banks  of  a  foaming 
torrent  some  hundred  yards  broad,  which  we  fol- 
lowed the  course  of  till  we  reached  our  destination 
for  the  night — Tsiang-Shui-Poo.  Here  we  rode  along 
now  a  foot  or  so  above  the  water's  edge,  anon  at 
least  fifty  feet  above  the  water,  in  places  where  a 
false  step  or  slip  would  have  sent  one  flying  into 
the  torrent  below,  for  there  was  no  guard-rail,  and 
the  path,  broken  and  rugged,  was  at  times  scarcely 
three  feet  wide.  I  thought  discretion  the  better 
part  of  valour  after  a  time,  and  led  Karra  till  we 
got  on  to  terra  firma  again  in  the  shape  of  a  broad 


142  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

stretch  of  sand,  which  brought  us  to  the  village  of 
Tsiang-Shui-Poo,  wet  through,  and  without  any 
means  of  changing,  but  at  the  same  time  relieved 
that  the  next  day  with  any  luck  would  see  us  at 
Kalgan. 

The  village  of  Tsiang-Shui-Poo  was  really  a 
village,  for  it  boasted  of  some  hundred  inhabitants 
and  thirty  or  forty  houses.  The  inn  (an  open  shed 
in  which  cattle  and  men  slept  promiscuously)  was 
at  any  rate  clean,  and  we  managed  to  get  a  good 
sleep  on  a  wisp  of  straw  free  from  the  stench  of 
sewage  that  had  annoyed  us  so  much  everywhere 
else.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  came  to  look  at  us  as 
we  discussed  the  evening  meal.  The  men  were 
cheery,  good-looking  fellows,  and  the  women  far 
prettier  than  any  I  had  yet  seen,  for  their  faces  were 
devoid  of  paint — and  they  had  almost  European 
complexions.  Tsiang-Shui-Poo  was  to  us  an  Elysium 
— a  haven  of  rest — which  reminded  one  for  all  the 
world  of  the  lovely  Kentish  village  of  Farningham, 
which  is  no  doubt  known  to  many  of  my  readers. 
There  was  the  trout  stream  at  the  bottom  of  the 
garden,  the  clover  meadows  with  their  fresh,  sweet 
scent,  the  corn  ripening  for  the  sickle  on  the  hill 
behind  the  inn — although,  to  be  sure,  two  stunted 


PEKIN   TO    KALGAN.  143 

willows  had  to  do  duty  for  the  famous  chestnut-tree 
in  front  of  that  cosy  old  inn,  the  "Red  Lion;"  and, 
I  fancy,  even  the  genial  host  of  that  celebrated 
hostelry  would  have  lost  his  temper  at  the  fare  set 
before  him  by  Boniface  of  the  "  Cattle-Shed  Hotel  " 
at  Tsiang-Shui-Poo  ! 

By  next  morning  the  rain  had  entirely  disap- 
peared, and  with  a  blue  sky  and  cool  breeze  we  left 
Tsiang-Shui-Poo,  invigorated  in  mind  and  body  by 
a  good  long  sleep.  I  cannot  pronounce,  much  less 
write,  the  name  of  the  village  we  halted  at  at  mid- 
day. It  was  evident  we  were  nearing  Kalgan, 
for  we  passed  at  least  a  dozen  large  caravans 
during  the  morning,  to  say  nothing  of  carts,  litters, 
and  stray  horsemen.  The  poppy-fields  were  now 
superseded  by  rice-plains,  irrigated  as  before  by 
"  shaloofs,"  and  interspersed  with  enclosures  of 
corn  and  maize. 

We  lunched  in  a  fairly  clean  room  of  the  inn  at 
the  town  with  the  unpronounceable  name.  Many 
Russians  appeared  to  have  visited  it,  for  their  names 
(in  Russian  characters)  were  scrawled  all  over  the 
place.  In  one  corner,  in  small  capitals,  we 
read  : — "  Bordeaux  a  Pekin  par  terre.  Sep.  4th, 
1870." 


144  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Shortly  before  five  o'clock  a  low  chain  of  hills 
appeared  on  the  horizon.  Had  it  not  been  specially 
pointed  out  to  me,  I  should  never  have  noticed  the 
thin  serpentine  thread  winding  its  course  along 
their  summit — an  irregular  white  line  lost  to 
sight  at  times,  in  places  where  it  was  broken 
into  by  forest  or  undergrowth :  a  very  different 
edifice  from  one's  preconceived  ideas  of  the  Great 
Wall  of  China. 

We  entered  Kalgan  at  half  past  six  o'clock.  It 
will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  size  of  the 
place  when  I  say  that  it  took  us  nearly  two  hours 
to  ride  from  the  southern  gate  to  the  suburb  of 
Yambooshan,  where  the  Russian  tea-merchants 
lived,  to  whom  we  were  provided  with  a  letter  of 
introduction.  The  population  of  Kalgan  is  esti- 
mated at  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  thou- 
sand. 

Our  mule-drivers  suggested  an  immediate  ad- 
journment to  the  inn,  for  the  Russians,  they  said, 
lived  outside  the  gates  of  Kalgan,  at  Yambooshan. 
The  gate  was  shut  at  seven,  after  which  hour,  no 
one,  European  or  otherwise,  was  permitted  to  enter 
or  leave  the  city ;  but  we  stuck  to  our  determination 
of   seeing   M.  Batouyeff  before   nightfall.     Riding 


PBKIN    TO    KALGAN.  145 

out  of  tbe  southern  gate,  we  emerged  on  to  a  dry 
river-bed,  on  either  banks  of  which  stood  several 
substantial  and  well-built  houses  of  Chinese  archi- 
tecture. At  the  head  of  the  valley  stood  apart 
from  the  others  a  single  dwelling  a  V Euro'peenne — a 
pretty  two-storied  house  with  verandah  and  gaily 
coloured  Venetians,  standing  in  a  spacious  garden, 
down  the  centre  path  of  which,  as  soon  as  we 
came  in  sight,  two  white- clad  Europeans  hurried 
to  meet  us. 

One  of  these  proved  to  be  M.  Ivanoff — partner  of 
M.  Batouyeff,  who  was,  he  explained,  at  that  time 
away  at  Chefoo  for  a  couple  of  months,  enjoy- 
ing the  sea  breezes  after  a  residence  of  five  years 
here  without  a  break.  Luckily  for  us  M.  Ivanoff 
spoke  English  fluently,  having  spent  several  years 
at  Tientsin.  He  laughed  outright  when  we  asked 
him  to  direct  us  to  the  inn.  "Ah,  gentlemen,  I 
hope  you  have  not  such  a  poor  opinion  of  Russian 
hospitality  as  that,"  said  our  friend,  as  he  led  the 
way  up  the  neat  gravel  walk,  lined  with  rose  and 
geranium  beds,  to  the  house — where  we  found  two 
large  airy  bedrooms,  a  sitting-room,  and,  best  of  all, 
a  large  bath-room  placed  at  our  disposal.  "  I  do  not 
live  here  myself,  but  my  clerk  will  do  anything  for 

VOL.  I.  L 


146  FEOM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

you.  You  have  but  to  call  '  Michailof .'  He  lives 
next  door.  Dinner  will  be  served  at  eight  o'clock. 
Gentlemen,  I  wish  you  good  evening,  and  will  do 
myself  the  pleasure  of  calling  upon  you  again  to- 
morrow." 

Here  was  luxury  indeed.  The  sight  of  the  bed 
was  almost  too  much  for  me.  I  felt  inclined  to 
forego  dinner  altogether,  jump  in,  and  revel  in  its 
clean,  soft  sheets  and  white  dainty  curtains  !  A 
delicious  warm  bath,  a  change  of  clothes,  and  we 
found  ourselves  seated  at  an  open  window,  looking 
down  upon  the  moon-bathed  valley  of  Yambooshan, 
enjoying  an  excellent  dinner  a  la  russe,  washed  down 
by  a  still  more  excellent  bottle  of  Chateau  Lafitte. 
"  Here's  to  the  Russians,"  said  Lancaster,  as  we 
tossed  off  for  the  first  time  a  glass  of  that  insidious 
though  delicious  liqueur  "  Yodka."  "  How  the 
English  do  misunderstand  them,"  I  echoed :  a 
sentiment  I  had  occasion  to  repeat  more  than  once 
during  our  weary  pilgrimage  through  the  Asiatic 
realms  of  the  White  Czar. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

KALGAN,    OR   CHANG-CHIA-KOW. 

We  had  intended  making  a  stay  of  four  or  five 
days,  at  tlie  most,  at  Kalgan.  This,  we  thought, 
would  give  us  ample  time  to  get  carts,  camels,  and 
men  for  the  crossing  of  the  Great  Gobi  Desert; 
for,  we  had  been  led  to  believe,  when  at  Tientsin, 
that  there  would  not  be  the  slightest  necessity  for 
remaining  more  than  a  day  or  so  at  the  frontier 
city,  unless  we  particularly  wished  to  do  so.  But, 
alas !  as  at  Pekin,  fresh  difficulties  cropped  up 
hourly ;  and  when  we  broached  to  M.  Ivanofi*  our 
intention  of  leaving  for  Ourga  in  three  or  four  days' 
time,  he  simply  laughed  in  our  faces. 

"  You  must  recollect  you  are  not  in  Europe," 
said  the  hospitable  Russian,  "  and  also  that  Mongols 
are  worse  even  than  Chinamen  in  the  matter  of 
delay.  Moreover,  I  shall  have  to  get  your  carts 
built,  a  question  of  ten  days  at  the  very  least. 
The  camels,  too,  are  all  out  on  the  plains.     No, 

L  2 


148  FEOM    PKKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

gentlemen;  I  fear  you  must  make  up  your 
minds  to  at  least  a  fortniglit's  imprisonment  in 
Kalgan !  " 

There  was  nothing  for  it  under  the  circum- 
stances but  to  smile  and  look  pleasant,  thanking 
Providence,  meanwhile,  for  giving  us  such  com- 
fortable quarters,  and  not  cooping  us  up  in  a 
Chinese  inn.  Considering  everything,  we  had  by- 
no  means  a  bad  time  of  it  with  the  Russian  tea- 
merchants  at  Kalgan. 

They  certainly  had  a  very  fair  idea  of  making 
themselves  comfortable.  The  house  of  our  host 
was  especially  so,  and  by  no  means  the  kind  of 
dwelling  one  would  expect  to  find  in  this  out-of-the- 
way  corner  of  the  earth.  We  had  pictured  to  our- 
selves a  rough  wooden  shanty — we  found  a  well-built 
stone  house  with  cool,  lofty  bedrooms,  a  pretty 
drawing-room,  with  grand  piano  and  bright  chintzes, 
singing-birds,  and  flowers;  and  French  windows  open- 
ing on  to  the  creeper-covered  verandah,  whence  one 
looked  on  to  the  beautiful  valley  of  Kalgan.  At 
one's  feet  a  shady  garden  wherein  roses,  Eucharis 
lilies,  jasmine,  mignonette,  and  other  flowers 
grew  in  wild  profusion,  though  untended  and  un- 
cared   for;     while   in  the   far   distance  the   Great 


KALGAN,    OR    CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  149 

"Wall  of  China,  now  towering  on  a  summit,  now  lost 
in  a  valley,  wound  like  a  huge  serpent,  its  course  of 
two  thousand  miles.  Nor  were  the  more  substantial 
things  of  life  uncared  for,  for  our  host  had  an  excel- 
lent cook,  and  in  this  land  of  milk  and  honey  there 
was  no  lack  of  material  for  his  culinary  efforts. 
The  Kalgan  mutton  is  excellent,  and  potatoes, 
cauliflowers,  cabbages,  peas,  lettuce,  even  aspara- 
gus, thrive  there,  all  imported  from  Russia,  to 
say  nothing  of  Chinese  vegetables  with  unpro- 
nounceable names,  and  still  more  curious  taste. 
Our  host's  cook  was  an  artist ;  his  claret  undeniable ; 
his  cigars  good.  We  had  certainly  tumbled  upon 
our  legs  at  Kalgan. 

The  city  of  Chang-Chia-Kow,  or  Kalgan,  is 
built  on  the  banks  of  a  broad,  swift-flowing 
river.  Running  at  right  angles  to  this,  between 
two  precipitous  mountains,  is  the  narrower 
gorge  of  Yambooshan,  the  houses  thereof  stand- 
ing outside  the  gates  of  the  city,  and  built  close 
into  the  side  of  the  hills,  portions  of  which  in 
some  cases  had  been  blasted  away  to  admit 
them.  There  is  a  reason  for  this.  The  dry, 
shingly  road,  which  in  summer  serves  as  liio-h- 
way  to  thousands  of  caravans,  becomes  in  winter 


9 


150  FEOM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

a  roaring  torrent,  which  sweeps  down  the  valley 
with  terrific  force  to  join  the  larger  stream,  at 
times  occasioning  great  loss  of  life.  At  the 
time  of  our  visit,  the  river-bed  was  absolutely  dry, 
though  the  preceding  winter  had  been  a  severe 
one,  and  much  damage  had  been  done  in  the 
spring. 

We  spent  a  good  deal  of  our  time  watching 
the  caravans  as  they  jingled  and  rattled  along 
the  stony  river-bed  to  or  from  Pekin.  Many 
were  laden  with  wood  cut  into  logs  and  brought 
from  the  mountains  near  Ourga,  across  the 
desert,  for  wood  is  scarce  in  Northern  China, 
and  I  do  not  think  we  passed  more  than  a  dozen 
trees  in  all  the  whole  way  from  the  capital  to  the 
Great  Wall.  Between  Yambooshan  and  the  city  of 
Kalgan  is  the  "  Gap,"  where  the  I'oad  narrows 
to  a  width  of  about  nine  feet.  It  is  from  this  the 
city  takes  its  name,  the  word  "  Kalga  "  signifying 
in  the  Mongolian  tongue  a  gap  or  gate.  It  has  been 
estimated  that  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
chests  of  tea  pass  through  here  annually,  for  every 
caravan  is  bound  to  pass  Kalgan  on  its  way  east  or 
west.  There  is  no  other  road.  Thus  about  forty  million 
chests  of  tea  pass  through  annually  to  Mongolia  and 


KALGAN,    OB    CHANG-CHTA-KOW.  151 

Siberia,  and  Ivanoff  (who  has  much  experience  in 
these  matters)  was  of  opinion  that  when  the  pro- 
jected line  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk  is  completed, 
there  will  be  a  further  increase  of  a  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  chests,  making  in  all  the  enormous 
total  of  five  hundred  thousand  chests  annually.  !  N"© 
railway  can  ever  be  made  across  Grobi.  The  means 
of  transit  must  always  remain  what  it  has  ever  been, 
i.e.  by  the  "  Ship  of  the  Desert." 

The  best  tea  never  leaves  China,  and  nearly  all  the 
next  best  in  quality  goes  to  Russia.  Few  people  in 
England  know  what  good  tea  really  is.  An  immense 
trade  in  Asiatic  Russia  is  done  in  what  is  known  as 
brick  tea,  an  article  I  shall  describe  later  on,  and 
which  is  drunk  chiefl}^  by  the  Mongols  and  lower 
classes  in  Siberia.  This  is  pressed  into  oblong 
cakes,  about  two  pounds  in  weight,  and  is  made  of 
tea  dust,  stalks,  and  refuse,  mixed  with  bullocks' 
blood,  to  give  it  a  flavour.  I  never  tasted  a  viler 
concoction  in  my  life. 

"  You  English  boil  your  tea,"  Ivanoff"  would  say, 
when  on  his  favourite  topic.  "  How  can  you  expect 
to  get  it  good  ;"  and  there  is  no  doubt  much  in  this. 
I  got  into  a  habit  in  Siberia  and  Russia  of  drinking 
tea   at  all  hours  of  the  day  and  night,  and  learnt  to 


152  FEOM    PEKI>;    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

make  it  a  la  linsse — two  teaspoonfuls  to  each 
cup;  then  pour  boilmg  water  into  the  pot,  so  as 
just  to  cover  the  leaves,  and  at  once  pour  it  out 
again,  afterwards  adding  the  requisite  amount  of 
liquid.  Let  it  stand  for  two  or  three  minutes  at 
most,  and  drink.  The  Russians  never  drink  their 
tea  twice  over,  as  we  do,  but  change  the  leaves  and 
the  pot  every  fresh  brew.  This  makes  a  good  deal 
more  difference  than  some  may  think.  I  have  heard 
English  people  deny  that  overland  tea  is  any  better 
than  that  sent  by  sea,  but  I  do  not  think  there 
can  be  any  real  doubt  about  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
genuine  overland  tea  very  rarely  finds  its  way  to 
England. 

The  city  of  Kalgan  proper,  reminds  one  more  of 
an  Egyptian  or  Arab  town  than  a  Chinese  one.  The 
dwellings  are  of  baked  mud,  unwhitewashed,  and  flat 
roofed.  Some  are  ornamented  with  arabesques,  and 
gaily-striped  awnings,  many  of  their  fagades  being 
half  hidden  with  clustering  vines.  The  "  Yamen," 
or  court-house,  is  the  only  building  of  pure  Chinese 
architecture  in  the  whole  place,  and  one  felt,  when 
taking  a  stroll  through  its  busy  streets  and  covered 
bazaars,  as  if  one  had  been    suddenly  transplanted 


KALGAN,    OK    OHANG-OHl A-KOW.  153 

from  the  heart  of  the  Chinese  Empire  to  some  town 
in  Central  Asia.  There  is  more  colour,  too,  than 
in  most  Chinese  towns,  the  eternal  dark  blue  or 
white  dress  of  the  natives  being  relieved  by  the 
gaudy  dresses  and  barbaric  trappings  of  the  Mon- 
golian Tartar.  The  very  smell  of  the  place,  too, 
was  different  to  those  we  had  passed  through,  the 
half  fishy,  half  spicy  odour  with  which  every 
traveller  in  ISTorthern  China  is  familiar,  being  super- 
seded by  the  sickly  smell  of  argol-smoke,  old  rags, 
and  general  filth  that  clings  to  the  Mongol  wherever 
he  goes.  They  were  not  reassuring  to  look  at,  these 
Mongols.  It  was  not  altogether  pleasant  to  think 
that  a  fortnight  more  would  see  us  consigned  to 
the  tender  mercies  of  this  wild,  nomad  race,  two 
solitary  Europeans,  alone  and  unprotected  in  the 
great  desert  of  Gobi.  At  first  sight  the  Mongol 
Tartar  decidedly  inspired  us  with  respect,  not  to 
say  mistrust. 

There  are  few  noisier  and  busier  places  than  Kal- 
gan.  The  row  in  the  middle  of  the  day  was  deafen- 
ing, and  the  clouds  of  black  dust,  raised  by  the 
perpetual  traffic,  unbearable.  It  was  amusing  some- 
times to  walk  in  the  busiest  part  of  the  day,  to  the 


154  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

market-place,  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  where  the 
great  horse,  or  rather  pony  mart  is  situated.  There 
must  have  been  some  three  or  four  hundred  ponies  the 
morning  we  were  there,  being  trotted  and  galloped 
up  and  down  for  sale — for  export  to  Pekin  and  other 
parts  of  China.  It  was  exciting,  not  to  say  dangerous, 
work,  apparently,  for  the  wild  desert  horsemen  tore 
hither  and  thither,  utterly  regardless  of  where  they 
went,  or  whom  they  knocked  down  or  collided  with. 
I  saw  half  a  dozen,  falls  in  less  than  half  an  hour ; 
but  the  riders  did  not  seem  to  mind,  nor  did  it  occa- 
sion any  chaff  or  merriment  among  the  crowd  of 
bystanders,  as  would  have  been  the  case  in  England. 
The  riders  merely  got  up,  and  with  a  shake  of  the 
shoulders  waited  till  the  yelling,  chattering  crowd  had 
caught  andrestored  the  runaway!  Though  the  ground 
was  rough  and  flint-strewn,  no  one  seemed  to  mind  a 
fall.  Round  the  squarewere  a  number  of  tea-houses 
and  sheds  for  the  sale  of  "Airak"  (native  brandy), 
where  the  wily  Pekin  Chinaman  might  be  seen  hob- 
nobbing with  the  swarthy  Tartar  over  a  "  deal."  I 
fancy  the  latter  usually  got  the  worst  of  the  bargain. 
The  ponies  were  beautifully  shaped,  wiry  little 
animals,  about  thirteen  to  fourteen  hands.  I  saw 
one,  a  chestnut,  sold  for  eight  dollars,  which  would 


KALGAN,    OR    CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  155 

have  fetched  thirty  or  forty  guineas  iu  England. 
At  mid-day  it  became  almost  impossible  to  make 
one's  way  through  the  crowds  of  people  that 
thronged  the  narrow  streets,  and  crowded  the  canvas 
booths  for  the  sale  of  iced  drinks,  tea,  tobacco,  and 
other  refreshments  erected  along  the  foot-paths. 
At  such  moments,  on  a  fine  day,  the  bright  sun- 
shine, gaudy  dresses  of  the  Mongols,  white  and 
blue  of  the  Chinese,  thronging  the  streets  of  the 
huge  walled  city,  with  its  amphitheatre  of  rugged, 
precipitous  hills,  made  a  picture  as  unique  as  it  was 
interesting.  The  whole  place  looked  like  a  gigantic 
fair.  Street  tumblers,  jugglers,  and  fortune-tellers 
plied  a  brisk  trade  in  the  middle  of  the  roadway, 
heedless  of  yelling,  wild-looking  Mongols  galloping 
madly  about  on  ponies,  while  the  shop-keepers  at  the 
top  of  their  voices  cried  out  from  their  doors  the 
excellence  of  their  wares,  each  trying  to  outyell  his 
neighbour.  Add  to  this  the  clashing  of  cymbals 
and  beating  of  gongs  from  a  theatre  hard  by,  and 
you  have  a  faint  idea  of  a  street  in  Kalgan  at  mid- 
day. 

Here,  as  in  Pekin,  the  dust  acts  as  a  disin- 
fectant, and  Kalgan  is  by  no  means  an  unhealthy 
place,  though  the  heat  in  summer  is  as  severe  as  in 


156  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

winter  the  cold,  is  intense.  I  know  no  place  so 
inspiriting  on  a  fine  day,  so  depressing  on  a  dull 
one,  as  Kalgan.  In  the  former  case  all  was  anima- 
tion, life,  and  colour.  The  sky  of  Mediterranean  blue, 
and  the  verdant,  smiling  hills  and  gaily- coloured 
verandahs  and  dresses  of  the  natives,  coupled  with 
the  keen,  inspiriting  air,  enlivened  the  spirits  like  a 
glass  of  champagne ;  but  on  a  dull  or  rainy  day  every- 
thing around  looked  dark  and  depressing.  A  kind 
of  fog  hung  over  everything,  over  the  mountain 
tops  wreathed  in  dank,  white  mist,  the  grey, 
lowering  sky,  and  brown,  mud-coloured  dwellings, 
while  the  white  wooden  crosses  in  the  Russian 
cemetery,  just  to  the  right  of  our  house,  stood  out 
with  uncomfortable  prominence.  It  was  on  days 
like  this  that  one  realized  how  far  one  was  from 
England,  how  many  thousand  leagues  of  unknown 
country  lay  between  us  and  home. 

Dull  days  were  in  the  minority,  however,  and  our 
time  passed  pleasantly  enough,  if  somewhat  unevent- 
fully, at  Kalgan.  There  were  but  eleven  European 
residents  in  all,  five  of  them  belonging  to  the  two 
Russian  tea  firms,  the  remainder  to  an  American 
Mission  established  here  ten  years  ago.  "  We  are 
like  the  rival  editors  in  Peek-Veek,"  said  Ivanoff  one 


KALGAN,    OR   CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  157 

day,  alluding  to  himself  and  bis  confrere  in  tlie  tea- 
trade.  "  We  do  not  speak ;  and  have  not  for  some 
years."  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  our 
host  so  well  up  in  English  literature,  till  I  heard 
that  Dickens,  as  well  as  many  other  standard  authors, 
has  been  largely  translated  into  Russian,  and  has 
an  enormous  sale  at  Irkoutsk  (our  friend's  native 
place),  and  other  parts  of  Siberia. 

We  called  on  the  mission  one  day,  whose 
head-quarters  are  in  a  substantially  stone-built 
house  standing  in  beautiful  gardens  on  the  out- 
skirts of  the  city.  One  might  almost  have 
imagined  oneself  in  some  country  parsonage  in 
England,  drinking  tea  in  a  cool,  pretty  drawing- 
room,  while  a  fresh,  sweet  smell  stole  in 
through  the  French  windows  from  the  hay 
and  clover  fields.  Four  were  lady  missionaries, 
two  of  whom  were  certificated  doctors,  who 
had,  Ivanoff  told  us,  done  wonders  in  the  epi- 
demic of  typhus,  that  had  visited  Kalgan  two 
years  previously,  and  by  their  untiring  efforts  and 
wonderful  cures  had  made  many  converts.  We 
were  welcomed,  on  entering  the  house,  by  a  pretty 
little  Chinese  lady,  unaccountably  so,  as  we  thought, 
for  one  of  her  race.     The  mystery  was  explained 


158  FEOM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

when  she  inYited  us  to  be  seated,  in  our  own  language, 
and  further  told  us  that  although  she  had  adopted 

Chinese  costume,  she  was  an  American.    Mrs.  S 

had  only  been  married  thi^ee  months,  and  had  come 
straight  from  Xew  York  to  Kalgan,  to  share  her 
husband's  fortunes  in  the  wilds,  for  she  was  about 
to  leave  for  a  mission  four  hundred  miles  from  Kal- 
gan, situated  in  one  of  the  most  dangerous  districts 
of  the  Chinese  empire.  Her  husband  came  in  shortly 
after,  also  in  Chinese  costume,  with  the  addition  of  a 
pigtail !  It  is  a  rule  that  every  one  connected  with 
this  society  shall  wear  native  dress  ;  and  when  at 
theii'  posts  in  Central  China  the  missionaries  are 
expected  to  eat  like  the  natives.  I  could  not  help 
pitymg  the  pretty,'  delicate -looking  little  woman 
when  1  thought  of  the  trials  and  dangers  she  was 
einbarking  on.  She  seemed  quite  undismayed, 
however,  and  laughed  and  prattled  away  about  the 
career  she  had  chosen  like  a  child — indeed  she  was 
little  more  than  one  in  years. 

Another  missionary,  Mr,  C ,  had  arrived  that 

morningfrom  his  post  five  hundred  miles  off,  a  hazard- 
ous  and  fatiguing  journey,  which  he  had  made  in 
under  six  weeks,  bringing  his  Httle  son,  under  two 
years  old,  with  him,  notwithstanding  that  some  of  the 


KALGAN,    OR   CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  159 

journey  over  the  passes  had  to  be  done  on  foot. 
The  natives  of  the  regions  through  which  he  had 
passed,  had,  he  told  us,  insisted  upon  it,  that  the 
little  fellow  was  an  old  man,  for  he  had  very  light, 
almost  white  hair.  Most  of  them  were  "  Tow-ists." 
The  founder  of  this  sect  is  believed  by  its  followers 
to  have  been  born  at  the  age  of  eighty-three,  with 
grey   hair.     Hence  their  refusal  to  be  persuaded, 

notwithstanding  Mr.  C 's  most  earnest  assurance 

that  his  son  was  not  an  old  man  !     "  Kalgan,"  said 

Mr.  C ,  "is,  in  the  eyes  of  Mahometans,   the 

Bokhara  of  China,  and  there  are  large  colleges 
here,  where  the  teachers  of  the  Mahometan  faith 
are  educated.  Although  the  three  great  Chinese 
religions  are  Confucianism,  Buddhism,  and  Tow-ism, 
there  are  many  more  Mahometans  existing  in  China 
than  is  generally  supposed;  their  faith  in  the 
Celestial  Empire  is  governed  by  a  consistory  of  as 
many  as  seventy  persons." 

We  stayed  to  dinner,  and  bade  adieu  to  our  hosts 
at  sundown,  having  to  be  outside  the  city  gates  before 

seven  o'clock.     Mr.  T ,  the  head  of  the  mission, 

expressed  a  hope,  before  we  left,  that  we  should  not 
follow  the  example  of  the  last  travellers  (a  German 
and  a  Frenchman),  who  had  attempted  the  transit  of 


160  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LA.ND. 

Gobi,  armed  with  a  perfect  arsenal  of  firearms  and 
escorted  by  a  large  caravan.  Ten  days  from  the  start 
they  were  back  again  in  Kalgan,  having  fallen  out  on 
the  way.  That  was  their  excuse  ;  but  I  doubt,  from 
subsequent  experience,  if  the  dreary  monotony  of  the 
desert  had  not  more  to  do  with  it,  for  they  were 
good  friends  enough,  when,  after  two  days'  rest  at 
the  mission,  they  set  ofi"  for  Japan. 

Arrived  at  the  Great  Gate  of  the  city,  on  our  home- 
ward way,  we  found  ourselves,  together  with  some 
dozen  other  unfortunate  beings,  locked  out,  or  rather 
in,  for  the  night.  All  our  efforts  to  induce  the  gate- 
keeper to  let  us  out  were  fruitless,  for  he  simply 
responded  to  our  frantic  signs  and  gestures  with  a 
grin  and  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and  crawled  back 
into  his  foul-smelling  den,  to  discuss  the  mess  of  pigs' 
entrails,  slugs,  or  some  Chinese  delicacy  of  a  like  de- 
scription, which  constituted  his  evening  meal.  The 
position  was  awkward.  To  climb  the  walls  w^as  out 
of  the  question.  Their  height  precluded  that,  for  the 
city  walls  of  Kalgan  are  at  this  point  actually  part  of 
the  Great  Wall  of  China  itself.  The  only  way  out  of 
the  dilemma  was  to  drop  a  distance  of  thirty  feet  or  so 
on  to  some  rocks  at  a  point  about  three  hundred  to 
four  hundred  yards  from  the  gate,  but  we  preferred 


KALGAN,    OR    CeANG-CHIA-KOW.  161 

even  a  night  in  a  tea-house,  to  a  sojourn  of  a  month 
or  two  at  Kalgan,  tied  down  with  a  broken  leg. 
There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  sit  down  patiently  and 
trust  to  Ivanoff's  coming  to  release  us,  though  that 
seemed  unlikely  enough,  seeing  that  he  lived  some 
distance  from  Batouyeff's  house,  and  never  visited 
it  after  nightfall.  Matters  were  not  improved  by  a 
thin  drizzling  rain  which  began  to  fall  after  we  had 
waited  nearly  an  hour,  and  drove  us  to  seek  refuge 
in  a  crowded  tea-house  close  by  the  gates,  the  resort 
of  the  gay  dogs  of  Kalgan  who  are  locked  out  of 
their  homes  for  the  night.  The  stench  and  smoke, 
though,  soon  drove  us  out  again,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  aggressive  curiosity  of  the  inmates,  the 
greater  part  of  whom  were  Mongols.  Nine  o'clock, 
ten,  eleven  o'clock  passed,  and  yet  no  Ivanoff,  or 
signs  of  a  rescue  from  our  awkward  situation. 
We  should  long  before  have  tried  an  expedient  that 
seldom  fails  in  any  country,  never  in  China,  but 
alas !  we  had  no  cash.  At  one  o'clock,  a.m.,  we 
gave  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  and  had  resolved  to  get 
what  sleep  we  could  on  the  ground,  wet  and  miry 
as  it  was,  when,  in  searching  for  a  light,  I  came 
upon  a  hard  round  substance  in  my  waistcoat  pocket, 
and  found   a   dollar  that  had   reposed  there  ever 

VOL.    I.  M 


162  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

since  the  day  I  last  wore  the  garment,  six  weeks 
ago,  in  Shanghai.  Armed  with  this,  I  entered  the 
old  janitor's  den.  He  was  still  awake,  smoking  and 
crooning  over  the  dying  embers  of  an  argol  fire. 
The  effect  was  instantaneous.  In  less  than  five 
minutes  the  mercenary  old  wretch  had  summoned 
help  from  the  tea-shop,  which  was  still  blazing  with 
light,  and  crowded  with  people.  After  much  diffi- 
culty and  labour,  unbolting  and  unbarring,  the 
heavy  gates,  guided  by  the  efforts  of  six  men,  swung 
slowly  back  upon  their  hinges  and  let  us  out,  stiff, 
cramped,  and  in  a  fiendish  temper,  but  free,  and 
followed  by  the  ragged  rabble  who  had  been  our 
fellow-captives,  and  who  luckily  for  us  led  us  direct 
for  Batouyeff's  house,  for  we  should  never  have 
found  our  way  alone.  An  excellent  supper  soon 
made  amends  for  our  discomfort.  All  had  retired 
to  rest,  thinking  we  had  slept  at  the  Mission- 
house. 

An  extraordinary  being  called  upon  us  next 
morning,  and  one  looked  upon  as  a  character  by  the 
European  population  of  Kalgan.  The  visiting-card 
which  announced  him  told  us  but  little  ;  a  piece  of 
flimsy  red  paper  about  eight  inches  long  by  five 
broad  covered  with  Chinese    characters ;    and   we 


KALGAN,    OR   CHANG-CRIA-KOW.  163 

wondered  -what  the  caller  could  possibly  want, 
not  without  grave  doubts  tliat  an  order  might  have 
come  from  Pekin  to  stop  us.  Our  visitor  was  then 
shown  in,  a  short,  intelligent-looking  man  of 
about  fifty,  who,  to  our  astonishment,  spoke  Eng- 
lish perfectly.  We  had  a  long  chat  (and  many 
successive  ones)  with  Captain  Lew  Buah  (for  such 
was  the  stranger's  name),  of  the  Chinese  Navy, 
who  entertained  the  usual  liking  of  his  profession 
for  cold  brandy  and  water,  and  delighted  in  nothing 
more  than  in  coming  to  spend  the  afternoon  to 
fight  his  battles  over  again,  rather  to  the  detri- 
ment of  our  small  stock  of  spirits.  He  had  been 
exiled  to  Kalgan,  he  told  us,  for  five  years,  in 
consequence  of  being  the  only  man  who  had  saved 
his  ship  from  the  Erench  at  Foochow.  Ten  other 
Chinese  men-of-war  were  sunk  on  this  occasion,  but 
Lew  Buah,  seeing  defence  was  useless,  had  run  his 
steamer,  a  gunboat  of  three  hundred  tons,  up  a  small 
creek  of  the  river,  and  so  saved  her  from  the  enemy. 
For  this  he  was,  unjustly  enough,  condemned  to 
death,  a  sentence  afterwards  commuted  to  five 
years'  exile  on  the  Mongolian  border.  If  the  cap- 
fain's  yarn  was  true,  he  was  certainly  to  be  pitied, 
for  his  other  exploits  (which  I  have  since  ascer- 

M  2 


]64  FROM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS   BY   LAKD. 

tained  were  not  exaggerated)  make  him  out  any- 
thing but  a  coward. 

One  of  them  was  amusing  enough.  Having  run 
the  blockade  of  Formosa  three  times,  he  was  on  the 
fourtb  occasion,  when  carrying  a  cargo  of  soldiers, 
captured  by  a  French  man-of-war,  the  commander  of 
which  had  for  some  time  been  trying  in  vain  to 
catch  him.  Luckily  for  our  friend,  however,  the 
soldiers  were  sent  from  Manchuria  unarmed  and 
disguised  as  peasants,  and  neither  the  captain 
nor  officers  of  the  Frenchman  knew  him  by  sight. 
He  was,  however,  taken  on  board  at  once,  and  exa- 
mined by  a  Chinese  interpreter  in  presence  of  the 
French  commander.  Oddly  enough  the  former 
was  an  old  friend  of  LewBuah's,  and  intimated  by  a 
wink  as  soon  as  bis  countryman  came  on  board 
that  all  would  be  right.  Nothing  -suspicious 
was  found  on  board  Lew  Buah's  ship,  and  he 
was  allowed  to  depart  in  peace,  the  French  captain 

observing   as  he   left,   "  If  you    see    that    d d 

scoundrel  Lew  Buah,  tell  him  from  me  I'll  hang 
him  to  my  main  yard-arm  whenever  he  crosses 
my  path."  The  telling  of  this  yarn  was  the  old 
gentleman's  greatest  delight,  and  he  would  return 
with  fresh  vigour  to  the  brandy  bottle  after  telling 


KALOAN,    OE    CHANG-CHTA-KOW.  165 

US  how  he  had  done  the  foreign  devil  in  the  eye. 
The  old  fellow's  life  had  been  a  somewhat  che- 
quered one.  It  commenced  at  Canton  where  his 
father  had  been  a  street  fruit -hawker,  carrying  his 
wares  in  two  baskets  slung  across  his  shoulders  by 
a  bamboo ;  in  one  basket  was  the  fruit,  balanced  by 
little  Lew  Buah  in  the  other  !  An  English  lady  who 
happened  to  meet  the  strange  couple,  took  a  violent 
fancy  to  the  fat,  chnbby-cheeked  baby,  and  having 
no  children  of  her  own,  prevailed  upon  his  father, 
nothing  loth,  to  sell  her  his  son  for  the  modest  price 
of  ten  dollars.  He  thus,  at  the  early  age  of  two  years, 
fairly  lit  on  his  legs,  and,  after  a  residence  of  fifteen 
years  with  his  benefactress,  returned  to  China  and 
obtained  a  commission  in  the  Imperial  Navy,  in 
vfhichj  up  to  the  time  of  the  unfortunate  contre- 
temps at  Foochow  he  had  greatly  distinguished  him- 
self. Though  the  captain  spoke  English  fluently, 
some  of  his  expressions  were  at  times  very 
original.  We  asked  him  one  day  if  there  was  any 
sport  to  be  got  round  Kalgan,  upon  which  he  informed 
us  that  the  hills  around  abounded  with  "  Scotch 
woodcock."  Still,  for  a  Chinaman,  the  old  fellow 
had  charming  manners,  and  was  a  thorough  gentle- 
man in  thought  and  feeling. 


166  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

As  I  have  said,  a  bitter  feud  existed  between 
Ivanoff  and  his  confrere ;  but  the  postmaster,  M. 
Kolestnikoff,  and  our  host  were  firm  friends.  Both, 
too,  were  ardent  sportsmen,  and  invited  us  one  morn- 
ing to  join  them  in  a  day's  shooting  in  the  hills  and 
ravines  round  Kalgan.  Ivanoff 's  costume  was  some- 
what singular,  consisting  of  a  suit  of  spotless  white 
canvas,  silk  socks  and  dancing-pumps,  while  round 
his  neck  was  slung  an  enormous  field-glass.  Polite- 
ness forbade  my  making  inquiries  till  we  got  to  the 
shooting-ground.  I  imagined,  at  least,  that  we 
were  going  deerstalking,  judging  from  the  caution 
our  Russian  friends  displayed  in  climbing  about 
the  crags  and  peaks.  It  was  terribly  hard  climb- 
ing, and  our  hands  were  torn  and  bleeding  when 
we  reached  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  about 
a  mile  from  the  house,  where  the  day's  sport 
was  to  commence.  Here  I  was  somewhat  sur- 
prised to  see  Ivanoff  lay  down  his  gun,  and, 
gravely  unslinging  his  huge  pair  of  glasses,  in- 
tently scan  the  rocks  of  a  mountain  separated 
from  us  by  a  narrow  ravine.  Evidently 
they  are  after  deer,  I  thought,  thankful  that  I 
had    brought    some     bullet    cartridges    with    me, 


KALGAN,    OB   OHANG-OHIA-KOW.  167 

when  suddenly  our  host  dropped  the  glasses  and 
seized  my  arm.  Following  the  direction  in  which  he 
was  pointing,  I  made  out,  with  some  diflficulty,  what 
looked  like  a  covey  of  partridges  sunning  themselves 
on  the  plain  eighty  or  a  hundred  feet  below  us. 
"Will  you  shoot  first?"  said  Ivanofi',  cocking  a 
huge  muzzle-loader  almost  the  size  of  a  duck 
gun.  "But  are  we  not  going  to  walk  them  up  ? " 
asked  Lancaster,  who,  like  myself,  was  somewhat 
bewildered  at  their  strange  proceedings.  "  Walk 
them  up  ?  "  inquired  the  Eussian,  with  a  puzzled 
look,  "walk  them  up?  what  do  you  mean?  No, 
no,  shoot  from  here,  T  will  show  you,"  and  lying 
flat  on  his  stomach,  he  took  deliberate  aim 
at  the  unconscious  victims.  Bang  went  the 
old  field-piece  with  a  report  that  woke  a 
thousand  echoes  from  the  hills  around,  and  must 
have  been  heard  distinctly  at  Kalgan,  over  a  mile 
ofl".  When  the  thick  white  smoke  had  cleared  away, 
there  was  but  one  little  brown  body  lying  extended 
on  the  ground,  a  sight  which  was  received  with 
rapturous  applause  by  the  postmaster,  who  was 
watching  the  proceedings  from  a  rock  higher  up. 
We  shot,  or  rather  climbed  and  fell  about,  till  mid- 


168  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

clay,  but  saw  no  more  birds.  Tf  tlie  sport  was  not 
first-class,  the  excitement  was  intense.  In  some  of  tlie 
places  we  literally  had  to  hold  on  by  our  eyelids, 
and  squeeze  past  sheer  falls  of  two  hundred  or  three 
hundred  feet,  on  to  the  sharp,  rugged  rocks  below. 
Ivanoff  afterwards  told  us  that  a  brace  is  accounted 
a  good  bag  at  Kalgan,  which  seems  curious  when 
the  desert  hard  by  teems  with  game  of  all  kinds. 
Perhaps,  though,  the  method  practised  by  our  Kalgan 
friends  had  something  to  do  with  the  small  bags. 

We  could  have  had  plenty  of  fun  with  the  pigeons, 
which  flew  about  in  huge  flocks  in  the  mountain- 
paths  about  Kalgan  ;  but  as  we  were  the  guests  of  a 
Russian  we  did  not  like  to  shoot  them.^  We  saw 
many  hundreds  of  specimens  of  a  peculiar  kind  of 
beetle  in  the  lower  and  swampy  grounds,  an  animal 
rather  larger  than  a  mouse,  with  a  long  whip -tail, 
and  short  broad  black  body,  covered  with  bright 
red  bands.  I  was  unable  to  discover  its  name. 
They  do  no  harm  to  the  crops,  Tvanoff  said,  living 
chiefly  on  smaller  insects,  and  are  largely  eaten 
by  the  natives,  who  consider  them  a  great 
delicacy. 

^  The  pigeon  in  Kussia,  and  especially  Siberia,  is  looked  upon  as 
a  sacred  bird. 


KALGAN,    OR   CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  169 

We  crossed  the  Great  Wall  of  China  on  our  way 
home,  or  rather  a  portion  of  it  that  had  broken 
away  and  left  a  mass  of  shapeless  stone  and  rubble. 
Its  height  is  wonderfully  deceptive.  Seen  from 
the  valley  it  looked  five  or  six  feet  high  at  the 
very  most,  but  on  taking  the  trouble  to  measure 
its  dimensions  we  found  it  to  be  twenty- three  feet  in 
height,  about  twelve  feet  wide  at  the  base,  and 
seven  at  the  top.  It  has  a  tumble-down,  dilapidated 
appearance,  for,  saving  the  square  battlemented 
towers  that  are  built  in  it  at  every  four  hundred 
yards  or  so,  it  is  uncemented,  and  composed  of  huge 
loose  stones  gradually  decreasing  in  size  as  they  near 
the  coping.  Though  the  stones  have  rolled  away 
in  places  and  left  great  gaps  in  the  structure,  one  only 
realizes  on  approaching  it  close — at  Kalgan  no  easy 
matter — what  a  herculean  work  the  building  of  this 
barrier  two  thousand  miles  long  must  have  been.  The 
stones  of  which  it  is  composed  are  so  time-worn  and 
moss- covered  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  to 
what  species  they  belong  ;  they  seemed  mostly  of  one 
kind,  and  extremely  heavy.  I  managed  to  secure 
three  small  ones  for  paper  weights,  while  Ivanoff  and 
Kolestnikoff  "  kept  cave,"  the  Mongols  and  Chinese 
being   very  jealous  of  any  interference  with  their 


170  FROM    PEKIN    TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

property  or  institutions.  At  the  same  time  no  one 
ever  dreams  of  repairing  tlie  gaps,  though  it  would 
be  easy  enough.  As  the  reader  is  probably  aware,  the 
Great  Wall  of  China  was  built  about  300  B.C.  by 
the  Chinese,  as  a  defence  against  the  Tartar  hordes 
who  were  then  ravaging  the  countries  bordering  on 
their  frontier. 

We  had  now  been  at  Kalgan  nearly  ten  days,  and 
our  carts  were  approaching  completion,  but  there 
were  as  yet  no  signs  of  the  camels.  Two  suspicious- 
looking  gentlemen  (a  Mongol  and  a  Chinese)  called 
on  us  one  evening  with  a  plausible  tale  of  being  able 
to  bring  us  eight  camels  on  the  morrow,  and,  that 
we  might  be  delayed  no  longer,  themselves  under- 
took to  guide  us  across  the  desert  to  Ourga. 
Ivanoff  was  then  away  for  two  days,  and  on  my 
replying  that  I  could  give  no  definite  answer  with- 
out consulting  him,  the  faces  of  our  visitors  length- 
ened considerably.  Their  intention  was  probably 
to  rob  and  desert  us,  for  on  seeing  that  we  were 
determined  to  await  our  host's  return  before  closing 
with  them,  they  vanished  to  return  no  more.  A  more 
villainous-looking  couple  I  have  seldom  seen,  and, 
if  appearance  goes  for  anything,  there  is  no  doubt 
they  meant  mischief. 


KALGAN,    OR    CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  171 

Comfortable  as  were  our  quarters  and  host,  we 
were  getting  a  little  tired  of  Kalgan,  for  besides 
strolling  about  the  streets  and  loafing  about  on  the 
caravan  track,  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  do. 
Our  chief  occupation  of  a  morning  was  to  ramble 
round  the  city,  whiling  away  an  hour  or  two  at  the 
Chinese  theatre,  booths  or  shops.  In  the  afternoon  it 
was  amusing  to  watch  the  long  strings  of  wood-carts 
come  jingling  and  rattling  along  the  stony  river-bed 
from  Mongolia,  and  lazy,  sleepy-looking  camel  cara- 
vans crawling  along  under  their  burdens  of  furs  and 
other  products  of  Siberia.  Some  were  a  hundred  and 
fifty  to  two  hundred  strong,  and  one  wondered  why, 
when  there  were  so  many  of  them  about,  they  could 
not  afi'ord  to  let  us  have  half  a  dozen  or  so  to  fit 
out  our  modest  expedition  across  the  Great  Hungry 
Desert,  as  it  is  called  by  the  Chinese.  We  had 
learnt  by  now,  however,  that  suggestions  do  not 
hurry  this  journey,  but  retard  it,  however  feasible 
the  project,  so  wisely  held  our  peace. 

Towards  evening  we  usually  found  our  way  to 
the  summit  of  a  rocky  mountain  about  a  couple 
of  miles  from  Kalgan,  and  watched  the  sunset, 
which  was,  as  a  rule,  of  exceptional  beauty.  Though 
the  ascent  was    steep  and   arduous,  one  was  well 


172  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY"    LAND. 

repaid  by  the  view  wlien  it  was  over.     The  ravine 
leading  to  it  was  a  kind  of  crack  or  fissure,  evi- 
dently of  volcanic    origin,   and  pitch  dark  on  the 
brightest  day,  save  for  a  patch  of  bright  blue  sky  seen 
through  the  narrow  aperture  overhead.     Emerging 
from  this,  one  came  to  a  steep,  almost  perpendicular 
grass  slope,  crowned  at  its  summit  by  a  huge  lime- 
stone rock  literally  riddled  with  caves,  and  occupied 
by  thousands  of  huge  black  and  white  birds  sitting 
motionless  at  their  outlets,  winking  and  blinking  at 
the  setting  sun,  and  looking  as   if  no  human  being 
had  broken   in    upon  their  solitude   for  centuries. 
They  displayed   not  the  slightest  alarm  at  our  ap- 
proach, but  gathered   in    groups    and   cawed   and 
screamed  as  if  in  anger  at  our  intrusion.     Not  a 
dwelling  was  to  be  seen,  not  a  sound  heard  to  break 
the   silence  but  the  occasional  rustle  of  wings,  the 
croak  of   some   huge  bird,   or  the  distant  crash  of 
some  boulder  or  stone  as  it  dislodged  itself  to  fall 
heavily  into  the  dark  valley  below.     One  could  see 
from  here  the  limitless   chains  of  mountains   that 
surround  Kalgan,  the  great  wall   stretching  away 
east   and   west   to   the   horizon,  and  beyond  it,  a 
long,  level  sea-like  expanse,  the  green  and  fertile 
plains    of    China.     Nearer    still,    nestling    in    the 


KALGAN,    Oil    OHANG-CHIA-KOW.  173 

valley,  lay  Kalgan,  witli  its  wliite  houses  and  flower- 
gardens,  its  coloured  awnings  and  terraces,  extend- 
ing for  a  mile  and  more  along  the  banks  of  the 
broad  blue  river,  and  half-way  up  the  steep,  rugged 
mountain  behind  the  city.  It  was  hard  to  realize  at 
such  times  that  one  was  so  far  from  the  civilized 
world.  It  needed  but  a  slight  effort  to  imagine 
oneself  in  Europe  again,  hidden  away  in  some 
secluded  mountain  village  in  the  Alps  or  Pyrenees. 
Pleasant  too  was  it  to  sit  out  in  the  veranda  of 
an  evening,  with  a  cool  breeze  blowing  in  fresh 
and  strong  from  the  desert,  watching  the  moon 
slowly  rise  over  the  great  black  mountain  at 
the  foot  of  the  pass,  throwing  the  weirdest  effects 
of  light  and  shade  over  the  dark  valley  and 
frowning  crenellated  walls  of  the  sleeping  city, 
for  aU  was  quiet  as  a  rule  by  ten  o'clock,  and  not 
a  sound  to  be  heard  but  the  cry  of  the  watch,  or 
at  hourly  intervals,  the  beating  of  a  gong  at  the 
Great  Gate.  We  almost  regretted,  at  such  times, 
that  our  days  in  China  were  drawing  to  a  close.  One 
feels  a  pang  of  regret  on  leaving  even  the  most  dis- 
agreeable countries,  and  we  had  assuredly  nothing  to 
complain  of  in  this  so-called  barbarous  land,  where, 
save   on  one    occasion,    we  had  met  with  nothing 


174  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

but  civility  and  kindness.  Anticipation  is  usually 
either  better  or  worse  tlian  realization,  and  we 
looked  forward  with  no  little  anxiety  to  the  jour- 
ney across  the  desert  of  Grobi — with  no  signs 
of  vegetation,  no  settled  habitations  or  fellow- 
beings  to  break  the  monotony  or  disturb  the 
solitude  of  the  long  and  weary  thirty-five  days' 
journey  that  lay  between  us  and  the  Russian 
frontier. 

Though  the  days  were  hot  at  Kalgan,  the  nights 
were  cool  and  pleasant.  Our  rest  was  somewhat 
disturbed,  though,  by  Ivanoff' s  clerks,  who  shared 
the  apartment  next  ours,  and  gave  us  a  nightly 
concert  that  began  about  half  past  ten,  and 
lasted  till  an  indefinite  hour  in  the  morning.  Their 
instrument  was  a  kind  of  half  banjo,  half  con- 
certina, very  popular  in  Siberia,  which  has  a  melan- 
choly, though  not  unpleasing,  sound.  Both  men 
were  Siberians,  one  a  native  of  Irkoutsk,  and 
the  other  of  Kiakhta,  and,  like  all  their  coun- 
trymen, had  a  rooted  antipathy  to  going  to  bed. 
I  do  not  believe  they  ever  slept  at  all,  for  I 
once  woke  about  4  a.m.,  and  one  of  them,  even 
at  that  hour,  was  reading  out  loud  to  the  other. 
Neither    could    speak  a   word   of  English,  or,    in- 


KALGAN,    OR    OHANG-CHIA-KOW.  175 

deed,  any  language  but  Russian  and  Mongolian. 
They  came  rushing  into  our  room  one  night  to  say 
there  was  a  large  wolf  in  the  yard  at  the  back  of 
the  house.  We  loaded  a  rifle  and  hurried  out^ 
but  only  just  in  time  to  see  the  beast  vanish  over 
the  wall  in  the  moonlight.  The  outskirts  of  Kalgan 
are  infested  with  these  brutes  at  night,  and 
even  in  the  daytime  children  have  been  carried 
off ;  but  we  never  saw  another  till  we  got  into 
Siberia. 

The  camels  arrived  on  the  tenth  day,  four  days 
sooner  than  we  expected  them,  and  we  set  about 
making  our  preparations  for  a  start  without 
further  delay.  The  caravan  was,  according  to 
Ivanoff's  arrangement,  to  consist  of  sixteen 
camels,  three  carts,  and  three  ponies,  under  the 
escort  of  three  Mongol  guides.  We  found  it 
quite  hopeless  to  attempt  to  pronounce  their 
names,  so  christened  them,  for  purposes  of  identifi- 
cation, Moses,  Aaron,  and  Sylvia,  the  latter  from 
bis  striking,  though  somewhat  grotesque,  like- 
ness to  a  burlesque  actress  of  that  name  who 
graces  the  boards  of  the  Gaiety  Theatre  in 
London.  Though  Sylvia  was  a  pleasant-looking, 
good-tempered  boy  of  about  twenty,  his  companions 


176  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

were  positively  repulsive.  I  have  seldom  seen  a 
more  villainous-looking  cut-throat  individual  than 
Aaron,  but  luckily  his  looks  belied  him.  Each 
wore  the  Mongol  costume,  a  loose,  long  gowD, 
thickly  coated  all  down  the  front  with  mutton  fat, 
grease,  and  other  abominations,  for  a  Mongol's 
coat  is  his  dinner-napkin.  All  were  armed  with 
short,  ugly-looking  knives,  while  Moses,  in  his 
capacity  of  leader,  carried  a  rusty  horse-pistol 
which  looked  as  if  it  had  been  made  about  the 
same  date  as  the  Great  Wall,  and  which  would 
probably  have  done  him  far  more  injury  than  his 
opponent,  had  it  gone  off. 

The  transit  of  the  Desert  of  Gobi  is  accom- 
pHshed  by  the  regular  heavy  Russian  post  (es- 
tablished 1860)  in  something  under  twenty-five 
days  from  Kiakhta,  but  we  expected  to  take  con- 
siderably longer.  The  post  caravans  are  under  the 
direction  of  experienced  Mongol  mail-men  and 
Cossacks,  who  know  the  road  to  an  inch,  although 
there  is,  of  course,  no  beaten  track  to  guide  them. 
Our  guides  were  of  a  somewhat  primitive  order,  and 
as  we  afterwards  discovered,  often  considerably  out 
both  as  to  time  and  distance.  Some  Chinese  tea- 
merchants  strolled  into  the  yard  the  day  before  we 


KALGAN,    OK   CHANG- OHIA-KOVV.  177 

left,  while  we  were  getting  the  packing-cases  settled 
evenly  on  the  camels'  backs.     They  evidently  did  not 
think  much  of  our  caravan,  and  more  than  one  of  them, 
Jee  Boo  told  me,  openly  expressed  an  opinion  that  we 
should  never  get  across  with  such  weak  camels  and 
inexperienced    men.     Truly    we     could    not    have 
chosen  a  worse  time  to  start  so  far  as  the  strength 
of  the  camels  was  concerned.     As  to  the  men,  I  felt 
we   must   take   our   chance,   but  I  was    somewhat 
uneasy,   and    did   not   enjoy   the    excellent    dinner 
(our    last    civilized    meal    for     some    time)     that 
Ivanoff  provided  for  us  so  much  as  I  should  have 
done  under  ordinary  circumstances.       It  was  too 
late  now,  however,  to  make  any  alterations,  and  we 
retired  to  rest  earlier  than  usual,  so  as  to  make  an 
early  start  in  the  morning  for  Da-Hun-Go,  the  last 
settlement  or  hamlet  on  the  Chinese  side  before  the 
desert  city  of  Ourga  (600  miles  distant)  is  reached. 
Ivanoff  was  to  accompany  us  as  far  as  our  first 
halting-place,    about   twenty   miles   distant.       The 
carts  had  already  started  when,  at  10.30  (on  the 
morning  of  the  8th  of  July),  we  set  out  for  Da- 
Hun-Go.      Just   as   we    were    about  to    mount,    a 
white-clad  figure  appeared,  surmounted  by  an  enor- 
mous   straw   hat,  which    when   removed   disclosed 

VOL.  I.  N 


178  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  perspiring  and  beaming  features  of  our  old  naval 
friend,  Captain  Lew  Buah.  This  necessitated  a 
further  adjournment  to  the  house,  where  the  captain 
drank  success  to  our  expedition  in  Vodka,  and 
made  an  appointment  to  dine  with  us  in  London 
in  two  years'  time.  I  sincerely  hope  the  old  fellow 
has  since  obtained  his  pardon,  and  returned  to  his 
vocation,  for  which,  as  far  as  regards  pluck,  he  was 
certainly  well  fitted. 

It  was  a  bright  and  lovely  morning.  The  first  hour 
or  two  of  our  journey  lay  through  the  dry  river-bed — 
or  caravan  road — on  which  we  passed  many  strings  of 
bullock-carts,  but  few  camels.  About  nine  miles  from 
Kalgan,  and  half-way  to  Dah-Hun-Gro,  we  passed 
"  Tutinza,"  a  Mongol  word  signifying  "Cave  Town." 
Tutinza,  which  contained  about  eight  hundred  in- 
habitants, could  not  have  been  better  named,  as  the 
houses  are  literally  built  into  the  sides  of  the  hill,  and 
are  roofless,  although  they  belonged  to  well-to-do 
Chinamen,  and  were  well  and  even  luxuriously 
furnished  inside  ;  while  here  and  there  among  them 
were  pretty  flower-gardens  and  clustering  vines. 
Seen  from  a  distance,  the  appearance  of  the 
blue  and  white  clad  figures  moving  about  among 
the    pathways    intersecting    the    caves    was    very 


KALGAN,    OR    CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  179 

curious.  It  looked  like  a  huge  ant-hill.  Nearly 
opposite  the  village  is  "  The  Target  of  Tamerlan," 
a  mountain  about  three  or  four  hundred  feet  high, 
the  summit  of  which  is  perforated  by  a  clean-cut 
circular  aperture  about  thirty  feet  in  diameter, 
plainly  visible  from  the  road  below.  A  freak  of 
nature,  no  doubt;  but  the  Mongols  say  that  this 
hole  was  made  by  an  arrow  shot  by  the  Tartar  hero. 
Jee  Boo  derisively  remarked  to  Moses  that  Tamerlan 
must  have  had  a  very  large  bow,  which  only  elicited 
a  grunt  in  reply,  and  made  our  leader  look,  if  possible, 
more  ill-tempered  and  villainous  than  ever. 

The  long  rest  at  Kalgan  had  put  our  ponies  in  rare 
trim,  and  when  we  had  left  the  rocky  valley  and  got 
on  to  the  grass  plains  that  bound  the  valley  of 
Da-Hun-Go,  they  tore  away  with  us  at  a  pace  that 
it  took  Ivanoff,  who  was  riding  an  antiquated 
steed  purchased  from  a  Cossack  courier,  all  his 
time  to  keep  up  with  us.  Before  reaching  the 
plains,  we  ascended  for  the  last  time  the  ridge  of 
mountainous  rocks  separating  China  from  the  plains 
of  Mongolia.  There  is  a  gradual  rise  of  about  fif- 
teen hundred  feet  from  Kalgan  to  Da-Hun-Go,  from 
which  point  the  desert  extends,  flat  and  unbroken, 
with  the  exception  of  gentle  undulations,  and  a  few 

N  2 


180  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

ridges  of  rock,  to  tlie  borders  of  Siberia.  So  steep 
was  the  ascent  that  we  had  to  get  off  aad  lead  our 
ponies,  and  though  only  three  hundred  feet  high,  it 
took  the  carts  nearly  two  hours  to  accomplish  it. 
Halfway  up  we  met  a  caravan  of  bullock-carts,  each 
with  three  or  four  men  hanging  on  behind  with  ropes 
to  act  as  breaks.  Even  with  these  precautions  two 
or  three  lay  smashed  to  pieces  on  the  road-side. 
It  is  a  curious  fact,  seeing  the  rough  work  they  go 
through,  that  these  vehicles  are  built  entirely  of 
wood,  and  have  not  a  scrap  of  iron  or  other  metal 
in  their  construction.  About  four  o'clock  we  came 
to  a  dilapidated,  crumbling  wall  about  fifteen  feet  in 
height,  a  branch  of  the  Great  Wall  of  China,  which, 
running  at  right  angles  to  it  for  about  thirty  miles, 
forms  the  boundary  between  Inner  Mongolia  and 
China.  A  kind  of  gap  or  gate  fifteen  to  twenty  feet 
broad,  marked  the  caravan  road.  Passing  through 
this,  we  turned  and  looked  our  last  on  the  Chinese 
Empire,  and  by  five  o'clock  had  reached  our  camping- 
ground,  a  green  stretch  of  meadow-land,  watered  by 
a  clear  running  stream,  on  the  borders  of  which 
cattle,  sheep,  and  ponies  were  grazing. 

Half  a  dozen  brick  and  wooden  houses  composed 
the  villaofe  of  Da-Hun-Go.     While  the  tents  were 


KALGAN,    on    CIIANG-CIIIA-KOW.  181 

being  stnick,  we  strolled  out  witli  oiir  guns,  but 
though  we  saw  plenty  of  game,  duck,  snipe,  and  a 
species  of  moor-hen  in  plenty,  we  could  get  nowhere 
near  them.  AYe  would  willingly  have  stayed  here  a 
day, but  that  the  Mongols  when  once  off  are  as  hard  to 
stop  as  a  switchback  railway  until  they  have  reached 
their  destination,  long  or  short  as  the  journey  may  be. 
On  our  return  we  found  the  fires  lit  and  a  comfortable 
meal  prepared  for  us  by  Jee  Boo.  Ivanoff  stayed  the 
night,  and  slept  in  the  tent,  but  we  preferred  doubling 
up  in  our  carts,  the  night  being  so  cold,  that  one  was 
glad  of  a  thick  sheepskin  even  in  the  close,  stuffy 
vehicles.  We  slept  soundly,  lulled  by  the  murmur 
of  the  brook,  and  were  rather  loth  to  move,  when  Jee 
Boo  brought  us  the  matutinal  cup  of  cocoa  and  a 
biscuit.  But  the  camels  were  already  packed,  and 
although  it  was  then  only  six,  the  indefatigable 
Ivanoff  had  been  up  an  hour  superintending  every- 
thing and  giving  final  instructions  for  our  comfort 
and  safety  to  the  Mongols,  an  utterly  useless  pro- 
ceeding, I  afterwards  thought,  when  I  got  to 
know  this  unique  race  better,  for  whatever  is  said 
to  them,  except  for  their  own  benefit,  invariably  goes 
in  at  one  ear  and  out  of  the  other. 

"We  left  Da-Hun-Go  at  seven  o'clock,  taking  leave 


182  FROM    PEKO    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND- 

of  our  kindly  host  with  much  the  same  feehng  that  a 
man  experiences  when  embarking  for  the  first  time 
on  a  long  sea  voyage,  with  the  difference  that  we 
had  but  a  very  faint  notion  of  when  we  should 
reach  port,  and  but  a  very  vague  idea  of  the  hard- 
ships and  fatigue  to  be  undergone  before  we 
regained  comparative  civihzation  at  Kiakhta.  At 
length  all  was  ready.  The  tent  and  water-barrels 
packed,  carts  harnessed,  and  ponies  saddled. 
Moses,  mounting  a  wiry  little  beast  about  twelve 
hands  high,  led  the  way,  while  Aaron  took  the  lead 
on  the  foremost  camel,  Sylvia  bringing  up  the  rear 
and  hunting  up  the  stragglers,  who  were  con- 
tinually breaking  loose  from  the  line  as  they  stooped 
to  gather  the  sweet  fresh  pasture  through  which  we 
travelled.  A  final  squeeze  of  the  hand  to  Ivanoff,  a 
crack  of  Moses'  heavy  whip,  and  the  caravan  slowly 
moved  away  to  the  deep  boom-booming  of  the  camel 
bells,  a  music  which,  though  it  sounded  musical  and 
pleasing  enough  at  first,  we  were  heartily,  hope- 
lessly sick  and  tired  of  long  before  reaching 
Ourga.  As  we  turned  a  corner  of  the  road  and 
took  a  last  look  at  the  vanishing  figure  of  our 
friend  and  host,  it  was  with  a  feeling  of  loneliness 
and  depression,  hardly  wonderful,  perhaps,  when  we 


KALGAN,    OR    CHANG-CHIA-KOW.  183 

realized  that  for  nearly  one  thousand  miles  in  dis- 
tance and  more  than  a  month  in  time  we  should  see 
no  other  Europeans,  and  very  few  natives.  Nor  was 
it  reassuring  to  think  that  we  were  for  the  next 
month  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  three  ragged, 
villainous-looking  individuals  who  constituted  our 
escort,  and  who  might,  if  they  so  pleased,  murder, 
rob,  or  desert  us  with  impunity,  so  far  as  any  fear  of 
punishment  was  concerned.  Siberia,  to  say  nothing 
of  Russia  and  France,  seemed  very  far  away  on  that 
bright  July  morning  as  we  slowly  started  off,  on 
the  first  important  stage  of  the  long  land  journey 
from  Pekin  to  Calais. 

We  were  nearly  four  hours  getting  out  of  the 
valley  of  Da-Hun-Go,  one  of  the  prettiest  bits 
of  scenery  we  passed  during  the  whole  of  our 
voyage.  The  ravine  itself  is  a  little  over  a  mile 
broad,  with  low  undulating  green  hills  on  either 
side.  Flocks  of  sheep  dotted  their  sides,  and  an 
occasional  red  and  gold  Buddhist  temple  flashed  in 
the  sun  on  their  summits  and  broke  the  sky-line. 
Through  the  centre  of  the  valley  ran  a  tumbling, 
foaming  brook  alive  with  trout,  its  banks  fringed 
with  sweet-smeUing  flowers,  and  about  fifty  yards 
from  its  brink  the  brown,  well-trodden  caravan  road 


184  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

wliicli  from  here  to  the  borders  of  the  desert  proper 
is  well  defined.  One  might  have  been  in  one  of 
the  loveliest  parts  of  England.  Wild  hyacinths^ 
cowslips,  wild  dog-roses,  periwinkles,  and  daisies 
grew  on  all  sides  in  the  long,  sweet  grass  through 
which  our  ponies  almost  laboured  knee-deep,  while 
in  the  distance  the  low  sweet  notes  of  a  cuckoo 
heightened  the  illusion,  and  recalled  lovely  bits  of 
scenery  in  Devonshire  or  Wales. 

We  halted  for  an  hour,  about  two  o'clock,  for  a  tin 
of  preserved  meat  and  glass  of  cold  whisky  and  water. 
Moses  intimated  to  us  through  Jee  Boo  his  intention 
of  pushing  on  and  gaining  the  desert  before  nightfall, 
so  there  was  no  help  for  it.  I  did  not  wish  to  begin 
the  journey  with  a  disturbance,  and  made  no  demur, 
and  three  o'clock  saw  us  again  on  the  march, 
passing  through  plains  of  wheat  and  barley,  and 
enormous  fields  or  enclosures  of  mustard  and  poppies. 
We  saw  no  habitations,  and  wondered  a  good  deal 
where  the  tillers  of  all  this  ground  reside.  The 
road  got  worse  towards  evening,  and  the  heavy, 
clumsy  carts  stuck  fast  several  times  in  the  deep, 
rotten  holes  with  which  it  was  honeycombed.  A 
little  before  six  o'clock  we  got  into  a  more  desolate- 
looking  country,  although  it  was  better  travelling. 


ih. 


nP(i(? 


KALGAN,    OH    CHANG-OHIA-KOW.  185 

wliicli  was  perhaps  lucky,  as  the  stiff  work  in  the 
marshes  had  almost  done  up  our  camels.  I  had  yet 
to  learn  that  the  more  beat  these  animals  look,  the 
fitter  they  are. 

We  now  passed  through  a  sterile,  burnt-up-looking 
country,  thickly  covered  with  clumps  of  thick, 
wiry  grass,  over  which  the  camel  carts  plunged 
and  rolled  in  a  very  painful  manner.  I  retired  to 
my  cart  about  five  o'clock  for  a  rest,  and,  tired  out 
with  my  long  ride  in  the  sun,  fell  asleep.  The 
sun  was  low  in  the  heavens  when  I  awoke 
and  looked  out  of  the  little  window.  All  traces  of 
vegetation  had  vanished,  while  straight  in  front  of 
us  rose  a  low  range  of  yellow  sand-hills,  through 
which  stunted  wisps  of  light  green  grass  struggled 
at  intervals.  On  the  near  side  of  these  were  a  couple 
of  circular  tents,  some  dogs,  and  ponies  standing 
hard  by ;  on  the  far  side  of  the  sand-hills  the  sea,  or 
what  appeared  so  exactly  like  it,  that  I  had  to  rub 
my  eyes  to  make  sure  I  was  not  dreaming.  There  it 
was ;  the  great  grey  waste  looking  exactly  as  it  does 
when  lit  up  at  sunset,  by  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun 
after  a  hot  summer's  day  in  England.  The  low 
yellow  sand-hills,  too,  heightened  the  illusion,  and 
stood     out   clear    and    distinct   against    the    grey 


186  FEOM    PEKIN   TO    CALA.IS    BY    LAND. 

expanse  and  level,  unbroken  horizon.  At  this 
moment  my  ruminations  were  rudely  broken  in 
upon  by  Moses.  Appearing  suddenly  at  the  side  of 
my  cart,  he  thrust  his  flat,  ill-favoured  face  in  at  the 
window,  and  extending  a  long,  skinny  forefinger, 
pointed  to  the  darkening  waste.  "  Shamo,"  ^  he 
muttered  in  a  hoarse,  guttural  voice.  Then  I  knew 
we  had  reached  the  confines  of  the  "  Great  Hungry 
Desert.'-' 

^  Mongol  name  for  Gobi  Desert. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE    DESERT    OP    GOBI. 

The  population  of  Mongolia,  an  elevated  plateau 
lying  about  four  thousand  feet  above  sea-level,  is 
roughly  estimated  at  between  three  and  four  millions, 
but  the  difficulties  of  obtaining  anything  like  an 
accurate  census  of  the  tribes  inhabiting  this  vast 
tableland  are  obvious.  Of  this  number,  over  thirty 
thousand  inhabit  Urga,  the  capital  and  residence  of 
the  *'  Kootookta,"  or  living  God  of  the  Mongol  reli- 
gion, "  Buddhism."  The  power  of  this  human  deity 
is  purely  nominal.  He  is  allowed  to  reign  on  suffer- 
ance by  the  Emperor  of  China,  who  governs,  more 
or  less  nominally,  the  whole  of  Mongolia,  from 
the  Siberian  frontier  to  the  mountains  of  Tibet. 
The  Mongol  Tartars  pay  tax,  though  somewhat 
irregularly,  to  the  Pekin  Government,  the  native 
khans  or  princes  being  responsible  for  the  revenues 
of  their  several"  khanates  "  or  districts. 

The  name  "  Gobi "  is  given  by  the  Mongols  to  any 


188  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

district  more  or  less  destitute  of  water,  but  the 
desert,  where  we  crossed  it,  presents  but  few  of  the 
characteristics  with  which  we  usually  associate  the 
name.  It  may  better  be  described  as  a  vast  plain 
or  steppe,  extending  from  the  northern  side  of  the 
Great  "Wall  of  China  to  the  Russian  frontier-town  of 
Kiakhta,  a  distance  of  over  eight  hundred  miles. 
With  the  exception,  however,  of  about  fifty  miles 
of  sandy  waste  midway  across,  the  north-western 
portion  is  seldom  entirely  devoid  of  vegetation  of 
some  sort  or  another,  be  it  rich,  luxuriant  pasture, 
or  dry  withered  scrub.  Perhaps  the  most  curious 
thing  about  this  so-called  desert  is,  that  although 
grass  is  so  plentiful,  and  in  many  places  wild  flowers 
grow  in  profusion,  water  is  very  scarce.  In  the 
summer  months  frequent  and  heavy  rain  storms  do 
much  to  lessen  this  evil,  but  the  Tartars  suffer 
terribly  at  times  from  the  drought,  which  sometimes 
lasts  a  year  or  more.  Notwithstanding,  the  climate 
is  healthy,  and  serious  epidemics,  such  as  cholera  or 
typhus,  unknown. 

There  are  three  caravan  routes  from  the  Great 
"Wall  to  Urga.  Along  each  of  these  wells  have 
been  dug  eight  to  ten  feet  deep,  and  at  intervals  of 
twenty  to  thirty   miles  ;  but   we  found  the    water 


THE    DESERT    OP    GOBI.  3  89 

in  most  of  them  tliick  and  brackisli,  in  many 
undrinkable,  and  had  every  reason  to  be  sorry,  long 
before  we  reached  Urga,  that  we  had  not  hiid  in 
a  hirger  stock  of  soda-water  at  Shanghai. 

Our  guides  were  not  cheerful  companions. 
Moses  seldom  spoke,  Aaron  never.  Sylvia,  how- 
ever, was  the  life  and  soul  of  the  caravan.  His 
spirits  never  flagged  for  an  instant,  and  when- 
ever he  could  talk  to  no  one  else,  he  would  hold 
lonsf  conversations  in  a  loud  tone  with  the  camel 
he  bestrode,  occasionally  bursting  into  song.  The 
Mongols  do  not  squeak  when  they  sing,  as  the 
Chinese  do,  but  their  voices  are  as  harsh  and  in- 
harmonious as  their  songs,  which  are  generally  in 
the  minor  key,  and  very  doleful  and  depressing. 

I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  a  daily  descrip- 
tion of  the  scenery  passed  between  Kalgan  and 
Urga.  It  may  be  described  in  very  few  words : 
Fourteen  days  of  undulating  grass  plain,  mono- 
tonous and  unbroken,  save  by  an  occasional  "  Yourt"^ 
or  encampment,  four  days  of  deep,  sandy  desert 
interspersed  with  two  ridges  of  rock,  one  hundred 
and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet  high,  so  steep  as  to  be 
almost  impracticable  for  the  carts.     Five  more  days 

'  A  Mongol  tent  or  encampment. 


190  FROM.   PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

of  green  plain  with  intervals  of  gravel,  thickly  covered 
with  the  brightly  coloured  transparent  stones,  for 
which  Gobi  is  famous.  Such  is  a  brief  but  sufficient 
description  of  the  twenty-three  days  we  occupied  in 
reaching  Urga.  But  for  the  tract  of  sandy  desert 
half-way,  nothing  meets  the  eye,  day  after  day,  week 
after  week,  but  one  long  dreary  succession  of  waves 
of  plain,  which  reminded  me  of  nothing  so  much 
as  the  ocean.  Not  a  solitary  object,  animate  or 
inanimate,  broke  the  dull,  desolate  landscape  save 
when  at  rare  intervals  we  sighted  a  Tartar  tent, 
gleaming  white  in  the  sunshine,  and  looking  in  the 
far  distance  like  some  white  sea-bird  asleep  on  the 
billows  of  this  huge  sea  of  verdure.  Beyond  the 
capital,  however,  the  country  becomes  more  accen- 
tuated, and  there  are  woods,  mountains,  and  rivers, 
to  gladden  the  eye  after  the  long,  monotonous  desert 
journey,  of  which  we  were  heartily  sick  long  before 
we  reached  the  sacred  city  of  the  Kootookta. 

I  fondly  imagined  I  had  reached  the  acme  of  dis- 
comfort and  misery  in  a  mule-litter,  but  the  latter 
is  a  bed  of  roses  compared  to  the  boxes  of  human 
suffering  in  which  we  crossed  Mongolia.  Imagine 
a  kind  of  oblong  vehicle,  eight  feet  long  by  three 
wide,  and  four  feet  high,  the  body  of  the  cart  of 


THE    DESERT   OF    GOBI.  191 

rough  unpainted  wood,  the  roof  or  covering  of 
canvas,  thickly  smeared  with  Chinese  varnish,  which 
in  wet,  or  very  hot  weather,  exuded  the  most  in- 
tolerable smell.  Two  doors  with  small  square  holes 
therein,  let  in  the  air  and  light  (also  occasionally 
the  rain),  while  a  mattress  and  a  couple  of  large 
feather  pillows  acted  as  a  buffer,  without  which 
one's  body  and  head  would  in  a  very  short 
time  have  been  one  mass  of  bruises.  To  say  that 
these  somewhat  primitive  vehicles  shake  would  be 
incorrect.  They  leap  and  bound  even  on  a  fairly 
good  road,  beating  and  pounding  the  wretched 
inmate  into  a  jelly ;  over  stony  ground  it  is  next  to 
impossible  to  remain  in  them  for  any  length  of  time 
without  a  splitting  headache,  and  a  feeling  as  if 
every  individual  bone  in  one's  body  had  been  torn 
from  its  socket  and  put  back  again.  I  do  not  wish 
my  bitterest  enemy  a  worse  fate  than  a  night  of 
rough  caravan  work  in  Mongolia.  We  often  walked 
till  one  in  the  morning,  in  preference  to  the  in- 
tolerable shaking,  which  affected  the  nerves  and 
mind  almost  as  much  as  it  injured  the  body. 

With  the  exception  of  a  forty-eight  hours'  rest  at 
Urga,  the  day's  work  never  varied,  from  the  time 
we  left  Kalgan  till  we  rode  through  the  Russian  out- 


192  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

posts  at  Kiakhta.  At  daybreak  (between  five  and 
six  a.m.)  Sylvia  would  gallop  off  on  a  pony  and  bring 
in  tlie  camels  which,  turned  loose  at  the  halt,  had 
strayed  away  in  search  of  pasture  till,  at  sunrise, 
some  of  them  were  mere  specks  on  the  horizon. 
Breakfast  (a  cup  of  cocoa  and  a  biscuit)  over,  the 
caravan  was  usually  well  under  weigh  by  half-past 
six.  The  pace  was  not  exhilarating,  it  seldom 
attained  the  rate  of  three  miles  an  hour,  never 
exceeded  it.  We  then  travelled  on,  riding  or 
walking,  till  two  o'clock  p.m.,  when  tents  were 
pitched,  and,  if  near  a  well,  the  water-barrels 
filled.  The  midday  meal  consisted  of  a  tin  of 
preserved  meat  and  rice,  or,  if  in  a  game  district,  a 
duck  or  sand-grouse  sometimes  enlivened  this  some- 
what sad  meal.  At  five  o'clock  we  were  on  the  move 
again  till  one  or  two  in  the  morning,  only  halting 
about  nine  o'clock  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  to  un- 
saddle the  ponies  and  swallow  a  cup  of  Valentine's 
meat  juice.  I  do  not  know  what  we  should  have 
done  without  this  preparation.  On  a  journey  of 
this  kind,  where  the  fatigue  is  so  great  and  cooking 
impossible,  it  is  simply  invaluable. 

We  thus  got  about  four  hours'  actual  rest  in  the 
twenty-four,  for  in  the  carts,  while  in  motion,  sleep 


TEE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  193 

was  out  of  the  question.  I  have  often  since  wondered 
how  the  ponies  stood  it.  Camels  are,  of  course, 
used  to  such  long  exhausting  journeys,  though, 
strangely  enough,  the  loss  of  a  camel  was  our  only 
casualty. 

AYe  got  on  fairly  well  for  two  or  three  days,  but 
after  the  first  week  experienced  a  sense  of  oppres- 
sion and  weariness  very  hard  to  shake  off,  and  the 
dull,  dead  monotony  of  the  eternal  green  steppes 
began  to  tell  upon  the  mind  and  spirits.  We  met 
but  once  a  day  as  a  rule,  and  even  then,  like  the 
parrot,  spoke  little  and  thought  much;  indeed  we  had 
nothing  to  talk  about,  for  with  the  exception  of  an 
occasional  yourt  there  was  not  one  solitary  object  to 
distract  the  mind  for  a  moment,  or  interrupt  the  de- 
pressing aspect  of  the  waves  of  plain  that  extend 
between  Kalgan  and  Urga.  "We  even  welcomed  the 
region  of  sand  in  mid-desert.  It  was  a  change,  at 
any  rate,  and  there  were  rocks  to  look  at,  though, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  work  was  harder  and  the 
distance  accomplished  each  day  considerably  less. 

Perhaps  the  most  striking  peculiarity  about  Gobi 
is  the  dead  silence  that  reigns  over  its  vast  surface. 
At  night  the  bright,  unwavering  lights  of  the 
Great   Bear,    and  soft  glimmer  of   Cassiopeia  and 

VOL.   1.  0 


194  FROM    I'EKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  Pleiades  stood  out  with  a  distinctness  rarely 
seen  in  other  latitudes.  I  often  lay  awake  and 
watched  them,  too  tired  to  sleep,  till  the  light- 
ening horizon  heralded  the  dawn  of  another  dreary, 
uneventful  day,  and  warned  one  that  another  hour 
at  most  would  see  us  off  again  on  our  weary  journey. 
I  had  never,  till  I  spent  a  night  out  on  the  waste, 
thoroughly  realized  the  words  of  the  poet : — 

And  round  me  all  in  utter  darkness  lies, 
No  sound,  no  form,  no  message,  and  no  sign. 

Only  the  silence  of  the  far-off  skies   ■ 
And  stars  that  thro'  the  darkness  calmly  shine. 

It  was  nottillthe  morning  of  the  fifth  day  out 
from  Saram  Bolousar  that  we  sighted  a  yourt  on  the 
horizon  and  encamped  within  a  mile  of  it  at 
dinner-time.  There  were  but  half-a-dozen  tents  in 
all,  containing  the  filthiest  and  most  repulsive 
beings  I  have  ever  beheld. 

The  majority  were,  unfortunately  for  us,  not  the 
least  troubled  with  shyness,  and  took  forcible  posses- 
sion of  our  tent  and  carts,  notwithstanding  the 
indignant  protestations  of  Jee  Boo.  Remonstrance 
was  useless.  It  would  have  been  contrary  to  the 
rules  of  desert  etiquette  to  turn  them  out,  and 
might     have     got     us     into     trouble.       It     was 


THE    DESERT   OF   GOBI.  195 

a  hot  day,  and  so  closely  were  they  packed  about 
the  tent-doorway  that  not  a  breath  of  air  could 
reach  us,  yet  we  suiSfered  in  silence,  though  the 
smell  from  the  greasy  rags  in  which  the  poor 
wretches  were  clothed  was  well-nigh  unbearable. 
We  must  have  seen  from  first  to  last  about  a  hun- 
dred natives,  but  I  was  sadly  disappointed,  I  must 
own,  in  the  Mongolian  Tartar.  I  had  pictured  him 
a  wild,  fierce-looking  fellow,  bristling  with  knives 
and  firearms,  and  leading  a  wild,  romantic  existence, 
of  which  privation  and  danger  formed  a  daily  part. 
I  found  him  a  mild,  stupid-looking  individual,  lazy, 
good-tempered,  dirty — not  to  say  filthy — in  appear- 
ance and  habits,  and  addicted  to  petty  theft  when 
there  was  no  fear  of  being  found  out. 

The  men  are  of  middle  size,  muscular  and  stoutly 
built,  with  thick  lips  and  small  beady  black  eyes. 
Naturally  fair,  the  combined  effects  of  sun,  argol 
smoke,  and  last,  but  not  least,  dirt  give  to  most  of 
them  the  hue  of  a  negro.  Their  women  are  plain 
and,  as  a  rule,  virtuous.  Infidelity  is  rare  in  Mongolia, 
and  when  it  does  occur  the  injured  husband  is  easily 
consoled  by  payment  of  a  few  sheep  or  a  camel  or 
two.  The  Mongolian  woman's  lot  is  not  a  happy 
one.     Unlike  their  Kirghiz  brothers,  the  Mongolian 

0  2 


196  PROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Tartars  have  no  respect  whatever  for  their  wives,  of 
which  they  are  allowed  any  number,  though  the 
first  married  takes  precedence  over  the  others. 
They  are  treated  more  as  slaves  than  companions, 
and  do  all  the  real  hard  work  of  the  yourt,  from 
catching  the  camels  to  disembowelling  a  sheep  ! 
The  men,  as  a  rule,  live  longer  than  the  women. 
The  latter  suffer  more  from  disease,  although,  with 
the  exception  of  a  kind  of  influenza  prevalent  in 
summer,  epidemics  are  unknown  in  Mongoha. 

The  Mongol  Tartar  is  essentially  a  nomad,  and 
seldom  stationary  for  more  than  a  year  at  a  time,  but 
for  ever  on  the  move,  roving  hither  and  thither 
over  the  great  plain  in  search  of  pasture  and  water 
for  his  flocks  and  herds.  His  "  yourt "  or  tent 
is  admirably  adapted  to  his  wild,  erratic  life,  being 
so  constructed  that  it  can  be  taken  down  and 
packed  on  a  camel's  back  in  less  than  an  hour. 
The  "  yourts "  are  circular  in  shape,  and  simply 
consist  of  two  layers  of  thick  felt  stretched  over  a 
wooden  framework  secured  by  stout  leather  thongs. 
They  are  about  five  feet  high,  and  eighteen  feet 
in  diameter.  A  hole  cut  in  the  centre  of  the  conical 
roof  lets  out  the  smoke  of  a  fire,  which  day  and 
night  is  kept  alight   for  cooking    purposes.       The 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  197 

Mongol  lias  no  fixed  time  for  his  meals.  He  eats 
when  he  feels  hungry,  and  as  often  in  the  middle  of 
the  night  as  the  day.  In  winter  the  roof  aperture 
is  closed,  and  the  smoke  allowed  to  escape  as  best 
it  may  through  the  chinks  and  crannies  in  the  felt. 
The  fuel  used  is  not  wood  (for  no  wood  grows  in 
Gobi),  but  "  argol "  or  dried  camels'  dung,  the  smoke 
of  which  is  much  more  dense  and  pungent,  and  most 
of  the  Mongols  suffer  from  sore  eyes  in  consequence. 
The  furniture  of  a  yourt  is  simple  enough;  half- 
a-dozen  sheepskin  rugs,  a  flat  iron  pan  to  cook 
in,  a  large  box  containing  the  goods  and  chattels  of 
the  family,  surmounted  by  an  image  of  Buddha  and 
two  or  three  prayer- wheels ;  there  is  little  or 
no  room  for  more.  Some  of  the  yourts  are  better 
furnished  than  others,  those  for  example  belonging 
to  the  khans  or  princes.  The  latter  are  resplendent 
inside  and  out  with  gold,  silver,  and  costly  silks ; 
but  these  are  rarely  met  with  by  the  casual 
traveller. 

With  the  exception  of  gluttony  the  Mongol  has 
few  vices.  Drunkenness  is  rare.  It  is  only  when 
the  mares  are  milked  and  "  airak "  brewed  that 
they  exceed  in  this  respect;  but  when  they  do, 
it  is  with  a   will,  a    whole  yourt   being  given   up 


198  FROM    PEKIN    'VO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

to  drunkenness  and  debauch  for  two  or  three 
days  together.  "  Airak "  is  the  only  intoxicant 
known  to  the  Mongols,  if  we  except  the 
strong  fiery  whisky  sometimes  imported  among 
them  by  Chinese  traders.  Dirt  is  their  other 
failing.  I  can  safely  say  I  have  never  seen,  or  even 
read  of  a  race  so  loathsome  in  their  appearance  and 
habits  as  the  Mongols.  Men  and  women  alike 
seem  to  revel  in  it,  and  most  of  them  present  more 
the  appearance  of  perambulating  bundles  of  filthy 
rags  than  human  beings.  It  was  not  till  we 
reached  Urga,  and  met  some  of  the  better  class,  that 
we  were  able  to  distinguish  what  the  Mongol 
costume  really  is,  viz.  a  kind  of  loose  dressing-gown 
reaching  just  below  the  knee,  secured  by  an  orna- 
mented silver  belt,  a  pair  of  baggy  breeches  stuffed 
into  a  pair  of  Chinese  half -boots  with  felt  soles,  the 
whole  surmounted  by  a  broad-brimmed  black  felt 
hat,  not  unlike  a  sailor's  hat  in  shape,  with  long  silk 
streamers.  In  winter  the  poor  Mongol  is  smothered 
in  sheepskins,  the  rich  in  furs  from  Siberia.  At  a 
distance  the  women  are  indistinguishable  from  the 
men,  the  only  perceptible  difierence  being  that  the 
former  wear  no  belt  (the  Mongol  name  for  woman 
signifies     literally    the     "  unbelted     one "),    while 


THE    DESERT   OF    GOBI.  199 

all  wear  a  head-dress,  a  kind  of  tiara  of  Chinese 
manufacture,  made  of  silver  and  red  and  blue  stones, 
which  look  like,  but  are  not,  turquoises  and  coral. 
A  Mongol  lady  never  does  her  hair  more  than  once 
every  two  months  or  so.  It  is  kept  in  position  by  a 
kind  of  thick  glue,  and  dressed  so  as  to  stand  out 
two  or  three  inches  on  either  side  of  the  head  at  right 
angles.  The  result  of  this  practice  in  dwellings  so 
infested  with  vermin  as  the  Mongol  yourts  may  be 
left  to  the  imagination. 

The  wealth  of  a  Mongol  Tartar  consists  ex- 
clusively of  camels,  sheep,  and  ponies,  for  there  is 
no  industry,  no  manufacture  of  any  kind  in  Mon- 
golia. The  ponies  are  wonderfully  well  suited  to 
endure  the  long,  distressing  voyages  their  owners 
are  continually  making.  Though  small  and  slightly 
built,  the  amount  of  fatigue  these  little  beasts  will 
undergo  is  something  incredible.  Nothing  seems  to 
tire  them,  and  our  own,  "Chow"  and  "  Karra,"  arrived 
at  Kiakhta  as  fit  and  sound  as  when  we  left  the  Great 
Wall,  although  they  had  but  five  hours'  rest  out  of  the 
twenty-four  for  over  a  month,  and  for  nearly  a  quarter 
of  that  time  were  on  a  short  allowance  of  water. 
The  worth  of  a  pony  in  Gobi  varies  from  81.  to  10/., 
or  its  equivalent  in  brick  tea,  for  money  is  unknown 


200  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

in  MoDgolia,  and  the  currency  at  present  consists 
solely  of  this  somewhat  cumbersome  article.  We 
passed  two  or  three  droves  of  400  or  600  ponies  each 
on  our  way  across,  which  were  being  sent  to  Kalgan 
for  export  to  Pekiu,  Shanghai,  and  other  parts  of 
China.    Accompanying  one  of  these  was  a  '*  Mongo- 

lized  "  German,  Herr  R ,  who  twenty  years  ago 

settled  in  Mongolia  and  has  made  a  large  fortune 
buying  and  exporting  ponies.  We  should  never 
have  known  him  for  a  European,  dressed  as  he  was 
a  la  Tartare,  and  the  "  Guten  Tag,"  with  which  he 
greeted  us,  sounded  strangely  out  of  place. 

The  Mongols  never  shoe  their  ponies,  nor  do  they 
groom  them.  The  mane  and  tail  is  allowed  to  grow 
so  long  as  to  almost  trail  on  the  ground,  the 
Tartars  saying  that  the  length  of  these  appendages 
keeps  them  warm  in  winter,  and  wards  off  flies  in 
the  hot  season;  also,  in  case  of  a  broken  bridle  or 
stirrup-leather,  there  is  always  the  horse-hair  handy 
to  mend  it  with ! 

The  ways  of  these  little  beasts  are  at  first  some- 
what confusing  to  a  stranger.  It  took  me  some 
time  to  get  used  to  "  Karra's  "  favourite  tricks,  such 
as  stopping  to  scratch  his  ear  with  his  hind-leg, 
sitting  down  like  a  dog,    and   occasionally  rolling 


THE    DESERT    OV    GOBI.  201 

without  a  moment's  warning,  when  we  came  to  a 
more  than  ordinarily  tempting  bit  of  grass.  He  was 
certainly  the  cleverest  pony  I  have  ever  seen  out  of 
a  circus,  and  as  sweet-tempered  as  he  was  mis- 
chievous. I  shall  never  forget  when,  the  first  day 
after  antelope,  I  attempted  to  guide  him  through  the 
rat-holes  and  mole-hills  that  thickly  cover  the  central 
parts  of  the  desert.  We  had  not  gone  ten  lengths 
before,  getting  his  head  well  down,  he  set  to  kicking 
and  bucking  with  such  a  will,  that  I  expected  every 
instant  to  see  the  girths  snap  and  the  saddle  sent 
flying !  Moses,  galloping  alongside,  motioned  me 
to  drop  the  reins  on  his  neck.  The  effect  was  in- 
stantaneous, for  he  immediately  became  as  quiet  as  a 
lamb,  and  bounded  away  again  with  a  snort  and 
shake  of  his  game  little  head,  as  much  as  to  say, 
"  The  idea  of  this  idiot  trying  to  teach  me  my  way 
over  the  desert!"  "Karra"  never  once  gave  me 
a  fall,  nor  made  a  mistake,  although  this  novel 
mode  of  riding  at  full  gallop  over  rough  ground, 
with  one's  hands  in  one's  pockets,  required  some 
nerve  at  first. 

We  were  later  than  usual  in  getting  away  the 
evening  of  our  halt  in  the  Tartar  encampment,  for  a 
sheep  was  given  us  by  our  unwelcome  guests  in  ex- 


202  PROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

change  for  a  couple  of  soda-water  bottles.  These 
are  especially  prized  by  the  Mongols,  probably  on 
account  of  their,  to  them,  strange  shape.  The  task 
of  slaying  the  animal  was  relegated  to  Sylvia,  who 
proceeded  to  his  work  in  true  Tartar  fashion.  First 
making  a  huge  gash  in  its  side  with  his  large  clasp- 
knife,  he  thrust  in  his  hand,  and  seizing  the  heart 
stopped  its  movements.  The  animal  was  then 
skinned,  and  the  entrails,  after  being  washed,  care- 
fully put  aside ;  nothing  was  wasted.  We  reserved 
the  legs  for  ourselves,  and  Moses  and  Co.  proceeded 
to  devour  the  rest.  From  the  time  it  was  killed  to 
when  they  were  licking  the  last  remnants  from  the 
bones  took  them  just  two  hours ;  they  ate  it  half  raw. 
The  sheep  on  Gobi  are  small  and  pure  white,  with 
long  pendent  black  ears,  and  an  enormous  tail 
weighing  eight  to  ten  pounds.  This  lump  of  fat 
is  considered  a  delicacy,  and  always  given  to  the 
favoured  guest  in  a  "yourt."  The  mutton  was 
excellent,  not  unhke  Southdown. 

We  got  but  little  rest  that  night.  Our  guests 
had  left  us  a  souvenir  in  the  shape  of  certain 
nameless  animals  that  stuck  to  us  faithfully  the 
remainder  of  our  journey  to  Kiakhta.  We  had 
hitherto  congratulated  ourselves  on  there  being  no 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  203 

mosquitoes,  but  soon  realized  that  a  whole  army  of 
the  latter  would  have  been  preferable  to  the  noisome 
insects  that,  two  or  three  days  afterwards,  swarmed 
in  the  carts,  and  gave  us  no  peace,  night  or  day. 
Their  smell  was  worse  than  their  bite,  and  I  think 
this  was,  perhaps,  the  greatest  discomfort  we  had  to 
put  up  with  on  the  desert  journey,  always  excepting 
the  fatigue  and  semi-starvation. 

"We  passed  and  saw    nothing  for  the  following 

three  days,  although  it  was  interesting  to  note  the 

curious  waves  of  vegetation  and  animal  life  that  we 

crossed  at   intervals.      For   a  couple  of  miles   the 

ground  would  be    a  perfect  network  of  rat-holes, 

to  give  place,  in  turn,   to  a  district  covered  with 

bright  black  and  yellow  lizards.      Then  thousands 

of   beetles   covered   the    plain — large,   long-legged 

things,    with   bodies  as   big   as    a   cockroach,   and 

striped  with  red  and  black  bars ;  then  rats  again, 

and   so    on,    but   the   rats    were  in   the   majority. 

In   many  places  the   plain  was    alive  with   them  ; 

you  trod  on  them  as  you  walked.     The  Gobi  rat  is 

peculiar  to  Mongolia.     He   is  a  soft,  pretty  little 

animal,  with  a  feathery  tail,  and  has  none  of  the 

disgusting  attributes  of  the  common  Norwegian  or 

English  rat. 


204  FROM    PEKTN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

It  was  the  same  with,  the  vegetation.  Each  flower 
or  herb  seemed  to  liave  its  own  district,  though  one 
kind  of  weed  was  noticeable  everywhere,  in  the 
barren  as  in  the  most  fertile  parts.  Not  being  a 
naturalist,  I  cannot  give  its  name,  but  in  appear- 
ance it  is  exactly  like  the  weed  that  grows  in  such 
luxuriance  at  the  bottom  of  our  fresh-water  ponds 
and  canals  in  England,  where  it  is  called  "  Babing- 
ton's  curse,"  from  the  fact  that  it  was  originally 
imported  by  a  person  of  that  name  in  America. 
When  crushed  it  emits  a  sweet  scent  like  thyme, 
and  on  clear,  cool  nights  the  scent  was  almost  over- 
powering when  the  carts  and  camels  had  passed 
over  it. 

Another  flower  very  common  in  Gobi  is  the  white 
convolvulus,  which  grows  almost  everywhere  like 
the  herb  mentioned  above.  Among  the  rarer  sort 
were  a  pretty  lilac-coloured  daisy  with  a  yellow 
centre,  the  common  dandelion,  and  in  some  parts 
the  English  daisy.  Rarest  of  any  was  a  pink  flower 
growing  on  a  prickly  bush  about  a  foot  high, 
exactly  like  a  miniature  hawthorn-tree  in  full 
bloom.  It  had  a  sweet  but  rather  sickly 
perfume. 

The  seventh  day  out  we  met  the  heavy  Russian 


THE    DESERT   OF    GOBI.  205 

mail — -five  camels  in  charge  of  two  Cossacks  and  a 
Tartar.  The  latter  were  cheery,  good-tempered 
fellows,  and  seemed  to  be  taking  it  easy,  each  astride 
a  camel,  with  red  flannel  shirts,  bare  legs  and  feet, 
and  nothing  to  show  they  were  Russian  soldiers 
but  the  flat,  white,  peakless  cap  with  which 
Vereschagin's  pictures  have  made  us  familiar. 
We  gave  them  a  drink  a-piece,  and  sent  them  on 
their  way  rejoicing,  but  with  an  expression  of 
wonder  on  their  jolly,  sunburnt  faces — wonder,  not 
unmingled  with  pity,  for  the  poor,  mad  Englishmen 
who  were  doing  this  journey  for  pleasure  ! 

We  entered  at  sunset  a  part  of  the  desert  literally 
covered  with  enormous  mole-hills,  some  as  much  as 
two  or  three  feet  in  height.  Being  pitch-dark, 
we  had  a  rough  time  of  it  in  the  carts,  for  the 
feeble  glimmer  of  the  paper-lantern  attached  to  each 
only  sufficed  to  make  darkness  visible,  and  it  was 
almost  impossible  to  steer  clear  of  the  huge  mounds. 
After  several  narrow  escapes  of  an  upset,  we  got 
out  and  walked,  about  ten  o'clock,  and  had  an  un- 
comfortable night  of  it,  for  about  10.30  a  fine, 
drizzling  rain  commenced  to  fall,  which  lasted  till 
we  encamped  at  midnight.  Walking  was  little 
better,   and    resulted   in    some    terrible    croppers, 


206  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

for  we  could  not  see  an  inch  before  us.  A 
good  stiff  glass  of  whisky  and  water  and  a  rest 
of  six  hoars  soon  put  things  right,  though  we  felt  a 
good  deal  beat  the  next  morning,  when  at  6.30  we 
were  roused  by  the  inexorable  Sylvia. 

We  encamped  the  next  day  near  a  yourt  of  con- 
siderable size.  Moses  having  informed  us  that  the 
chief  or  head-man  was  a  Lama  of  some  importance, 
we  sent  up  to  his  tent,  a  gaudy-looking  edifice,  sur- 
mounted by  half  a  dozen  red  and  yellow  prayer- 
flags,  to  ask  if  we  might  call  and  pay  our  respects, 
a  request  that  was  immediately  granted.  This  was 
the  largest  yourt  we  saw,  and  was  composed  of  over 
twenty  tents. 

We  rode  off  after  dinner,  accompanied  by  Jee 
Boo,  who,  on  the  way,  instructed  us  how  to  behave, 
for  the  forms  and  ceremonies  that  have  to  be  gone 
through  when  visiting  a  Tartar  domicile  are,  to  a 
stranger,  somewhat  confusing.  For  instance,  a  Mon- 
golian never  dreams  of  walking  up  to  a  strange 
yourt.  Not  only  is  it  contrary  to  custom,  but 
dangerous,  on  account  of  the  huge  dogs  kept  about 
every  tent  for  the  protection  of  the  women  and 
children  when  the  men  are  from  home.  A  Russian 
Cossack,  ignorant  of  this,  went  up  to  a  yourt  on 


THE^  DESERT    OF    GOBI.  207 

foot  a  few  years  since,  and  was  torn  in  pieces  by  the 
savage  brutes,  which  are,  iu  size  and  appearance, 
very  much  like  an  English  mastiff. 

Arrived  within  earshot  of  the  yourt,  we  reined 
up,  JeeBoo  shouting  out  loudly,  "  Nohai  Harai,"  or 
"  Tie  up  the  dogs."  Several  women  then  emerged 
from  the  lama's  tent,  and  secured  the  brutes,  after 
which  we  rode  up,  and  handing  our  ponies  over  to  the 
care  of  a  rather  pretty,  dark-eyed  Tartar  girl,  entered 
the  tent  in  somewhat  undignified  fashion  on  all 
fours.  The  door  was  too  low  to  admit  us  in  any  other 
fashion.  Our  sticks,  revolvers,  and  knives  were  laid 
on  the  ground  outside.  It  would  be  as  great  a 
breach  of  good  manners  to  enter  a  Mongol  tent 
armed  or  with  a  stick  in  your  hand,  as  a  drawing- 
room  with  your  hat  on,  the  idea  being,  that  while 
under  his  roof,  your  host  is  responsible  for  your 
safety.  You  do  not  require  to  defend  yourself. 
There  were,  save  the  lama,  no  men  about,  and  we 
afterwards  heard  they  were  away  on  a  hunting 
expedition  in  quest  of  antelope.  It  was  some 
time  before  we  could  make  out  the  lama,  for  the 
sunshine  outside  was  dazzling,  and  the  interior 
of  the  tent  in  almost  total  darkness.  The  great 
man,    who   was    lying    on    a  kind    of   divan,    and 


208  FROM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

surrounded  by  four  or  five  women,  did  not  rise  when 
we  entered,  but  lazily  extended  a  moist  and  dirty 
hand  as  a  sign  that  we  might  shake  hands  with  him, 
which  having  done,  we  seated  ourselves  on  his 
right  and  left.  He  was  a  fat,  pasty-faced  in- 
dividual, clad  in  a  long  gown  of  faded  yellow 
silk,  the  front  of  which  was  stifi"  with  the  grease 
and  dirt  of  years.  His  bullet  head  was,  after 
the  manner  of  lamas,  shaved ;  and  round  his 
neck  was  hung  a  huge  brass  ornament,  of  rough 
workmanship. 

Having  motioned  us  to  a  seat,  the  lama  made  a 
long  speech,  of  which  we  could  understand  no- 
thing, nor  could,  I  believe,  Jee  Boo,  although  he 
told  us  it  was  replete  with  good  wishes  and  comph- 
ments.  The  Mongol  language  is  a  difficult  one,  and 
even  our  interpreter,  who  had  studied  it  for  years, 
could  only  speak  it  in  a  very  rudimentary  way. 
One  peculiarity  of  the  Mongol  tongue  is  that,  unless 
you  say  a  word  exactly  as  it  is  pronounced,  you 
might  as  well  address  them  in  Sanskrit  or  double- 
Dutch.  As  an  instance  of  this,  an  American  mis- 
sionary at  Kalgan  was  good  enough  to  teach  me  a 
word  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  desert :  *'  Tie 
up  your  dogs."     He  pronounced  it  "  No  high.  Ha- 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  209 

ru "  {-^ic),  but  when  I  tried  tins,  it  failed 
signally,  and  the  Mongols  could  make  nothing 
of  it  for  a  long  time.  At  last  a  light  dawned  on 
them.  "Nohoi  Hare,  oh,  we  understand  that!" 
I  could  not  help  thinking,  after  this,  that  the 
Gospel  must  have  rather  a  poor  chance  in  Mon- 
golia ! 

The  interior  of  the  tent  was  comfortable  enough, 
though  the  argol  smoke  got  into  one's  eyes  and 
made  them  smart  for  days  after.  The  floor  was 
strewn  with  thick,  soft  Chinese  rugs  and  tapestries, 
apparently  of  great  value,  while  round  the  sides  of 
the  tent  were  hung  large  pieces  of  bright  silk, 
covered  with  Chinese  and  Tibetan  characters — 
probably  prayers.  Directly  in  front  of  the  entrance 
was  a  kind  of  altar,  painted  red,  upon  which  re- 
posed a  huge  gilt  image  of  Buddha  surrounded  by 
half-a-dozen  prayer- wheels,  to  which  whenever  they 
passed  them,  the  inmates  of  the  yourt  gave  a 
vigorous  turn.  The  amount  of  prayers  they  must 
have  got  through,  evea  during  our  short  visit,  was 
something  marvellous,  for  the  wheels  were  inces- 
santly on  the  go,  from  the  time  we  entered  the  tent 
till  we  left  it.  In  the  centre,  and  directly  opposite 
the  entrance,  a  huge  copper  cauldron,  three  parts 

VOL.  I.  y 


210  FROM    PEKIX   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

full  of  a  dirty,  yellow-coloured  liquid,  sim- 
mered on  a  brazier  of  argol,  the  only  fuel 
used  in  this  part  of  Mongolia,  where  no  wood 
grows. 

Having  smelt  and  returned  the  inevitable  snuff- 
bottle,  we  murmured  "  mendu  "  "  good-day,"  and 
relapsed  into  silence,  waiting  for  the  Lama  to 
recommence  the  conversation.  The  snuff-bottle 
is  an  infallible  sign  of  a  Mongol's  wealth  and 
position.  No  conversation  is  ever  carried  on  with- 
out a  preliminary  sniff,  which  is  more  a  matter  of 
form  than  anything  else,  as  they  often  contain 
nothing.  From  the  head  Lama  to  the  poorest 
Monofol  no  Tartar  is  ever  without  one.     Most  are 

I 

of  Pekin  manufacture,  rano^inof  in  value  from  a  few 
cash  to  two  hundred  taels  or  more,  the  best  ones 
being  of  gold  or  jade  encrusted  with  precious 
stones,  the  commoner  sort  of  glass  or  china. 
Attached  to  the  stopper  is  a  small  bone  or  ivory 
spoon  Avith  which  the  snuff  (when  there  is  any) 
is  ladled  into  the  nostrils. 

A  good  ten  minutes  elapsed  before  the  Lama 
showed  any  desire  to  enter  into  conversation,  and 
we  were  about  to  take  our  departure  when  the 
pretty  Tartar  girl  came  bustling  into  the  tent  and  . 


THE    DESEET   OF    GOBI.  211 

broiiglit  US  some  tea  (or  a  concoction  of  that 
name)  out  of  the  copper  cauldron.  Seeing  that  we 
looked  at  the  greasy-looking  stuff  rather  askance, 
the  Mongol  gave  a  sort  of  grunt  and  held  his 
thumb  up,  an  operation  that  was  repeated  by  the 
women  around  him.  This  I  learnt  from  Jee  Boo 
means  "  good,"  holding  it  down  in  the  manner  of 
the  Romans  when  they  desired  the  death  of  a 
gladiator  "bad."  So  we  were  forced  to  drink  it, 
though  with  reluctance,  especially  as  I  had  noticed 
that  the  Mongols,  as  a  rule,  follow  Jack  Sprat's  ex- 
ample and  lick  the  platter  clean !  The  shallow  wooden 
cups,  out  of  which  we  drank,  were  literally  encrusted 
with  dirt,  but  it  would  never  have  done  to  refuse, 
so  we  gulped  the  nauseous  mixture  of  brick  tea, 
millet,  and  mutton-fat  down.  ISTever  shall  I 
forget  it.  That  was  the  only  cup  of  real  Mongol  tea 
I  ever  tasted,  but  it  was  some  days  before  I  got  the 
flavour  out  of  my  mouth.  The  Lama  seemed  to 
enjoy  it,  though,  and  put  away  quite  a  dozen  cups 
duriusf  the  interview. 

The  beverage  had  one  good  effect;  it  loosened 
his  tongue,  and  the  following  somewhat  erratic 
dialogue,  through  the  medium  of  Jee  Boo,  now 
took  place  between  us  : — ■ 

p  2 


212  FROM    PEKTN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Lama :  "  Who  and  what  are  you,  and  where  do 
you  come  from  ?  " 

Jee  Boo  :  "  They  are  Enghsh,  and  come  from  a 
great  country  far  away  beyond  the  seas." 

Lama  :  "  What  are  you  ?  " 

Jee  Boo  :  "  English  !  " 

Lama  :  "  You  mean  they  are  Russian  (Rooski)." 

Jee  Boo  :  "No;   English  (roaring)." 

Lama:  ''What  nonsense;  they  are  white!  and 
all  white  men  are  Russians,  so  they  must  be." 
Silence  ;  then,  after  a  pause  : — "  What  do  you  say 
you  are  ?  " 

Jee  Boo  :  "  English.  A  countrj^  (he  adds  paren- 
thetically) ruled  over  by  a  woman." 

"  Indeed  !  "  replies  the  Lama,  opening  his  little 
pig's-eyes  in  astonishment ;  then  thoughtfully,  and 
after  a  very  long  pause,  "  How  many  sheep  has 
she  got?  " 

This  involved  a  mental  and  mathematical  cal- 
culation rather  beyond  me,  so  I  merely  replied 
that  her  Majesty's  wealth  was  so  great,  it 
could  not  be  gauged  by  the  domestic  animal  in 
question.  My  response  was  only  met  with  a  quiet 
smile  of  incredulity,  and  a  remark  that  elicited  loud 
laughter  from  the    women.     We  inferred,   as   Jee 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI. 


213 


Boo  did  not  join  in  the  merriment,  and  would  not 
tell  us  wliat  it  meant,  tliat  it  was  not  complimentary. 
Seeing  tlie  lama  smoking,  I  lit  a  cigarette,  and 
was  about  to  replace  the  case  in  my  pocket  when 
our  merry  old  host  took  it  from  my  hand,  and  after 
carefully  examining  it,  transferred  it  calmly  but 
firmly  into  his  own  breeches'  pocket.  Presuming 
he  would  return  it  when  we  left,  I  thought  no 
more  of  the  matter,  but  at  the  close  of  our  visit 
found  he  had  every  intention  of  keeping  it  as,  he 
explained  to  Jee  Boo,  a  souvenir  of  me.  In  vain 
I  expostulated.  "  You  can't  possibly  ask  for  it 
back,"  said  Jee  Boo,  "  it  is  the  custom."  The  case 
was  but  a  cheap  leather  one.  Had  it  been  of 
value,  I  should  have  rebelled,  even  though  in  mid 
desert.  At  any  rate,  I  determined  in  future  to 
make  afternoon  calls  in  Gobi  with  empty  pockets. 
The  name  of  this  place,  as  far  as  I  could  gather, 
was  "  Ourouni."  It  is  very  hard  in  the  desert 
to  get  at  the  right  name  of  even  a  permanent 
yourt.  The  Mongols  have  a  superstition  that  if 
they  tell  a  stranger  the  name  of  their  habitation, 
it  will  bring  bad  luck  to  the  place.  I  have  fre- 
quently asked  three  or  four  of  the  inmates  of  a 
yourt   its    name,    and    been    answered   a    different 


214       FROM  PEKEN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

one  by  each.  I  gave  it  up  at  last  as  a  bad  job. 
The  only  yourt  I  was  sure  of  throughout  the 
journey  was  Toogoorook,  and  that  was  on  our 
maps. 

The  sun  was  low  in  the  heavens  when  we  bid 
adieu  to  the  Lama  and  took  our  departure.  "We 
were  rather  surprised  to  find  on  arriving  in  camp, 
the  baggage  on  the  ground,  the  ponies  still  un- 
saddled, the  camels  scattered  about  the  plain  in 
all  directions,  and  Moses  and  Aaron  clearly  under 
the  influence  of  "  arak.''  As  for  Sylvia,  he  had 
taken  up  a  position  behind  one  of  the  carts  tete- 
a  tSte  with  the  pretty  Tartar,  who  was  plaiting 
his  pigtail,  and  carrying  on  in  a  way  that  would 
somewhat  have  disconcerted  her  spouse  had  he 
suddenly  arrived  on  the  scene.  Benedick  would 
probably,  however,  not  have  minded  much,  for,  as 
I  have  said,  the  Mongols  are  not  jealous  of  their 
women.  They  greatly  differ  in  this  respect  from 
the  Kirghiz  tartars,  who  will  not  allow  a  stranger 
even  to  look  upon  their  wives.  Their  respective 
religions,  Mahometanism  and  Buddhism,  of  course, 
account  for  this.  The  Kirghiz  woman  is  always 
more  or  less  under  supervision,  the  Mongol  may  do 
as  she  pleases,  go  where  she  likes,  and  alone.    Never- 


A[.L 


1     p 


THE    DKSKKT    OF    GOBI.  215 

theless,  tliere  is  but  little  immorality  among  the 
latter.  As  much  cannot  be  said  for  the  followers 
of  the  Prophet  further  west. 

Our  faithful  little  henchman's  face  expanded 
into  a  broad  grin  as  soon  as  he  saw  us.  He  was 
no  bad  judge  of  female  beauty.  The  face  and 
figure  of  the  object  of  his  affections  would  not  have 
disgraced  a  European  ball-room ;  while  a  fascinating 
half-savage  half  naice  manner  enhanced  her  at- 
tractions not  a  little.  It  was  only  with  great 
difficulty  and  by  threats  of  complaining  to  the 
Lama  that  we  separated  the  love-sick  camel-driver 
from  his  lady-love.  But,  even  then,  she  would  not 
forsake  him.  Jumping  on  a  pony  as  soon  as  we 
started,  she  rode  alongside  the  caravan  till  the  moon 
had  fairly  risen,  and  we  were  some  miles  from  her 
home.  It  was  not  till  nearly  ten  o'clock  that  she 
left  us,  after  a  tender  parting  with  Sylvia  (during 
which  the  caravan  was  left  to  its  own  devices), 
to  gallop  home  alone  in  the  moonlight  to  her  yourt 
and  lawful  master. 

Moses'  pony  showed  such  evident  signs  of 
breaking  down  that  he  exchanged  it  for  a  new  one 
to-day.  We  witnessed  the  operation  of  selecting 
the  animal  from  a  drove  of  one  hundred  or  so  that 


216  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

were  feeding  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  or  so  of  the 
yourt.  Armed  with  a  long  slender  pole  with  a  noose 
at  the  end,  one  of  the  men  rode  out  and,  after  a 
smart  gallop,  succeeded  in  lassoing  a  wiry-looking 
little  chestnut  and  bringing  it  back  to  camp,  when 
it  was  at  once  saddled.  It  was  scarcely  three  years 
old,  and  had  never  been  backed,  yet  in  less  than 
half  an  hour  from  when  Moses  mounted  it  was 
walking  alongside  the  caravan  as  quietly  and 
demurely  as  its  predecessor.  The  facility  and 
rapidity  with  which  the  Mongols  break  in  their 
horses  is  something  marvellous. 

The  Mongols,  men,  women,  and  children,  are 
passionately  fond  of  riding,  and  almost  their  sole 
pastime  is  horse,  or  rather  pony  racing,  which  the 
women,  who  sit  cross-legged,  join  in  as  well  as  the 
men.  That  they  are  splendid  riders  is  hardly  to  be 
wondered  at,  for  they  are  in  the  saddle  from  morn- 
ing till  night.  A  Mongol  never  dreams  of  walking, 
even  when  going  the  shortest  distances,  as  from  one 
tent  to  another  in  camp.  To  their  animals  they  are 
kindness  itself,  and  I  never  once  saw  them  strike  a 
pony.  Their  seat  is  peculiar  and  ugly.  Most  of 
them  ride  crouching,  like  monkeys,  leaning  well 
over  their  pony's  withers,  and  riding  entirely  with 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  217 

the  left  liand,  while  the  riglit  arm  is  waved  wildly 
about  at  full  extent  when  they  wish  to  increase 
their  speed.  As  a  rule,  though,  they  are  very 
merciful  in  this  respect,  and  let  their  ponies  take 
it  easy,  the  ordinary  pace  being  a  sort  of  amble. 
We  fortunately  took  the  precaution  of  bringing  our 
own  saddles,  for  those  used  by  the  Mongols  are 
made  entirely  of  wood,  and  are  hard,  uncomfortable 
things,  in  shape  something  like  a  Turkish  demi- 
pique,  but  about  half  the  size.  The  bit  used  is 
something  like  our  English  ring-snaffle,  the  reins 
being  made  of  thin  leather  thongs. 

The  following  day  was  without  incident  except 
that,  about  sunset,  we  passed  a  series  of  cairns 
stretching  away  at  intervals  of  about  four  hundred 
or  five  hundred  yards  to  the  horizon  on  either  side 
of  us.  These  are  about  fifteen  feet  in  height,  and 
formed  of  stones  of  various  sizes,  bleached  camel- 
bones,  feathers,  and  bits  of  rug,  while  at  the  top  of 
each  a  dilapidated  prayer-flag  fluttered.  We  took 
them  (as  we  afterwards  discovered,  rightly)  for  the 
boundary  between  Inner  and  Outer  Mongolia.  Al- 
though they  are  not  marked  on  any  Russian  or 
English  map,  Ivanoff  had  told  us  to  look  out  for 
them,  as  we  should  then  be  getting  about  half-way 


218  FROM    TEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

to  Ourga.  As  we  passed  them,  Moses  and  Co- 
each  cast  a  stone  upon  them  as  an  offering  to  their 
divinity.  No  Mongol  ever  dreams  of  omitting  to 
do  this.  Nothing  else  occurred  to  break  the  mono- 
tony of  the  day's  march,  but  an  occasional  shot  at  a 
duck  or  sand-grouse,  for  we  were  now  approaching 
the  game  country.  There  was  little  cover  at  first, 
but  the  next  and  three  following  days  the  desert 
was  covered  for  miles  around  with  thick,  prickly 
bushes  somewhat  resembling  furze,  and  here  it  fairly 
swarmed  with  sand-grouse,  a  pretty  fawn-coloured 
bird  with  a  black  ring  round  the  neck,  and  hairy 
legs.  Most  were  plump,  and  in  excellent  condition, 
and  we  found  them  excellent  eating.  We  must  have 
seen  thousands,  and  managed  to  bag  nine  brace  in  a 
couple  of  hours  with  no  difficulty,  merely  walking  a 
few  yards  away  on  either  side  of  the  carts,  for  they 
were  not  at  all  wild.  AVe  saw  no  other  game  except 
the  largest  hare  I  have  ever  seen,  which  I  shot. 
Her  size  was  explained  when  on  preparing  her  for 
the  pot,  we  found  she  was  about  to  present  the 
hare  population  of  Gobi  with  an  addition  of  five  ! 
The  game  was  a  welcome  change  to  the  tinned 
meats  we  had  had  to  subsist  on  since  leaving 
Kalgan,  especially  as  the  smart  Yankee  storekeeper. 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  219 

from  whom  we  had  procured  our  stores  at 
Shanghai,  had  managed  to  palm  off  a  number  of  old 
and  useless  tins,  some  dating  as  far  back  as  the 
year  18 62,  which  were  carefully  packed  away  under 
the  others,  so  that  we  did  not  open  them  till  in  mid 
desert.  I  can  only  trust,  for  his  sake,  that  the 
wishes  we  expressed  regarding  his  future  state  may 
never  be  realized. 

"With  the  exception  of  a  kind  of  small  ante- 
lope there  is  no  big  game  in  Mongolia  proper, 
although  hard  by,  in  Manchuria,  there  are 
tiger  and  lion  in  plenty.  The  Gobi  antelope  is 
called  by  the  Mongols  literally,  "  Gooroosh,"  by  the 
Chinese  "  Wang  Yang,"  or  yellow  sheep.  It  is  of 
a  light  fawn  colour  with  white  legs.  "We  saw 
several  herds  of  some  hundreds  each,  but  were  only 
once  able  to  get  within  shot,  for  owing  to  the  flat 
nature  of  the  ground  they  nearly  always  saw  or 
heard  us  long  before  we  could  get  near  them.-  The 
only  occasion  on  which  we  did  so,  was  by  the  aid  of 
a  ridge  of  rocks.  Our  ponies,  too,  were  not  up  to 
much  galloping,  although  Karra  was  always  ready, 
and  keen  as  mustard  for  a  hunt.  But  the  Mongols 
declined  to  stay  for  us  a  moment,  and  the  operation 
of  keeping  one  eye  on  the  game,  and  the  other  on 


220       FROM  PEEIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

the  caravan  was  somewhat  fatiofuinof.  With  a 
properly  organized  expedition  a  sportsman  could, 
have  any  amount  of  fun  in  the  Gobi,  though  I  doubt 
if  even  the  good  sport  would  repay  him  the  expense 
and  discomfort. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  patches  of  bright 
golden  sand  broke  the  green  horizon,  and  on 
the  evening  of  the  same  day  we  passed  our  first 
night  eii  plein  desert.  The  next  morning  showed 
us  nothing  but  sand,  drift  upon  drift,  as  far  as  the 
eye  could  see,  in  an  unbroken  horizon,  save  where 
to  the  north-west,  in  the  middle  distance,  a  ridge 
of  abrupt,  precipitous  rocks  glowed  pink  in  the  rays 
of  the  rising  sun.  By  midday  we  encamped  at  their 
base  after  a  hard  morning's  work,  for  the  sand  was 
axle-deep,  and  the  camels,  at  times,  were  unable  to 
move  the  carts  alone.  We  did  but  little  more  than  a 
mile  an  hour  all  day.  Although  the  ridge  of  rocks 
was  little  over  two  hundred  feet  high,  the  ascent  and 
descent  occupied  nearly  four  hours.  There  was  no 
path  or  track  of  any  kind,  and  the  ridge  as  rough 
and  uneven  as  a  heap  of  stones.  Every  moment  I 
thought  the  carts  would  go  to  pieces.  As  for  the 
ponies,  taking  off  their  bridles  and  saddles,  we  left 
them    to    their    own    devices.     Chow   was    rather 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  221 

awkward,  and  got  two    or   three  nasty  falls,    but 
Karra  scrambled  about  like  a  wild  cat,   and  was 
not   in    tlie   least   put    out.     Five    o'clock    saw    ns 
encamped  on  the  deep  sandy  plain  the  other  side, 
where  there  should  have  been  a  well,  but  it  was, 
alas !  quite  dry,  and  we  had  to  put  ourselves  and 
the  ponies  on  short  allowance.    All  were  thoroughly 
done  up,  when  at  eight  o'clock  p.m.,  the  inexorable 
Moses  made  a  fresh  start.     We  then  found  that  one 
of  the  camels  was  dead  lame.     Ttie  usual  Mongol 
remedy  of  patching  up  the  sole  with  small  tin  tacks 
and  a  piece  of  leather,  much  as  a  boot  is  cobbled, 
was  found  ineffectual,  so  his  pack  was  removed,  and 
he  was  untied  and  left  to  get  on  with  the  caravan 
as  best  he  could.     The   poor  brute's   struggles  to 
keep  up  with  us  were  painful  to  witness,  for  a  camel 
will  go  on  till  he  drops  and  dies,  sooner  than  be  left 
alone  in   the  desert.     1  would   have   put   a  bullet 
through  him,  but  that  the  Mongols   are  intensely 
superstitious,    and    have  a   belief  that  killing   one 
of  these  animals   brings  bad   luck    on   a    caravan. 
The   poor  brute   was    still    with    us   when  we   en- 
camped,  but    died    about    half   an   hour   after   we 
started    in    the   morning.       Looking    back    a   few 
moments  after,  I  saw  his  carcase  black  with  crows 


222  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  carrion,  thougli  a  moment  before  there  was  not 
a  bird  to  be  seen  in  the  skj. 

The  Mongolian  camel  is  peculiar  to  the   country. 
It  is  two  humped  and  very  much  smaller  than  camels 
found  in  other  parts  of  the  world.     The  average  load 
of  a  caravan   camel  is  4  cwt.,  or  four  chests  of  tea 
of  1  cwt.  each.     It  was  often  a  source  of  wonder  to 
me  how  these  animals  can  exist  as  they  do  without 
water — indeed,  they  were  supposed  never  to  want 
it,  and  it  was  given  them  only  when  very  plentiful. 
They  ate    the  whole   day,  however,  while  on    the 
plains,  and  the  amount  of  food  they  got  through 
en  route  was    surprising.      Curiously  enough   they 
seemed  to  prefer  dry  scrub  to  good  sweet  grass. 
In  winter  a  long,  shaggy  coat  protects  the  Mon- 
golian  camel  from  the  keen,  icy  blasts   that  sweep 
over  the  Gobi,  but  in  summer  this  is  shed,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  coarse  tufts  on  the  head,  neck, 
and  legs.     Our  camels  appeared  to  suffer  terribly 
from  the  heat,  and  perspired  profusely  on  hot  days. 
On  these  occasions  we  found  it  impossible  to  remain 
in  the  carts.     Indeed,  at  all  times  the  stench  was 
so  bad  that  we  had  to  lie  with  our  heads  at  an 
angle   that   no    amount    of   pillows  would   rectify. 
Any  one  with  apoplectic  tendencies  would   stand  a 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  223 

poor  chance  crossing  Gobi.  Tlie  Mongolian  camel 
is  led  in  the  ordinary  way,  i.e.  by  a  tliin  plug  of  wood 
sharp  at  one  end,  and  thrust  through  the  nostril,  and 
fastened  to  a  string,  which  in  turn  is  fastened  to  the 
camel  or  cart  in  front.  The  operation  of  drilling  the 
hole  through  a  young  camel's  nose  is  painful  in  the 
extreme.  I  witnessed  it  once,  and  not  being  aware 
that  nature  has  provided  these  beasts  with  a  kind 
of  reservoir  of  green,  mucous  substance,  presum- 
ably for  purposes  of  self-defence,  stood  close  to  it 
during  the  operation,  and  received  a  quantity  of  the 
stuff  full  in  my  face,  much  to  Sylvia's  delight,  who 
ducked  just  in  time  to  avoid  it.  Beyond  this,  save 
on  one  occasion,  1  never  saw  a  Mongolian  camel  show 
signs  of  temper.  They  are  gentle,  stupid  creatures 
for  the  most  part. 

We  suffered  a  good  deal  from  heat  and  thirst  our 
second  day  in  the  sandy  desert.  The  work  too  was 
harder — so  hard  that  at  times  we  had  to  hitch  an 
extra  camel  on  to  each  cart,  and  even  then  could 
hardly  get  them  through  the  deep,  clinging  sand. 
About  11  a.m.,  we  overtook  five  Mongols,  wild 
rugged-looking  fellows,  on  their  way  to  Ourga.  Moses 
discovered,  after  a  few  minutes'  conversation,  that  it 
was  thanks  to  them  and  their  ponies  that  the  well  of 


224  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

yesterday  was  dry.  They  had  a  sheep-skin  half  full 
of  water  with  them,  but  resolutely  refused  to  spare 
us  a  drop.  I  do  not  think  I  ever  realized  what  the 
word  thirst  really  meant  till  that  moment,  for  it  was 
now  a  case  of  share  and  share  aUke,  our  supply  of 
claret  and  soda-water  having  become  exhausted 
three  days  before  this.  Each  of  these  men  had  a 
bundle  of  heavy  wooden  rods  fastened  to  his  saddle- 
bow, and  trailing  on  the  ground,  thus  scoring  a  deep 
trail  or  wake  in  the  sand  behind  him.  It  is  only  by 
these  means  that  in  this  part  of  the  desert  the 
Mongol  is  able  to  find  his  way  from  yourfc  to  yourt, 
for  there  are  no  landmarks  to  steer  by.  They 
had  no  tent  or  travelling  conveniences  whatever, 
save  a  large  brass  pan  for  cooking  purposes,  and 
a  supply  of  argjl  in  a  canvas  sack,  though  what 
they  could  find  to  cook  was  a  mystery  to 
me.  They  accompanied  us  for  a  time,  but, 
seeing  that  we  had  no  bottles  or  anything  else  to 
fifive  them,  soon  left  us  and  struck  off  in  a  south- 
westerly  direction,  directly  contrary  to  the  place 
they  told  us  they  were  bound  for,  Ourga.  I  did 
not  inquire  why,  knowing  that  the  ways  of  the 
Mongol  are  inscrutable,  and  not  to  be  judged  as  are 
those  of  the  ordinary  run  of  mankind ! 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  225 

So  the  day  \;voro  heavily  away,  and  we  plodded 
on,  nearly  up  to  our  knees  in  sand  by  the  side  of 
the  caravan  till  four  o'clock,  when  Sylvia  sighted  a 
large  herd  of  goorooshinthe  distance,  but  the  glimpse 
we  caught  of  them  was  only  momentary,  and  the 
hurrying,  indistinct  brown  mass  had  in  a  very  few 
seconds  disappeared  below  the  horizon. 

About  half  an  hour  later  a  loud  scream  attracted 
my  attention,  and,  turning,  I  found  Jee  Boo  flat 
on  the  ground  in  a  dead  faint,  the  effect,  as  I 
rightly  guessed,  of  the  sun.  Moses  even  then  was 
very  loth  to  stop,  and  it  was  only  by  a  judicious 
exposure  of  my  revolver,  of  which  Mongols  have  a 
wholesome  dread,  that  I  succeeded  in  halting  the 
caravan.  Pitching  the  tent,  I  soon  had  the 
wretched  Chinaman  inside,  and  made  as  comfort- 
able as  circumstances  would  permit.  I  found 
him  quite  unconscious,  while  the  eyelid  when 
opened  disclosed  a  broad  expanse  of  white,  which 
was  far  from  reassuring.  Apart  from  the  mere 
fact  of  losing  the  poor  fellow,  I  could  not  help 
wondering  what  would  become  of  us.  in  the 
event  of  his  death,  for  we  knew  but  half  a  dozen 
words  of  Mongol,  and  without  an  interpreter  were 
helpless  as  the  babes  in  the  wood  !     The  atmosphere 

VOL.  I.  Q 


226  FEOM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY  LAND. 

of  the  tent  soon  became  so  stifling^  that  I  had 
to  leave  it  for  a  few  minutes,  feeling  quite  sick 
and  faint.  We  all  know  the  value  of  water  in  such 
cases,  but  of  this  we  could  ill  spare  a  drop,  having 
but  about  half  a  gallon  left.  The  next  well,  it  was 
true,  was  but  seven  miles  distant,  but  who  could 
tell  that  it,  like  its  predecessor,  might  not  be  dry 
and  empty  ?  Altogether  the  situation  was  about  as 
awkward  as  it  could  well  be,  and  I  cursed  (not  for 
the  first  time)  the  unlucky  fate  that  had  ever  brought 
me  to  the  desert  of  Gobi !  But  something  had  to 
be  done  and  quickly,  so  for  the  first  time  I  opened 
our  small  medicine-chest,  the  furnishing  of  which 
I  had  carelesslv  taken  but  little  trouble  about. 
Of  course,  as  usual,  everything  not  required  was 
handy.  Rolls  of  diachylon  plaster.  Cockle's  pills, 
chlorodyne,  menthol,  Dover's  and  seidlitz  powders, 
came  tumbling  out  in  glorious  confusion ;  but  we 
fumbled  about  in  despair  for  a  remedy,  while  Jee 
Boo's  heavy,  stertorous  breathing  warned  us  that  not 
a  moment  was  to  be  lost.  I  was  determined  that  if 
he  did  die,  I  should  not  be  the  only  one  responsible 
for  his  demise,  and  insisted  upon  Lancaster's  giving 
his  opinion  as  to  treatment !  If  poor  Jee  Boo  had 
known  the  state  of  doubt  his  medical  advisers  were 


THE    DESERT    OF   GOBI.  227 

in,  I  think  he  would  have  suffered  even  more  than 
he  did  !  But  the  course  of  treatment  was  at  last 
decided  upon,  though  we  differed  materially  for  some 
time,  Lancaster  insisting  upon  it  that  we  should  open 
a  vein.  As  (when  I  pressed  him)  he  seemed  uncer- 
tain what  vein,  I  felt  in  the  interest  of  Jee  Boo's 
possible  widow  and  orphans  that  this  was  unjust. 
Even  my  small  experience  in  surgery  told  me  that 
there  are  some  veins  the  opening  of  which  will  kill 
the  strongest  man  in  under  five  minutes.  So  this 
course  was  (by  Lancaster)  reluctantly  abandoned, 
and  a  huge  dose  of  sal  volatile  and  water  ad- 
ministered. I  shall  never  forget  that  moment  or 
my  state  of  mind  during  the  working  of  the  medi- 
cine. However  (and  no  one  was  more  surprised 
than  myself)  it  had  the  desired  effect,  and  at 
the  end  of  about  ten  minutes  we  had  the  satis- 
faction of  seeing  our  patient  slowly  open  his 
eyes.  In  half  an  hour  he  was  quite  conscious 
again.  I  can  scarcely  recommend  this  treatment 
to  my  readers  as  an  infallible  one  for  sunstroke. 
Indeed,  I  have  since  been  told  by  a  physician, 
that  had  not  my  patient  been  a  Chinaman,  it 
would  have  killed  him  right  off ! 

We  were  not  sorry  to  get  out  of  the  tent,  for  the 

Q  2 


228  FROJf   PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

temperature  therein  registered  over  100°.  As  the 
flimsy  structure  was  only  intended  to  hold  three 
at  the  most,  and  as  every  one  assisted  at  our 
medical  consultation,  this  was  hardly  surprising. 
When  we  emerged  again  into  the  open  air  the 
changed  appearance  of  the  sky  and  desert  some- 
what puzzled,  not  to  say  alarmed,  us.  The  heat 
was  still  oppressive,  but  whereas  half  an  hour 
previously  the  sky  had  been  bright  and  cloudless,  it 
was  now  darkened,  while  the  sun  like  a  huge  ball  of 
fire  glowed,  red  and  angry,  in  the  misty  heavens, 
which  had  changed  within  the  last  ten  or  fifteen 
minutes  from  a  deep  intense  blue  to  a  uniform 
leaden  colour.  Nor  was  the  appearance  of  the  desert 
the  same,  the  glassy  yellow  expanse  of  sand  had 
disappeared.  Beyond  a  distance  of  thirty  or  forty 
yards  one  saw  nothing  but  a  moving  yellow  mass 
swaying  to  and  fro,  and  producing  the  effect, 
against  the  dark  masses  of  cloud,  of  a  huge  field 
of  ripe  corn  waving  wildly  about  in  a  heavy  gale  of 
wind. 

The  coup-cVoeil  would  have  been  peculiar  and 
interesting  anywhere  else.  In  the  desert  it  was  weird 
and  alarming,  so  much  so  that  I  returned  to  the 
tent,  and,  calling  Moses  out,  drew  his  attention  to  it. 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  229 

and  not  a  moment  too  soon.  In  less  time  than  it 
takes  to  write,  Sylvia  was  scouring  the  plain  in  search 
of  the  camels,  which  had  fortunately  not  strayed  far 
out  of  reach,  while  Aaron  busied  himself  in  firmly 
hammering  in  the  tent-pegs,  which  had  only  been 
lightly  fixed  during  our  temporary  halt.  In  less 
than  ten  minutes  the  camels  were  in  and  tethered 
in  a  line  next  the  carts,  to  which  the  ponies  were 
firmly  fastened.  Moses  then  led  or  rather  pushed 
us  into  our  carts,  and  slammed  the  door  in  our 
faces.  Looking:  out  of  the  window  a  moment  after 
I  saw  the  Mongols  disappear  one  by  one  into  the 
tent ;  Sylvia,  who  entered  last,  firmly  fastening  the 
aperture  behind  him.  During  these  mysterious 
preparations  it  had  become  darker  and  darker, 
while  the  wind,  which  had  suddenly  risen,  was 
driving  thick  woolly  masses  of  white  cloud  across 
the  black  lowering  sky.  We  were  not  long  in 
suspense.  A  few  seconds  only  elapsed  when  a 
perfect  tornado  burst  upon  us.  1  managed  with 
some  difficulty  to  open  my  door  on  the  lee  side 
and  look  out,  but  could  see  nothing  but  one  whirling 
mass  of  sand  or  vapour,  I  could  not  tell  which,  in 
appearance  very  much  like  a  thick  London  fog. 
Nor  could  we  hear  anything  but  the  whirling  of  the 


230  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

wind,  the  wild,  unearthly  cries  of  the  camels,  whose 
shadowy  forms  I  could  just  distinguish  huddled 
together  a  few  yards  from  me,  and  the  neighing  of 
Chow  and  Karra,  the  latter  of  whom  had,  with  his 
usual  sagacity  and  fore-thought,  broken  his  bridle 
and  crawled  under  my  cart.  Then  for  the  first 
time  the  truth  dawned  upon  me — we  were  in  a  sand- 
storm. 

It  was  not  an  agreeable  sensation,  for  I  was  in  a 
pleasing  state  of  uncertainty  as  to  how  it  would  all 
end.  One  might  as  well  have  tried,  during  the 
storm,  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  man  in  the 
moon  as  to  make  oneself  heard.  Luckily  it  did  not 
last  long.  In  five  minutes  it  was  over,  and  the  skjf 
blue  and  clear  again.  The  sight  on  looking  out  of  . 
the  carts  again  was  a  queer  one.  The  camels'  heads 
were  invisible,  each  being  burrowed  under  the  body 
of  his  neighbour.  As  for  the  tent,  it  had  dis- 
appeared, and  it  was  only  after  a  time  that  I  made 
out  a  heap  of  sand  with  a  moving  mass  underneath 
to  show  where  it  had  been.  It  had  blown  down 
early  in  the  proceedings,  and  Moses  and  Co.,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  wretched  Jee  Boo,  narrowly  escaped 
suffocation.  In  half  an  hour  everything  had  resumed 
its  wonted  appearance,  and  the  air  was  as  cool  and 


THE    DESERT    OP    GOBI.  231 

pleasant  as  before  it  had  been  sultry  and  oppressive. 
The  inside  of  our  carts,  though,  were  an  inch  deep 
in  sand,  and  our  nostrils,  hair  and  eyes  full  of  it. 
Save  for  a  hot,  feverish  feeling  that  banished  sleep, 
and  gave  one  an  uncomfortable  feeling  in  the  head 
like  influenza,  we  felt  no  ill  effects,  and  were  not 
altogether  sorry  when  it  was  over  that  we  had 
experienced  the  strange  phenomenon.  Sand- 
storms are  rare  in  Gobi,  but  when  they  do  occur 
are  dangerous  to  solitary  travellers.  Many 
mysterious  disappearances  in  this  part  of  the 
desert  are  put  down  to  them ;  for  the  sand-drifts 
obliterating  the  marks  of  the  Mongol's  guiding 
rods,  he  is  unable  to  retrace  his  steps  to  the 
yourt  he  started  from. 

We  reached  the  wells  at  about  4  a.m.  next 
morning,  and  were  relieved  to  find  them  nearly  full, 
and  the  water  drinkable.  The  rain  came  down  in 
torrents  shortly  afterwards.  We  would  have  given 
a  good  deal  for  a  shower  the  day  before,  but  could 
now  have  gladly  dispensed  with  it,  for  the  carts 
leaked  badly,  and  we  were  wet  through  before 
the  weather  cleared  at  daybreak.  We  got  a  couple 
of  hours'  rest  though,  and  by  ten  o'clock  were  away 
again,   refreshed   if  not  rested.     It  is  astonishing 


232  FEQM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

what  little  amount  of  sleep  a  man  can  do  with  when 
put  to  it. 

The  morning  of  this  (the  23rd  of  August)  was 
bright  and  clear,  and  the  rain  and  cool  air  seemed 
to  have  given  a  new  lease  of  life  to  man  and  beast. 
Jee  Boo,  though  complaining  of  slight  headache,  had 
otherwise  quite  recovered  from  his  attack,  so  that 
with  the  bright  sunshine  and  crisp,  clear  air,  our 
spirits  rose,  and  all  went  merry  as  the  traditional 
marriage-bell.  Towards  midday  we  had  a  some- 
what exciting  chase  after  an  antelope,  and  one  that 
might  have  resulted  somewhat  disagreeably.  The 
ever-watchful  Jee  Boo  having  sighted  a  herd 
near  a  ridge  of  rocks  some  three  miles  distant, 
we  saddled  the  ponies,  and,  with  our  rifles,  galloped 
towards  them  under  the  guidance  of  the  little 
Tartar,  taking  care  to  keep  the  ridge  between  us. 
When  within  about  three  hundred  yards  of  the  spot, 
we  dismounted,  Lancaster,  accompanied  by  Sylvia, 
making  for  the  right  of  the  rocks  (which  were  about 
a  mile  in  length  and  two  hundred  feet  in  height) 
while  I  took  the  left  hand.  Though  less  pre- 
cipitous than  the  ridge  we  had  crossed  two  days 
before,  the  ascent  was  too  steep  to  be  pleasant, 
especially  when  laden  with  a  rifle  in  one  hand,  and 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  233 

having  to  lead  a  wilful  and  obstinate  pony  witli  tlie 
other. 

We  reached  the  summit  in  safety  after  a  stiff  climb. 
To  any  pony  but  Karra  the  ascent  would  have 
been  impossible.  Securing  his  bridle  to  a  sharp 
edge  of  rock,  I  lay  flat  upon  the  ground,  and 
crawled  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  but  there  was 
nothing  to  be  seen  but  bare  sandy  plain.  Having 
watched  for  about  five  minutes,  I  was  about  to  rise 
and  take  up  #a  fresh  position,  when  the  crack  of 
Lancaster's  rifle  rang  out  some  distance  to  the 
right.  In  another  moment  the  whole  herd,  some 
sixty  or  seventy  in  number,  came  bounding  by  just 
underneath  me.  Picking  out  a  fine  buck,  I  took 
steady  aim,  fired,  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing 
him  drop  on  his  forelegs.  I  thought  for  a  second  he 
was  badly  hit,  but  he  only  reeled  to  and  fro  once  or 
twice,  then  with  an  effort  regained  his  feet,  and 
galloped  on  after  the  others,  who  were  already 
almost  out  of  sight.  Seeing  that  he  got  over  the 
ground  but  slowly  and  with  difficulty,  I  determined 
to  give  chase,  and,  loosing  Karra,  we  made  our  way 
helter-skelter  down  the  cliff-side.  Though  the 
climb  had  taken  us  quite  half  an  hour,  the  descent 
did  not  take  more  than  three  minutes.     Some  of  the 


234  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

ledges  were  quite  four  feet  high,  with  a  landing 
on  smooth  slippery  rock,  but  little  Karra  never 
once  made  a  mistake.  Arrived  at  the  bottom  of 
the  cliff,  I  jumped  on  his  back,  and  away  we 
went  full  gallop  after  the  wounded  antelope,  now 
just  disappearing  out  of  sight  over  a  high  ridge 
of  sand  a  good  distance  off.  My  pony  was  even 
keener  than  I,  and  I  never  knew  till  that  day  what 
a  little  wonder  he  was.  Fifteen  days  had  we  been  in 
the  desert,  travelling  day  and  night,  and  two  days 
of  that  on  short  allowance  of  water  and  food,  and 
yet  here  he  was  galloping  as  strong  as  a  steam 
engine,  and  pulling  and  tearing  at  his  bridle  as  if  he 
had  been  in  the  stable  for  a  month.  What  would  he 
not  have  been  worth  in  England  !  But  quickly  as 
we  covered  the  distance  to  the  ridge  which  had 
hidden  the  antelope  from  view,  we  were  too  late. 
No  trace  could  we  discover  of  him.  The  desert 
was  here  covered  with  innumerable  sandhills  and 
depressions,  and  it  is  more  than  likely  that  he 
succeeded  in  hiding  himself  in  one  of  these.  We 
hunted  about  for  some  time,  but  without  success.  I 
dared  not  stop  too  long,  for  fear  of  losing  the  caravan, 
which  I  knew  had  not  stopped  during  our  absence. 
So,  somewhat  disappointed,  I  dismounted,  and  led 


THE    DESERT   OF    GOB[.  235 

Karra  slowly  back  to  the  rocks  where,  as  I  thought, 
Lancaster  and  Sylvia  were  awaiting  me.  No  trace 
of  the  caravan  was  now  visible. 

I  took  my  time  returning  to  the  ridge,  imagining 
that  by  this  time  my  companions  had  seen  me,  and 
would  not  move  till  I  came  up  to  them.     It  seemed 
strange  too  that  they  should  have  abandoned  their 
position,  for  on  coming  up  to  the  right  side  of  the 
rocks  I  found  them  gone.      When,   on  riding    the 
whole  length  of  the  ridge,  shouting  as  I  went,  I 
saw  no  signs  of  them,  the  disagreeable  truth  flashed 
across    me  that  they   had  departed    altogether — a 
surmise  which  proved  correct.     In  vain  I  searched 
every     cleft     and    ravine,     thinking    they     might 
have    penetrated    thither    in    search    of    wounded 
game ;    in   vain  I  yelled   myself  hoarse,   and  blew 
the  whistle  which  we    always   carried    in    view    of 
this  contingency,  till  I  was  black  in  the  face ;  not  a 
sound  came  in  answer,  but  the  echoes,  wbich  the  in- 
numerable creeks  and  gullies  which  riddled  the  place 
flung  back  to  me.     In  one  of  the  ravines,  curiously 
enough,  I  came  upon  a  tree,  the  first  and  only  one 
we  saw  in    the  desert,  or  indeed  since  leaving  Tsin 
Whui  Poo ;  it  was  but  ten  or  twelve  feet  high,  a 
kind  of  wild  olive  with  gnarled  trunk  and  scanty 


236  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

foliage.  At  any  other  time  I  should  have  stopped 
to  examine  it  more  closely,  but  that  my  mind  was 
then  running  on  matters  very  far  removed  from 
natural  history.  Every  moment  the  awkwardness  of 
my  position  grew  more  apparent.  A  thousand  doubts 
and  fears  crowded  on  my  mind,  which  the  surround- 
ings of  the  lone,  desolate-looking  place  did  not  tend 
to  reassure.  At  one  moment  I  was  for  remaining 
where  I  was,  but  the  next  brought  the  reflection  that 
Lancaster,  having  seen  me  riding  for  dear  life  in  a 
S.W.  direction,  would  probably  direct  the  Mongols  in 
that  quarter,  and  never  dream  of  returning  to  this 
bleak  barren  rock.  One  thing  was  certain,  if  the 
caravan  did  not  rescue  me,  no  one  would,  for  this 
part  of  Gobi  is  as  uninhabited  and  desolate  as  the 
interior  of  the  Sahara  itself. 

Of  a  sudden  the  thought  struck  me  to  climb  to 
the  summit  of  the  rocks,  and  as  a  last  resource  to 
scan  the  horizon  from  that  altitude  with  the  glasses 
I  had  fortunately  brought  with  me.  Securing 
Karra  to  the  old  tree,  I  again  ascended  to  the  top, 
this  time  not  without  some  hard  knocks  and 
scratches,  while  the  perspiration  poured  off  me  in 
my  anxiety  to  lose  no  time.  I  was  never  without 
a  compass  in  the  desert,  and  had  luckily  taken  the 


THE    DESERT   OF   GOBI.  237 

bearings  of  the  rocks  before  we  set  out  that  morn- 
ing. Allowing  for  time  and  distance,  I  found  the 
caravan  should  now  be  N.^.W.  from  where  I  stood, 
and  turning  my  glasses  to  the  spot,  discovered  it 
to  my  great  relief,  on  the  very  edge  of  the  horizon, 
and  hardly  visible,  even  through  the  powerful  glasses. 
To  tlve  naked  eye  it  was  invisible.  First  taking 
care  to  get  my  bearings  right,  I  scrambled  down, 
and,  loosing  Karra,  galloped  after  it  ventre  a  terre. 
In  twenty  minutes  it  was  well  in  sight,  and  we 
were  safe. 

It  was  all  owing  to  Sylvia,  who  had  persuaded 
Lancaster  to  return,  saying  that  I  should  without 
doubt  join  the  caravan  farther  on.  A  Mongol 
failing  is  to  think  that  strangers  know  their 
way  about  the  desert  as  well  as  they  do  them- 
selves. Lancaster  had  had  no  better  luck  than 
myself,  so  our  day's  sport  was  hardly  a  success. 
We  were  a  good  deal  disappointed,  though  not  so 
much  as  our  men,  who  had  been  looking  forward 
to  a  meal  of  fresh  roast  meat,  the  gooroosh  being 
excellent  eating. 

Towards  evening  of  the  same  day  we  traversed 
a  tract  of  sand  about  a  mile  across,  so  deep  that 
we    had  to   hitch  three   camels   on    to    each    cart. 


238       FRQM  PEKTN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

Even  then  they  could  hardly  get  the  heavy,  clumsy 
vehicles  through  it,  and  we  had  to  literally 
put  our  sho alders  to  the  wheel.  The  sand  was 
nearly  up  to  our  knees,  and  so  fine  that  it  actually 
worked  its  way  into  our  boots  through  the  sole  and 
the  leather.  Just  beyond  this  the  sand  is  suc- 
ceeded by  hard  gravelly  soil  of  a  deep  red  colour, 
covered  so  thickly  in  parts  with  transparent  stones 
and  crystals,  that  the  ground  looked  here  and  there 
like  inlaid  mosaic.  Quantities  of  these  stones  are 
sent  to  Pekin,  to  be  converted  into  buttons,  snuff- 
bottle-stoppers,  &c.  They  are  also  much  sought 
after  by  the  ladies  of  Ourga  for  head  ornaments. 
Most  of  the  pebbles  were  a  species  of  yellow  or  red 
agate,  and  I  picked  up  a  couple  of  very  pretty 
violet  ones — presumably  amethysts. 

There  is  not  a  blade  of  grass  or  vegetation  in 
this  part  of  the  desert,  nor  are  there  any  rocks 
or  hills  to  break  the  dead-level  of  the  plain, 
as  flat  and  smooth  as  a  billiard- table  or  well-kept 
garden-walk,  for  miles  and  miles.  It  therefore 
struck  us  as  curious  to  come,  while  walking  a  few 
yards  in  front  of  the  caravan,  upon  the  letters 
*'  A.  L."  formed  in  capitals  three  feet  long,  by  a 
kind   of   creeper  which  had  firmly  taken  root  in  the 


THE   DESERT   OF    GOBI.  239 

hard,  gravelly  soil.  Had  tlie  letters  been  irregularly 
or  fantastically  formed,  they  might  have  suggested 
a  freak  of  nature,  but  they  were  clear,  distinct, 
and  as  well  formed  as  any  on  this  page. 
How  they  came  there  must  remain  a  mystery. 
They  could  not  have  been  the  work  of  Russians 
(for  their  L  is  totally  different  to  that  of  other 
European  languages)  much  less  that  of  a  Mongol  or 
Chinaman.  I  must  own  that  I  am  superstitious,  and 
hoped  that  the  mysterious  characters  might  bode  no 
evil  to  one  of  my  greatest  friends  bearing  the  same 
initials  in  England. 

Just  after  sunset  three  mounted  Mongols  rode 
out  of  the  dusk,  and,  galloping  furiously  past  the 
caravan,  disappeared  in  the  direction  we  were  going. 
They  seemed  to  have  started  out  of  the  ground,  so 
suddenly  did  they  make  their  appearance.  An  event 
of  this  sort  always  creates  excitement  in  the 
desert,  for  as  a  general  rule  every  one  stops  and 
exchanges  words  when  meeting  a  caravan  on  the 
lonely  highway.  For  this  reason  perhaps  our 
Mongols  did  not  like  the  look  of  the  strangers,  and 
Jee  Boo,  at  the  request  of  Moses,  begged  us  to  load 
our  revolvers.  We  did  so,  but  saw  nothing  more  of 
the   mysterious    horsemen,   who    Sylvia   positively 


240  FRCBl    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

assured  us  were  robbers,  who  would  have  attacked 
us  had  the  J  not  found  us  too  strong  for  them,  and 
on  the  defensive. 

We  passed  a  couple  of  yourts  shortly  afterwards, 
smoke-blackened,  shapeless  dwellings,  about  half 
the  size  of  an  ordinary  Mongol  tent,  with  a  small 
hole  for  a  door,  out  of  which  a  man  and  a  woman 
crawled  and  offered  us  aro-ol  for  sale.  More 
revolting  specimens  of  the  human  race  I  have  never 
seen.  We  saw  no  sheep  or  ponies  about ;  indeed 
there  was  nothing  to  feed  them  upon.  Hard  by 
lay  a  dead  camel,  the  stench  from  which  nearly 
knocked  us  down  fifty  yards  off,  and  on  which  the 
poor  wretches  had  been  subsisting  for  several  days. 
Other  food  they  had  none,  though  there  was  a  well 
brimful  of  clear  cold  water  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
farther  on,  at  which  we  filled  the  barrels,  and,  for  the 
first  time  for  ten  days,  washed  our  hands  and  faces. 

We  managed  to  get  some  sleep  in  the  carts,  for 
the  first  and  only  time  that  night,  for  the  ground 
was  as  smooth  as  a  billiard- table,  and  there  were  no 
stones  or  boulders  to  disturb  our  slumbers.  IS'or 
did  I  wake  till  past  one  o'clock,  when  the  caravan 
halted. 

Looking  out  of  the  cart  window,  I  at  first  imagined 


THE    DESERT    OP    GOBI.  241 

that  we  bad  arrived  at  Onrga,  for  we  were  en- 
camped, apparently,  under  the  walls  of  a  city.  At 
the  same  time  it  struck  me  as  strange,  that  a 
silence  so  dead  should  reign  over  such  a  large  place. 
The  illusion  was  complete,  and  I  was  never  more 
astonished  to  find  that  what  I  had  taken  for  walls, 
towers  and  roofs  of  houses,  were  in  reality  nothing 
more  than  a  group  of  enormous  blocks  of  granite. 
Some  must  have  measured  quite  fifty  feet  high  by 
twenty  broad,  the  space  of  ground  they  occupied 
being  considerably  over  a  square  mile.  Had  I 
thought  for  a  moment,  I  must  have  known  that 
stone  buildings  in  Mongolia  are  extremely  rare,  al- 
most unknown.  A  Mongol  Tartar  has  the  greatest 
objection  to  living  in  a  permanent  dwelling  of  any 
sort  or  kind,  and  even  Ourga,  the  capital,  is  com- 
posed almost  exclusively  of  tents.  Notwithstanding, 
one  could  scarcely  realize  that  it  was  an  optical 
delusion,  that  the  mimic  domes  and  minarets 
standing  out  clear  and  distinct,  as  a  pen-and- 
ink  sketch  against  the  starlit  sky,  were  but  masses 
of  unhewn  stone,  and  the  work  of  nature,  not  of 
man. 

Our  Mongols  were  asleep,  and  Lancaster ;  but 
late  as  it  was,  and  at  the  sacrifice  of  my  remaining 

VOL.  I.  K 


242  PROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

rest,  I  could  not  resist  the  temptation  of  exploring 
the  place,  first  taking  the  precaution  of  arming  my- 
self. It  looked  just  the  kind  of  spot  that  robbers 
or  marauders,  had  there  been  any  about,  would  have 
selected  for  an  encampment. 

I  found  the  interior  as  curious  as  the  outside, 
for  the  rocks  were  placed  as  regularly,  and  the  ways 
as  well  defined,  as  the  streets  and  squares  of  a 
modern  city.  The  deathlike  stillness,  and  queer 
fantastic  shadows,  thrown  by  the  bright  moon-rays, 
gave  one  an  uncanny  feeling,  and  I  took  care  to  keep 
the  caravan  fires  in  sight.  Although  outside  the 
desert  was  hard  and  gravelly,  the  sand  here  was 
knee-deep.  Suddenly  while  walking  down  one  of  the 
smaller  paths  my  foot  struck  sharply  against  a  small 
square  stone  sunk  deeply  into  the  sand.  On  exa- 
mining this  more  closely,  I  found  that  on  it  was 
rudely  carved  a  Russian  character  and  a  cross. 
It  was  evidently  a  grave.  Having  no  desire  to 
prolong  my  investigations  after  this,  I  was  about 
to  rise  and  return  to  the  caravan,  when  an 
indefinable  impression  stole  over  me  that  some- 
thing, and  something  human  and  living,  was  near 
me.  The  feeling  may  have  been  produced  by 
liver,    perhaps    by   instinct.     At   any  rate,    it   was 


THE    DESERT   OF    GOBI.  243 

correct,  for  on  turning  I  found  myself  next  to 
one  of  the  most  repulsive  and  hideous  creatures 
I  have  ever  beheld.  It  was  impossible  to  tell  in 
the  dim  light  whether  it  was  a  man  or  a  woman, 
for  its  body  was  covered  with  shapeless  rags,  its 
head  with  a  mass  of  grey  tangled  hair  that  hid 
the  features.  I  have  seldom  felt  more  uncom- 
fortable, and  would  at  that  moment  gladly  have 
given  five  pounds  to  be  back  safe  and  snug  in  my 
cart.  At  any  rate,  I  thought,  the  sooner  out  of 
this  the  better,  so  seizing  my  opportunity,  I 
dodged  past  the  figure,  and  walked  quickly  away 
in  the  direction  of  the  camp  fires.  Guessing  my 
intention,  it  pursued  me  for  a  few  yards,  struggling 
with  difficulty  through  the  deep  sand,  but  I  soon 
distanced  it,  and  only  breathed  freely  again  when  I 
had  got  out  of  the  place,  and  was  once  more  in 
the  open. 

The  caravan  was  in  a  state  of  commotion  when  I 
returned,  for  I  had  been  away  quite  an  hour,  and 
having  told  no  one  of  my  intention,  they  were,  on 
waking,  at  a  loss  to  know  where  I  had  got  to. 
When  I  related  my  adventures  to  Moses,  his  face 
was  a  picture.  "  Moo  chim  "  (bad  men),  he  kept 
repeating,  which  meant  that  the  place,  according 

li  2 


244  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

to  Mongols,  is  haunted,  and  that  no  one  who  can 
avoid  it  ever  penetrates  into  its  silent,  mysterious 
depths  by  day  or  night.  Whether  the  creature  I 
saw  was  a  ghost,  I  know  not.  If  so,  it  was  a  very 
dirty  one.  It  would  have  needed  the  pencil  of  a 
Dore,  the  pen  of  a  Eider  Haggard,  to  describe  the 
place,  which  was  certainly  the  most  marvellous 
freak  of  nature  I  have  ever  come  across. 

I  made  inquiries  at  Kiakhta,  but  could  never 
find  out  anything  to  explain,  geologically,  the 
presence  of  these  stones,  and  their  peculiar  position. 
All  the  Russian  merchants  could  tell  me  was  that  a 
Cossack  in  charge  of  the  mail  had  been  buried  there 
seven  years  ago,  and  that  the  place  ever  since 
was  said  by  the  Mongols  to  be  infested  with  evil 
spirits.  It  seems  strange  that  no  efforts  have 
ever  been  made  by  the  professors  belonging  to  the 
College  of  Kiakhta  to  unravel  the  mystery,  but  the 
latter  appeared  to  give  more  of  their  leisure  hours  to 
cards,  vodka,  and  flirtation  with  their  neighbours' 
wives  than  to  scientific  research. 

The  morning  of  the  next  day  (July  25th)  was 
cold  and  cloudy.  We  crossed,  an  hour  after  start- 
ing, a  large  salt-marsh,  with  tufts  of  half -withered 
grass  growing  here  and  there.     The   ponies  fared 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  245 

badly,  but  the  camels  managed  all  right,  as  I  verily 
believe  they  would  do  in  a  crater.  Though 
this  marsh  is  deep  in  rainy  weather,  and 
very  difficult  to  get  over,  there  had,  luckily, 
been  no  rain  for  some  time,  and  we  crossed 
it  without  difficulty,  the  ground  being  hard,  and 
covered  with  evaporated  salt,  giving  the  desert 
the  appearance  of  a  huge  snow-field.  Beyond 
this,  vegetation  again  ceased,  and  we  entered  on  a 
tract  of  gravelly  country.  Some  low  green  hills 
now  appeared  on  the  horizon — the  plains  and  rich 
pastures  of  Too-goo-rook,  at  which  yourt  the 
hardest  part  of  our  desert  journey  would  be 
virtually  over. 

"We  encamped  midday  at  the  foot  of  a  steep  and 
barren  rock,  about  one  thousand  feet  high,  on  the 
banks  of  a  large  lake  of  dirty,  brackish  water,  as 
wild  and  desolate  a  spot  as  can  well  be  imagined. 
Huge  vultures  and  other  carrion  birds  flew  hither 
and  thither  about  the  rocks  and  ravines,  while  the 
dismal  and  incessant  croaking  of  the  frogs  among 
the  withered  sedges  that  fringed  the  black,  melan- 
choly-looking water  made  the  place  anything  but 
a  cheerful  spot  for  an  encampment.  The  further 
end  of  the  lake  swarmed  with  wild  fowl,  and  we 


246  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

succeeded,  after  dinner,  in  bagging  a  couple  of 
sheldrake,  though  they  were  so  shy,  it  was  only 
with  great  difficulty  we  could  get  near  them.  We 
also  shot  an  enormous  vulture,  seven  feet  broad 
from  one  wing-tip  to  the  other;  but  he  smelt  so, 
we  had  to  have  him  carried  some  distance  away 
from  the  caravan.  This  was  explained  by  the  par- 
tially devoured  remains  of  a  camel  we  afterwards 
passed  a  few  hundred  yards  from  camp.  The  brink 
of  the  lake  was  strewn  with  the  bleached  bones  of 
these  animals,  which  did  not  contribute  to  make 
the  coup-d'oeil  more  cheerful. 

Towards  evening  we  sighted  a  large  herd  of 
antelope  on  the  horizon,  but  they  saw  us,  and  were 
off  long  before  we  could  give  chase. 

About  five  o'clock  it  came  on  to  rain  and  blow 
as  it  only  can  in  Gobi.  I  do  not  think  I 
ever  spent  a  more  wretched  night.  The  storm 
became  so  bad  that  the  camels  would  not  face  it, 
and  we  had  to  stop  and  pitch  tents  at  ten  o'clock, 
three  hours  before  the  usual  time.  Several 
attempts  were  made  to  light  a  fire,  but  without 
success,  for  the  wind  not  only  blew  it  out,  but 
the  wretched,  flimsy  tent  down  on  top  of  it, 
Mongols  and  all.     We  consoled  ourselves  as   best 


THE   DESERT    OP    GOBI.  247 

we  could  with  a  nip  of  whisky  (of  which  we  had 
one  bottle  left),  and  turned  into  our  carts  to  make 
the  best  of  it.  But  even  our  sheepskins  were 
next  to  useless  in  the  keen  wind  that  whistled 
through  the  rents  and  chinks  of  the  canvas  cart 
roofs  as  if  they  had  been  sieves.  About  midnight 
the  rain  came  down  again  in  sheets,  and  in  less  than 
half  an  hour  was  streaming  in  upon  us,  like  a 
shower-bath.  We  were  wet  through  in  less  than 
ten  minutes,  and  then  abandoned  the  idea  of  rest 
or  sleep  altogether. 

If  the  night  had  been  miserable,  the  morning 
was  far  worse.  We  were  perfectly  willing  to  start ; 
anything  was  preferable  to  sitting  in  our  carts, 
listening  to  the  ceaseless  pattering  of  the  rain  and 
looking  out  of  the  narrow  window  at  the  misty, 
dreary  landscape ;  but  the  Mongols  were  ob- 
durate. Nothing  upsets  them  like  rain  or  getting 
wet,  presumably  because  they  never  wash,  and 
Moses  steadfastly  refused  to  move  till  the  weather 
cleared,  which  it  showed  no  signs  whatever  of 
doing.  Our  men  had  managed  to  rig  the  tent  up 
again,  and  all  three  lay  inside,  packed  like  sardines, 
with  every  aperture  tightly  closed.  I  tried  to  read, 
but  soon  had  to  give  it  up,  my  head   shook  so  with 


248  FROM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS   BY    LAKD. 

the  cold.  Worse  still,  we  had  exhausted  our  last 
scrap  of  tobacco,  and  could  not  bring  ourselves  to 
venture  on  the  hay-like  filth  that  Sylvia  offered 
us.  Still,  it  showed  the  little  Tartar's  unselfish- 
ness, for  he  had  but  a  pipeful  left  to  last  him  on 
to  Ourga,  and  there  is  no  race  in  the  world  so 
devoted  to  the  fragrant  weed. 

About  two  o'clock  it  mended  a  little,  and  the 
sun,  which  had  all  the  morning  been  invisible, 
began  to  struggle  through  the  grej,  watery  clouds. 
So  sudden  are  the  changes  of  temperature  and 
weather  in  the  desert  that  by  3  p.m.  the  sky 
was  blue  and  cloudless,  and  the  sun  too  hot  to  be 
pleasant.  We  were  not  sorry  to  get  out  again,  and 
dry  ourselves  in  the  warm  rays  which  took  the 
stiffness  out  of  our  cramped  and  aching  limbs. 
We  suffered  but  little  from  vermin,  which  up  till 
now  had  been  one  of  our  greatest  annoyances,  after 
this.  "  It's  an  ill  wind  that  blows  nobody  good ;" 
and  perhaps  they  were  all  drowned ! 

Starting  at  7  p.m.,  we  travelled  all  night,  and  by 
morning  every  trace  of  sand  and  gravel  had  disap- 
peared, and  we  were  in  the  grass  plains  again — 
where  our  ponies  fairly  revelled  in  the  fresh,  rich 
pasture.     Sylvia  was  despatched  to  a  yourt  some 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  249 

five  miles  distant  to  buy  a  camel  in  place  of  the 
one  we  had  lost,  and  as  he  was  not  expected  back 
till  six  o'clock,  we  enjoyed  a  good  sleep  all  the 
afternoon,  not  before  we  wanted  it.  We  had  had 
none  for  two  nights. 

The  camel  arrived  in  dae  course.  He  was 
a  snow-white  one,  of  mild  and  benign  appearance. 
Lancaster  took  a  great  fancy  to  him,  and  insisted 
in  having  him  harnessed  to  his  cart.  I  noticed  a 
look  in  the  beast's  eye,  whenever  he  was  pushed 
about  or  touched  more  roughly  than  usual,  that  boded 
no  good.  However,  we  were  assured  that  he  was 
all  that  could  be  desired,  and  took  Sylvia's  word  for 
it.  We  started  again  that  evening,  with  our  new 
purchase  in  Lancaster's  cart.  Although  the  night 
was  fine  and  starlit,  with  a  lovely  moon,  I  turned 
into  my  cart  early,  for  the  plain  was  as  smooth  and 
unbroken  as  a  lawn-tennis  ground,  and  I  did  not 
despair  of  getting  a  really  good  night's  rest,  and 
probably  should  have  had  one,  but  for  an  unforeseen 
accident  that,  ridiculous  and  laughable  as  it  now 
seems,  might  have  had  a  very  serious,  if  not  fatal 
result.  I  was  rudely  awoke  about  2  a.m.  by  Jee 
Boo,  who  bursting  open  my  door,  entreated  me  to 
come  out  at  once.     One  is  easily  unnerved  in  the 


250  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

desert,  and  apt  to  fancy  things,  so  much  so  that  for  a 
moment  I  thought  a  mutiny  had  broken  out  among 
the  Mongols,  and,  seizing  my  revolver  and  pouch, 
jumped  out  on  to  the  moonlit  plain.  The  sight 
that  greeted  my  eyes  caused  me  at  first  to  burst 
into  a  fit  of  uncontrollable  laughter,  in  which,  how- 
ever, the  Mongols,  who  were  helplessly  assembled 
round  my  cart,  did  not  join.  Like  them,  I  also  soon 
realized  how  seriously  the  affair  might  end.  Lan- 
caster's camel  had  run  away,  and  was  scouring  the 
plain  in  a  way  that  plainly  showed  if  we  ever  in- 
tended seeing  him  again  we  had  better  catch  him 
at  once.  The  ponies  were  all  unsaddled,  but 
Sylvia  and  I  jumped  upon  ours  barebacked,  and 
galloped  away  as  hard  as  we  could  lay  legs  to  the 
ground  after  the  refractory  beast,  whose  white  body, 
followed  by  the  cart  swaying  madly  to  and  fro,  was 
rapidly  disappearing  in  the  dim,  shadowy  distance. 
It  had  happened  in  a  second.  Sylvia,  having  left 
his  cart  for  a  moment,  which  was  leading,  the 
cunning  brute  had  taken  advantage  of  his  absence 
to  break  with  one  jerk  the  string  that  fastened 
his  cart  to  the  next  camel.  When  our  driver 
returned,  he  found  the  caravan  halted  and  his 
new  purchase   making  tracks  across  the  plain  in, 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  251 

strange  to  say,  the   direction  of  the  yourt  we  had 
bought  him  from. 

The  best  description  I  have  ever  read  of  a  camel' s 
pace  when  at  full  speed  is  given  by  the  late  Colonel 
Burnaby,  in   "A  Ride  to  Khiva,"  where  he   says  : 
"  A  camel's  gait  is  a  peculiar  one.     They  go  some- 
thing like  a  pig  with  the  fore,  and  like  a  cow  with 
the   hind,  legs."     This  does  not  sound  like  speed, 
but  the  pace  at  which  these  brutes  get  over  the 
ground  is  something  more   than   remarkable,   and 
it  took  us  all  our  time,  to  get  up  to  Lancaster's 
cart,    who    was,     to    use    a     sporting    expression, 
"  going   strong  !  "     The    frantic   bounds    the  cart 
was  taking  beggars  description.     I  thought  every 
second   it   would  overturn,  for  the    brute   whirled 
it  about  as  if  it  had  been  a  match-box.     I  could 
see  Lancaster  in  tbe  moonlight  at  the  open  door, 
evidently  meditating  a  jump,    so    shouted  to  him 
to  remain  where  he  was.     The  ground  was  rough 
and  stony,  and  to  fall  might  have  meant  a  broken 
limb,  which  would  have  placed  us  in  an   awkward 
predicament.     It  was  some  time  before  we  managed 
to  stop  the  runaway  by  each  getting  one  side  of,  and 
riding  into,  him.    I  never  could  have  believed  a  camel 
had  such  a  turn  of  speed.     Sylvia  caught  the  nose 


252  JPllOM    PEKTN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

string,  and  we  secured  him  at  last,  and  got  him  back 
to  the  caravan  without  further  mishap.  He  was 
relegated  to  the  water-barrels  in  future.  It  was 
thought  the  weight  might  steady  him,  and  it  did, 
for  we  were  troubled  with  no  more  of  his  pranks. 

The  plains  next  day  were  more  thickly  in- 
habited and  the  pasture  more  luxuriant  than  in 
any  part  of  the  desert  yet  traversed.  We  passed 
several  yourts,  from  which  the  inhabitants  rode 
out  to  meet  us  with  presents  of  milk  and  a  kind  of 
cheese  made  of  mare's  milk.  They  seemed  cleaner 
and  better-mannered  than  the  Mongols  the  other 
side,  and  did  not  (for  a  wonder)  ask  us  for  any- 
thing. Their  yourts,  too,  were  cleaner,  their 
sheep  and  ponies  better  looking  than  others  we  had 
seen. 

This  portion  of  the  Gobi  swarms  with  a  curious 
animal,  of  which  I  ignore  the  name.  It  is  in 
colour  like  a  hare,  in  size  something  between  that 
animal  and  a  rabbit,  with  short  thin  legs,  and  stiff 
wiry  hair  like  that  of  a  badger.  The  ground  was 
in  many  places  literally  honeycombed  with  their 
burrows,  which  are  enormous  for  so  small  an  animal. 
Many  of  the  holes  would  for  a  short  distance  admit 
a  good-sized  man.     They  are  neatly  and  beautifully 


^^^--\i\' 


jfd/^.  i\\*iv\  A\\\«'' 


V.~'^ 


'^T'' 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  253 

constructed,  the  earth  being  carried  and  thrown 
away  some  distance  off,  though  liow  has  not  been 
ascertained.  We  must  have  seen  thousands,  but 
could  never  get  near  enough  to  shoot  one,  and  so 
examine  it  closely.  Unlike  the  smaller  species  of 
rat  on  the  other  side,  the_y  are,  shy  and  wary, 
and  bolt  into  their  holes  on  the  slightest  noise.  It 
is  said  that  Mongols  eat  them,  but  I  am  rather 
doubtful  as  to  the  truth  of  this  assertion.  Few 
would  have  the  patience  or  take  the  trouble  to 
catch  them. 

We  sighted,  on  the  28th  of  August,  a  huge  en- 
campment of  some  fifty  tents,  on  the  horizon, 
evidently  the  yourt  of  some  chief  or  Lama  of 
importance,  en  voyage.  On  passing  it  at  the 
nearest  point  (some  two  miles  distant),  Lancaster 
and  I  were  riding  off  to  inspect  it  more  closely, 
but  were  recalled  by  the  frantic  gesticulations  of 
Moses,  who  begged  us  on  no  account  to  go.  His 
reason  I  never  could  ascertain,  but  he  led  us  to 
understand,  through  Jee  Boo,  that  we  might  meet 
with  an  unpleasant  reception,  by  which  I  con- 
elude  some  religious  ceremony  was  being  per- 
formed. We  could  distinguish  through  the  glasses, 
crowds  of  people  moving  about  the  encampment,  on 


254  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAT.'^    BY    LAND. 

foot  and  on  horseback,  and  these  with  the  white 
tents  gay  with  gaudy  prayer- flags,  against  the  bright 
green  sward,  gave  it  more  the  appearance  of  a 
huge  fair  than  a  desert  camp.  The  plains  for  miles 
around  were  dotted  with  flocks  and  herds,  but  none 
of  the  people,  though  they  saw  us  distinctly,  rode 
out  to  the  caravan. 

The  country  on  the  28th  became  more  accen- 
tuated and  undulating.  "We  passed  to-day  two 
large  lakes  (fresh)  teeming  with  wild  fowl,  duck, 
and  wild  geese,  of  which  latter  we  bagged  a 
brace,  and  ate  for  dinner,  washed  down  by  a 
bottle  of  champagne  specially  kept  for  the  day 
when  the  neck  of  our  desert  journey  should  be 
broken.  The  plain  to-day  was  full  of  huge  edible 
mushrooms  as  large  as  soup  plates.  We  gathered 
a  quantity,  and  had  some  for  dinner,  although  as 
we  ate  them  solely  on  Jee  Boo's  assurance  that  they 
were  not  poisonous,  we  were  somewhat  uneasy 
for  a  couple  of  hours  after.  We  encamped  to-day 
in  a  kind  of  oasis,  of  wild,  sweet-smelling  flowers, 
pink  heather  and  long  grass  through  which  ran  a 
delightfully  clear  cold  stream  of  water  over  a  gravelly 
bed.  It  was  like  nectar,  after  the  filth  we  had  been 
drinking,  and  yet   so  improvident  are  the  Mongols, 


THE    DKSERT    OF    GOBI.  255 

that  had  we  not  insisted  upon  it,  they  would  have 
left  without  filling  the  barrels.  It  was  lucky  we  did 
so,  for  the  two  succeeding  wells  were  stagnant  and 
brackish,  and  one,  having  the  remains  of  a  dead  sheep 
in  it,  undrinkable.  The  next  day  at  mid-day  we 
camped  in  sight  of  the  high  and  partly  wooded  hills 
that  surround  Ourga. 

A  Lama,  en  route  to  the  capital,  now  joined  us. 
This  is  an  invariable  custom  in  the  desert,  a 
Tartar  never  travelling  alone  if  he  can  possibly 
help  it,  perhaps  more  for  the  sake  of  companion- 
ship than  from  fear  of  robbers  or  marauders,  who 
are  said  to  infest  the  more  lonely  parts  of  Gobi. 
He  (the  Lama)  was  a  fat,  good-tempered  old  fellow, 
his  enormously  fat  carcase  clad  from  head  to  foot  in 
bright  yellow  silk.  The  grey  pony  he  rode  was  so 
tiny  that  looked  at  from  behind  its  body  was  in- 
visible. One  saw  nothing  but  a  huge  balloon-like 
mass  ot  yellow  silk,  supported  by  four  thin,  very 
shaky-looking  white  legs.  I  noticed,  throughout 
Mongolia,  that  the  fattest  men  invariably  rode  the 
smallest  ponies,  perhaps  on  the  same  principle  that 
in  Europe  the  largest  instrument  in  a  German  band 
is  almost  invariably  played  by  a  diminutive  child 
of  tender  years. 


256  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

We  visited  a  yourt  after  dinner  by  the  invitation 
of  our  newly  made  fat  friend.  The  tent  was  cleaner, 
both  inside  and  out,  than  the  ones  we  had  passed 
here  on  the  Chinese  side,  indeed  all  the  yourts 
had  a  prosperous,  well-to-do  look  about  them,  very 
different  to  the  smoke-blackened,  dirty-looking 
dwellings  on  the  southern  side  of  the  sandy  desert. 
This  was  probably  due  to  their  being  in  the  close 
vicinity  of  the  capital,  and  also  in  a  great  measure  to 
the  fuel  used  being  wood  instead  of  the  sickly-smell- 
ing, stifling  "  Argol." 

The  reader  may  or  may  not  believe  in  Palmistry, 
but  it  can  scarcely  fail  to  interest  him  to  hear  that 
this  ancient  science  is  as  well  known  among  the 
Mongols  as  the  gipsies,  and  lias  been  for  hundreds 
of  years.  I'  found  this  out  quite  by  accident,  on 
examining  the  hand  of  a  young  girl  who  brought 
us  milk  and  cheese,  and  otherwise  did  the  honours 
of  the  yourt.  To  my  surprise  she  at  once  guessed 
my  intention,  and  insisted  on  my  reading  it  all 
through,  and  explaining  the  lines  to  her.  Nor  did 
my  work  end  here,  a  dozen  greasy  palms  being 
eagerly  thrust  forward  as  soon  as  I  had  completed 
"Tsaira's." 

The  latter,  a  bright-looking  girl  of  about  sixteen. 


THE    DESEET    OF    GOBI.  257 

was  evidently  the  belle  of  these  parts,  and  not  un- 
justly so,  for  her  dark  eyes,  comely  features,  and  pearly 
teeth  were  a  pleasing  contrast  to  the  ordinary  stolid, 
flat-faced  females  of  the  desert.  She  was  the  first 
(and  last)  really  pretty  Mongolian  woman  we  saw,  and 
unlike  most  of  her  sex  (in  the  desert)  not  the  least 
shy.  The  operation  of  shaving  (which  I  now  went 
through  preparatory  to  meeting  the  Russian  Consul 
at  Ourga)  astonished  her  a  good  deal,  but  the  sight 
of  a  looking-glass  much  more  so.  She  had  never 
heard  of  such  a  thing,  or  seen  her  own  pretty 
face,  except  dimly  reflected  in  water  or  tea.  It  was 
the  only  one  we  possessed,  or  I  could  not  have  had 
the  heart  to  refuse  it  her,  for  she  was  not  backward 
in  asking.  However,  a  few  sticks  of  chocolate 
consoled  her,  though  she  tried  very  hard  for  a  ring 
I  wore.  It  was  only  by  impressing  on  her  that  it 
was  given  me  by  a  "  Boosooge  "^  almost  as  pretty  as 
herself,  who  would  never  forgive  me,  if  I  returned 
without  it,  that  she  allowed  me  to  depart  in  peace, 
which  we  did  at  sunset,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
yourt  turning  out  to  bid  us  good-bye,  and  load  us 
with  parting  gifts  of  milk  and  cheese. 

The  next  day  (30th  August)  we  entered  a  green 

Woman. 
VOL.  I.  S 


258  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS  BY    LAND. 

and  fertile  valley,  about  three  miles  broad,  with  lofty, 
partially  wooded  hills  on  either  side.  The  plain 
was  in  parts  thickly  inhabited,  and  we  continually 
passed  Mongols,  both  men  and  women,  and  during 
the  day  three  large  caravans,  two  of  bullock-carts 
one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  strong,  laden 
with  wood  and  hides  for  China,  to  return  with  tea. 
The  third  was  composed  exclusively  of  camels,  sixty 
in  number.  About  twenty  men  accompanied  it. 
On  one  of  the  leading  camels  was  a  poor  Mongol, 
evidently  in  a  dying  condition.  Our  own  men  were 
far  behind,  and  the  ones  we  questioned  by  signs, 
only  laughed  and  walked  on  when  we  pointed  to 
the  poor  wretch,  lying  on  his  back  with  the  fierce 
sun  beating  down  on  his  ghastly,  upturned  face. 
About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  behind  the  caravan 
came  the  Chinaman  in  charge,  gorgeous  in  yellow 
and  lavender  silk,  and  bristling  with  arms.  I 
felt  very  much  inclined  to  kick  him  out  of  his  cart, 
and  put  the  dying  Mongol  there  instead.  Although 
white  men  of  any  kind  are  so  rare  here,  they 
never  deigned  to  look  at  us,  nor  reply  to  our  ques- 
tion, addressed  in  Chinese,  as  to  how  many  days 
they  had  left  Ourga.  By  getting  them  into  conver- 
sation, we  might,  we  thought,   have  accompanied 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  259 

them  as  far  as  the  caravan,  and  by  Jee  Boo's  help  got 
something  done  for  the  poor  Tartar,  but  it  was  no 
use.  I  could  not  get  the  latter  out  of  my  head  the 
whole  day,  and  shuddered  when  I  thought  of  how  his 
sufferings  might  end.  The  Mongols  never  bury 
their  dead,  at  any  time,  and  often  on  a  voyage 
leave  their  sick  to  themselves,  very  much  as  they 
do  a  camel,  alone  in  mid-desert. 

The  queer  custom  prevalent  among  the  Mongol 
Tartars  of  leaving  their  dead  on  the  surface  of  the 
ground  was  brought  to  my  notice  in  a  forcible 
though  somewhat  unpleasant  manner  the  next 
day,  a  couple  of  hours  before  we  reached  the  river 
Tola,  which  lies  about  two  miles  from  Ourga. 
Upon  this  occasion  our  baggage-camels  had, 
contrary  to  custom,  started  first.  The  caravan 
road  here  is  clearly  defined,  so  we  started  off  alone 
and  on  foot  in  advance  of  our  party,  and  had  barely 
gone  three  hundred  yards  when  an  object  lying  in 
the  middle  of  the  road  arrested  my  attention,  a  small, 
oblong  parcel  about  two  feet  long,  done  up  in 
Chinese  paper,  and  secured  with  twine.  "  Something 
Moses  has  dropped,"  I  remarked  casually;  and  the 
contents  feeling  soft  and  shapeless,  I  put  it  down  to 
some  of  his  wearing  apparel,  and  returned  to  the 

s  2 


260  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

caravan  to  give  it  to  Sylvia,  who  had  just  started 
and  was,  as  usual,  softly  crooning  to  himself  in 
a  semi-state  of  slumber  on  the  leading  camel. 
But  catching  sight  of  what  I  held,  he  nearly  fell 
off  with  fright,  and  shrieking  "  Moo-moo  "  with 
all  his  might,  pulled  his  camel  away  from  me 
with  such  force  that  the  cart  nearly  turned 
over.  "  Moo-moo,"  he  repeated,  hurriedly  dis- 
mounting, and  leaving  the  caravan  to  itself,  put  a 
respectful  distance  between  us.  His  face  was  a 
picture  of  alarm  and  dismay,  and  as  pale  as  a 
ghost.  I  was  not  altogether  easy  myself,  thinking 
the  packet  might  be  infected  with  some  virulent 
disease,  so  I  yielded  to  the  little  Tartar's  vehement 
gestures,  threw  it  on  the  ground  and  walked  on, 
followed  slowly  by  Sylvia  muttering  to  himself  and 
smoking  furiously,  a  sure  sign  that  a  Mongol's 
equanimity  has  been  seriously  upset. 

It  was  not  till  we  reached  the  others  at  mid-day 
that  I  found  out  what  the  mj^sterious  packet  con- 
tained, and  that  what  I  had  innocently  been  carrying 
about  was  a  dead  baby !  Sylvia  had  by  this  time 
recovered  himself,  and  affected  to  laugh  at  the 
occurrence,  though,  at  the  time,  I  have  never  seen 
a  human  being  in  a  state  of   more   abject  terror. 


THE    DESEET   OF   GOBI.  261 

The  Russian  Consul,  when  I  told  him  of  the  occur- 
rence, remarked  that  all  Mongols  have  an  almost 
ridiculous  fear  of  death  and  everything  connected 
with  it.  This  seemed  the  more  curious  as  every 
step  you  take  in  their  capital  reminds  you  of  it. 
Ourga  might  justly  be  called  "  a  dead  city,"  so  grim 

and  weird  are  the  customs  of  its  strange,  uncanny 
population. 

We  sighted  the  Tola  at  aboat  nine  o'clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  31st  of  August,  and  must  have  passed 
at  least  a  dozen  caravans  of  fifty  or  sixty  camels 
each,  before  we  reached  its  banks,  from  the  time 
we  started,  about  six  a.m.  The  reports  we  got  as 
to  the  state  of  the  river  were  not  encouraging. 
Heavy  rains  had  made  the  ford  impassable,  and  all 
traffic  was  now  being  carried  on  by  means  of  the 
ferry,  some  five  miles  lower  down  the  stream.  It 
w^as  not  reassuring"  either  to  hear  that  this  ram- 
shackle  contrivance  had  broken  down  twice  within 
the  last  twenty-four  hours,  precipitating  three  bul- 
lock-carts and  two  men  (one  of  whom  was  drowned) 
into  the  water.  However,  we  made  up  our  minds 
for  the  worst,  and,  hoping  for  the  best,  gave  our- 
selves up  to  enjoyment  of  the  really  beautiful  scenery 
we  were  passing  through. 


262  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

One  might  have  been  in  the  most  picturesque 
parts  of  Switzerland  or  the  Tyrol.  A  broad, 
gravelly  road  runs  from  here  right  into  Ourga,  and 
along  this  a  continual  stream  of  caravans,  inward 
and  outward  bound,  was  hurrying.  The  whole  plain 
was  alive  with  movement,  and  the  bright  sunshine, 
gay  dresses  of  Mongol  horsemen,  and  tinkling  of 
caravan  bells,  gave  an  air  of  gaiety  to  the  scene, 
welcome  enough  after  twenty- three  days  of  un- 
interrupted, monotonous  desert.  On  our  right 
hand  a  clear,  brawling  stream  swirled  along,  an 
outlet  of  the  swollen,  tumultuous  Tola,  to  lose  itself 
in  the  large  freshwater  lake  we  passed  yesterday. 
On  our  left  a  range  of  low,  green  hills,  wooded  at 
the  summit,  their  green  hill-sides,  dotted  with  count- 
less sheep  and  ponies  at  pasture,  stretched  away  to 
where  the  Tola,  a  thin  thread  of  silver,  wound  its 
course  through  this  lovely  valley,  literally  a  "  land 
of  milk  and  honey  !  "  We  arrived  at  the  riverside 
about  one  o'clock.  The  foaming,  turgid  river, 
the  banks  lined  on  either  side,  as  far  as  eye  could 
see,  with  bullock-carts  and  camels,  the  row  and 
hubbub,  where  each  man  (and  there  must  have 
been  some  hundreds)  tried  to  shout  louder  than 
his  neighbour  ;  it  was  a  strange,  picturesque  sight. 


THE    DESEBT    OF    GOBI.  263 

A  smart  dapper-looking  Cossack,  in  grey  coat 
with  yellow  facings,  and  white,  peakless  cap,  had 
charge  of  the  ferry,  a  clumsy-looking  arrangement 
enough,  worked  by  a  dilapidated-looking  rope 
stretched  across  the  stream,  here  about  three 
hundred  yards  wide,  and  secured  to  two  small  trees 
on  either  side  of  the  river.  It  did  not  need  much 
calculation  to  see  where  the  ferry  would  go  in  the 
event  of  this  breaking,  for  about  two  hundred  yards 
down  stream  was  a  chain  of  rocks,  against  which 
the  torrent  foamed  and  dashed  in  a  manner 
anything  but  cheering  to  non- swimmers  like  Lan- 
caster and  myself.  The  result  of  an  accident 
had  been  pretty  well  shown,  for  this  was  the  third 
boat  used  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  the 
others  having  been  engulfed,  with  the  loss,  however, 
of  only  one  human  life. 

The  Cossack  was  politeness  itself,  and  I  luckily 
knew  a  little  Eussian.  "  Are  you  the  Englishmen 
expected  from  Pekin?"  "Yes."  How  they  knew  of 
our  advent  at  Ourga  was,  and  has  ever  since  been, 
inexplicable  to  me.  "  M.  Shishmaroff  has  been  ex- 
pecting you.  Please  take  a  seat,  and  I  will  send 
you  and  the  ponies  over,  the  carts  can  follow." 
And  offering  us  a  cigarette,  our  friend  hurried  off  to 


264  FROM    TEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

see  our  steeds  safely  embarked.  Though  only  a 
private  soldier,  the  man's  manner  was  as  courteous 
and  polite  as  could  be.  It  was,  however,  only  a 
forerunner  of  what  we  were  to  experience,  for 
seldom  have  I  experienced  in  any  country  so  mucli 
genuine  kindness  and  hospitality  from  the  lower 
orders  as  in  Asiatic  Russia. 

Our  friend  the  Cossack  returned  in  under  half 
an  hour.  "  Your  boat  is  ready,  Grospodin,  and 
you  can  get  in,  but  please  sit  tight.  I  will  cross 
with.  you.  In  case  of  accident,"  he  added  coolly, 
as  he  politely  handed  us  in,  "  jump  out  and  hold 
on  to  the  rope.  The  Mongols  will  pull  you 
ashore." 

It  was  not  a  pleasant  sensation,  crossing  that 
stream,  in  fact  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  ever  passed 
a  much  more  mauvais  quart -d^heure.  The  clumsy 
craft,  although  containing  only  the  Cossack,  our 
two  selves  and  the  ponies,  lurched  over  midway 
across,  so  suddenly  and  at  such  an  angle  that 
the  water  came  pouring  in  over  the  side.  This 
frightened  the  ponies,  who  set  to  plunging  and  kick- 
ing with  such  a  will  that  I  thought  every  instant  their 
heels  would  go  through  the  side  of  the  rotten  old 
tub.     We  were  then,  luckily,  considerably  more  than 


THE    DESKUT    OF    GOBI.  265 

half-way  over,  each  liolding  on  like  grim  death  to 
the  rope,  for  to  let  go  would  have  meant  a  certain 
upset.  Never  have  I  heard  such  a  babel.  The 
Mongols  on  the  bank  (in  whose  minds  the  death,  of 
their  drowned  companion  was  still  fresh)  raised  a 
yell  that  would  have  awoke  the  dead,  and  must 
have  disturbed  the  Kootooktas  mid-day  siesta  three 
miles  off.  It  was  only  by  dint  of  sheer  hard  work, 
that  we  succeeded  in  pulling  ourselves  across, 
our  fingers  nearly  cut  to  the  bone  by  the  fraying  of 
the  rope.  I  have  seldom  felt  more  relieved  than 
when  we  stood  once  more  high,  and  dry  on  terra  firma. 
The  thought  of  how  our  carts  were  to  be  got  over 
did  not  concern  us  in  the  least.  We  were  only  too 
glad  to  have  escaped  with  our  lives,  for  an  upset, 
even  to  a  good  swimmer,  would  bave  meant  certain 
death. 

It  was  nearly  three  o'clock  by  the  time  we  were 
across,  and  as  the  carts  were  not  to  be  brought  over 
till  the  ferry  was  repaired,  a  work  of  three  or  four 
hours,  we  resolved  to  ride  on  alone.  The  way  was 
simple  enough,  for  a  broad  gravel  path  or  road  runs 
right  into  the  city.  Having  got  minute  directions 
from  the  Cossack  how  to  find  the  Consul's  house, 
we  set  off  at  a  gallop  across  the  plain  to  Ourga. 


266  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

So  ended  our  journey  over  the  desert  proper. 
What  we  had  always  imagined  would  be  the  hardest 
part  of  our  journey  was  now  over.  We  had  never 
thought  of  Siberia.  That  seemed  feasible  enough. 
Our  bugbear,  before  starting,  had  been  Gobi,  the 
terrible  Chinese  desert,  against  which  we  had  been 
so  often  warned  before  leaving  England.  "  You 
will  never  get  across,"  said  one.  "  The  Tartars  will 
murder  you  for  a  certainty,"  said  another.  Even  in 
Pekin  itself  we  heard  blood-curdling  stories  of  the 
wild  tribes  said  to  inhabit  the  lonely  waste  lying  be- 
tween the  Great  Wall  of  China  and  Russian  frontier. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  few  Europeans,  even  those 
living  in  China  itself,  know  anything  whatever  of 
Mongolia.  Danger  there  may  be,  but  we  never 
experienced  it,  nor  do  the  three  or  four  Englishmen 
who  preceded  us  make  mention  of  ever  having  been 
attacked.  I  would,  personally,  very  much  sooner 
spend  the  night  unarmed  and  alone  in  the  (so-called) 
most  dangerous  parts  of  Gobi,  than  walk  through 
the  lonelier  suburbs  of  London  or  Paris,  after  dark 
on  a  winter's  evening. 

We  skirted  for  a  time  the  precipitous  mountain 
that  lines  the  left  bank  of  the  Tola.  Presently 
we  came  to  an  abrupt  turn  in  the  road ;  a  glorious 


THE    DESERT    OF    GOBI.  267 

panorama  of  plain  and  wood,  mountain  and  river, 
lay  at  our  feet,  and  a  couple  of  miles  away  a  com- 
pact mass  of  red  and  white  dwellings,  golden  domes, 
and  snowy  tents,  surmounted  and  surrounded  by 
thousands  of  brightly  coloured -prayer  flags,  which 
flashed  and  waved  in  the  sun  with  every  breath 
of  the  pure  morning  air.  We  had  reached  the 
sacred  city  of  Ourga. 


CHAPTER   VI. 


OURGA   TO    KIAEHTA. 


OuRGA  can  scarcely  be  called  a  city  in  the  true 
acceptance  of  tlie  term.  Its  Mongol  name,  "  Ta 
Huren,"  or  "  The  Great  Encampment,"  better 
describes  the  huge  cluster  of  tents  that  com- 
pose the  Mongolian  capital,  dwellings  precisely 
similar  in  shape  and  size  to  those  in  the  desert, 
save  that  here  they  are  surrounded  by  rough 
wooden  palisades,  eight  to  ten  feet  in  height,  as  a 
protection  against  the  thieves  and  marauders  who 
in  the  caravan  season  nightly  infest  the  streets. 

The  population  of  Ourga,  which  is  estimated  at 
about  40,000,  fluctuates  a  good  deal.  This  is  owing 
in  a  great  measure  to  the  nomad  disposition  of  the 
inhabitants,  who  are  here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow, 
taking  not  only  their  goods  and  chatties,  but  also 
their  house  with  them.     With  the  exception  of  the 


OURGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  269 

Kootookta's  palace,  an  imposing  edifice  of  Tibetan 
architecture,  all  white,  gold  and  vermilion,  like  an 
ornament  off  the  top  of  a  twelfth-cake,  there  are 
but  three  brick  houses  in  the  place,  residences 
of  Russian  tea-merchants,  of  whom,  when  we 
passed,  there  were  seven  residing  in  Ourga.  These, 
with  the  half-dozen  Europeans  stationed  at  the 
Consulate,  mid-way  between  Ourga  .and  Maimachin, 
formed  the  entire  European  population  of  the  capital 
of  Mongolia. 

Notwithstanding,  Ourga  is  of  no  little  importance 
as  a  trading  centre,  for  it  is  the  only  stage  in  the  tea- 
carrying  trade  between  China  and  Russia,  while  it 
exports  large  quantities  of  hides,  timber,  and  cloth- 
ing throughout  Mongolia.  Ourga  is  the  Mecca  of 
the  Mongol,  and  the  distances  travelled  by  the  faith- 
ful for  the  privilege  of  gazing  upon  the  features 
of  their  hving  god,  the  Kootookta,  are  sometimes 
incredible.  Pilgrimages  are  made  from  Manchuria, 
nine  hundred  miles  away,  and  a  man  arrived,  while 
we  were  there,  from  the  borders  of  Tibet,  having 
accomplished  the  distance  across  the  desert,  a  great 
part  of  it  sandy  waste,  alone  and  on  foot.  The  journey 
from  Ourga  to  Lassa  (Tibet)  is  made  in  great  state 
by  the  Grand  Lama  of  Mongolia  on  the  death   or 


270        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

transmigration  of  a  Kootookta,  to  procnre  another 
from  the  "  Dalai  Lama  "  of  Tibet.  There  are  but 
two  hying  deities  in  Mongol  Buddhism.  The  Dalai 
Lama  of  Lassa,  and  Kootookta  of  Ourga.  It  is  for 
this  that  the  Mongolian  capital  is  looked  upon  as  the 
second  sacred  city  of  the  world,  Lassa,  the  capital  of 
Tibet,  being  the  first. 

The  present  Kootookta  is  about  eighteen  years  of 
age,  lives,  like  the  Emperor  of  China,  a  life  of  the 
strictest  privacy,  and  is  only  exhibited  to  the  faithful 
by  the  Lamas  or  priests  in  charge  on  very  rare 
occasions.  Though  worshipped  as  a  god,  he  is 
allowed  no  voice  in  the  government  of  the  country, 
which  is  entrusted  to  two  viceroys,  a  Mongol  prince 
and  a  Manchu  Tartar  from  the  court  of  Pekin. 
The  latter  keeps  an  eye  on  the  sacred  youth,  and 
sees  that  he  does  not  meddle  with  state  affairs. 
Presumably  also  (as  no  Kootookta  has  ever  been 
known  to  live  over  the  age  of  twenty)  attends  to 
other  little  matters  when  the  proper  time  comes. 

We  had  left  the  caravan  at  nine  o'clock.     It  was 
past    ten    when,    passing    the     Chinese    town    of 
Maimachin,    the    green    roof    and   gilt    balls    and 
crosses  of  the  Russian  Consulate  came  in    sight,  a 
handsome    stone   building,  in   a   spacious   garden, 


OfTKGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  271 

just  outside  the  tented  c%.  Tlie  day  was  bright 
and  beautiful;  as  we  galloped  through  the  crisp 
clear  air,  our  ponies'  feet  rattling  along  the 
sound  and  springy  turf,  our  spirits  rose  at  the 
thought  that  our  desert  journey  was  really  over, 
that  the  neck  of  the  voyage  was  (as  we  thought) 
broken.  Ignorance,  in  this  case,  was  indeed 
bliss ! 

At  a  short  distance,  Ourga  presents  the  appear- 
ance of  some  huge  fair.  The  white  tents,  blue  and 
gold  temples,  and  gaudy  prayer-flags,  gave  us 
at  first  sight  a  pleasing  impression  of  the  place, 
which  was,  however,  speedily  dispelled  on  closer 
acquaintance  with  its  dismal-looking  streets,  de- 
serted save  by  beggars  and  dogs,  and  the  hideous 
customs  practised  day  and  night  by  its  stransje 
population. 

We  soon  reached  the  gates  of  the  Eussian  Consu- 
late, and  I  pulled  the  heavy,  clanging  courtyard  bell 
with  a  sense  of  relief,  thinking  that  a  few  minutes 
more  would  see  us  consoled  for  the  discomforts  of 
our  thirty  days'  journey  with  a  brandy-and-soda,  or 
its  Russian  substitute  in  the  cool,  shady  reception- 
room,  a  glimpse  of  which  we  had  caught  while  riding 
past   the  front  of  the  house.     A  stalwart   Cossack 


272  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

answered  our  summons.  He  was  a  rough,  surlj 
fellow.  My  knowledge  of  the  Russian  language  is 
limited,  but  I  knew  enough  to  understand  that  M. 
Shishmaroff  was  away — that  no  one  knew  when  he 
would  return — and  that  he  should  have  the  letter 
(which  in  despair  I  was  holding  out)  when  he  did. 
With  this  information,  given  with  scant  courtesy,  the 
military  janitor  calmly  proceeded  to  shut  the  door  in 
our  faces.  Luckily  for  us,  however,  the  arrival  of  a 
third  party  on  the  scene  completely  changed  the 
aspect  and  position  of  affairs,  the  new  comer  being 
no  less  than  our  sulky  friend's  wife,  a  burly,  rosy- 
cheeked  female  of  some  forty  summers,  whose  face  it 
did  one  good  to  see  after  the  bilious,  yellow-cheeked 
dames  of  China  and  the  Gobi.  There  was  no  mis- 
taking this  one — Russia — and  Northern  Russia  too, 
was  written  in  every  line  of  it.  She  was  indeed  a 
friend  in  need.  It  was  fortunate  for  us  that  the 
altercation  at  the  gate  had  become  loud  enough  to 
attract  her  attention,  causing  her  to  desist  from  the 
occupation  she  was  engaged  in,  of  washing  her  last- 
born  at  the  pump,  and  hasten  down  to  the  gate  to  see 
what  was  the  matter.  Whether  our  personal  appear- 
ance or  the  prospect  of  sundry  copeks  did  it,  I 
know  not,  let  us  hope  the  former.     The  fact  remains 


OURGA    TO   KIAKHTA.  273 

tliat  iu  less  time  tliau  it  tak(3S  me  to  write  it,  she 
had  hurled  her  lord  and  master  on  one  side,  flung 
wide  open  the  gates,  and  led  our  ponies  in.  Slie  then 
signed  to  us  to  dismount,  and,  taking  us  each  by  the 
hand,  led  us  into  a  cottage  situated  in  the  centre 
of  the  courtyard,  and  about  fifty  yards  distant  from 
the  Consulate. 

The  lady  evidently,  to  use  a  vulgar  terra,  wore  the 
breeches,  for  the  partner  of  her  joys  and  sorrows 
offered  no  resistance  whatever  when  she  ordered 
him,  after  unsaddling  and  watering  our  ponies,  to 
set  off  at  once  with  my  card  and  the  letter  of  intro- 
duction to  where  M.  Shishmaroff  was  staying  on  a 
shooting  excursion  some  thirty  versts  off.  The 
poor  wretch  went  like  a  lamb,  and  I  must  own  it 
was  with  some  satisfaction  that  we  saw  our  quon- 
dam enemy  ride  through  the  green  gates  and  into 
the  blazing  sun  while  we  sat  in  the  cool  red-tiled 
cottage,  comfortably  discussing  a  dish  of  ham  and 
eggs  and  home-made  bread,  washed  down  by 
copious  libations  of  quass,  and  topped  up  by  a 
bowl  of  rich  thick  cream,  which  the  good  soul 
insisted  on  our  drinking,  whether  we  liked  it  or  not. 
Think  of  this,  0  dyspeptics,  and  ponder  when  I 
add  that  we  felt  no  ill  effects.    Such  are  the  practical 

VOL.  I.  T 


'11^  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

results  of  a  month  in  the  Gobi  desert  on  the  human 
frame  and  digestion. 

The  long  sunny  day  wore  slowly  away.  As  we 
knew  some  hours  must  elapse  before  the  sergeant 
could  possibly  return,  Lancaster  and  I  extended 
ourselves  on  many  chairs,  and  with  a  box  of 
excellent  cigarettes  (the  sergeant's)  between 
us,  settled  down  to  a  thoroughly  lazy  afternoon. 
The  sensation  of  absolute  quiet  and  rest  was  little 
short  of  delicious  after  the  wear  and  tear  we  had 
been  leading  for  nearly  a  month — days  of  dirt  and 
discomfort,  nights  of  sleeplessness  and  misery.  It 
was  worth  all  the  hardship  we  had  undergone  to 
experience  the  sense  of  relief  and  rest  that  long, 
still  summer's  day  in  the  Russian  Consulate  at 
Ourga.  It  was  hard  to  realize  that  one  was  still 
in  the  Chinese  Empire.  The  clean  cottage,  with  its 
cool  red-brick  floor,  bright  copper  saucepans,  chintz 
window-curtains,  and  flower-bedecked  window-sills 
of  to-day  were  such  a  contrast  to  the  grimy  smoke- 
discoloured  yourts,  stufiy,  vermin-infested  camel- 
carts  of  yesterday.  I  caught  myself  more  than  once 
wondering  if  the  past  voyage  was'"not  all  a  dream, 
from  which  I  had  awoke  in  some  solitary  wayside 
cottage    in  far-away    England.       The   illusion  was 


OQKGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  275 

but  slowly  dispelled  when  waking  from  a  somewbat 
heavy  nap  (for  which  the  mixture  of  quass  and 
cream  was  no  doubt  answerable),  I  found  the  good- 
wife  bustling  about  among  her  pots  and  pans,  two 
curly-haired,  rosy-cheeked  brats  clinging  to  her 
skirts,  and  the  kettle  singing  merrily  on  the  hob. 

The  sergeant  returned  about  six  o'clock  with  a 
note  from  M.  Shishmaroff,  written  in  French,  and 
begging  us  make  ourselves  at  home  in  the  Consulate 
till  his  arrival  on  the  morrow,  an  invitation  we  were 
not  slow  to  avail  ourselves  of.  The  caravan  had  by 
this  time  arrived,  and  we  were  able,  after  a  delicious 
bathe,  to  get  a  complete  change  of  clothes,  a  luxury 
we  had  not  enjoyed  for  more  than  three  weeks.  We 
were  one  mass  of  bug  and  flea-bites  from  head  to 
foot,  but  a  little  ammonia  soon  set  this  right.  The 
portmanteaus,  too,  were  swarming  with  camel-ticks, 
and  the  next  morning  was  mainly  devoted  to  fumi- 
gating and  trying  to  get  rid  of  these  pests — no 
easy  matter. 

Though  luxuriously  furnished  and  fitted  up 
with  every  modern  appliance  and  comfort,  the 
house  of  the  Russian  Consul  at  Ourga  is  a  plain- 
looking  stone  building,  with  wings  on  either 
side,  the   one    serving    as  a  chapel,    the  other   as 

T  2 


276  FKOil    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

quarters  for  tlie  half-dozen  Cossacks  forming 
the  Guard.  The  windows  of  the  drawing-rooms 
looked  on  to  a  garden,  spacious  and  well  laid  out. 
Roses,  geraniums,  heliotrope,  mignonette,  and  other 
flowers  grew  in  profusion  along  the  borders  of  the 
neat  gravel-paths,  and  round  the  little  green 
wooden  kiosk,  where  after  dinner  Lancaster  and  I 
drank  our  coffee  and  smoked  cigarettes  as  we 
watched  the  sun  set  behind  the  sacred  hills,  and 
the  white  city  grow  grey  in  the  dusk.  A  more 
picturesquely  situated  one  can  scarcely  be  imagined 
than  Ourga,  in  the  midst  of  a  fertile  green  plain 
watered  by  the  blue  waters  of  the  Tola,  and  sur- 
rounded by  an  amphitheatre  of  undulating  wooded 
hills,  conspicuous  among  them  being  the  "  Sacred 
Mountain,"  with  its  dark  fir-trees  and  little 
temples,  where  the  buddhist  hermits,  tired  of  the 
pomps  and  vanities  of  the  world,  retire  to  spend 
their  last  days  mortifying  the  flesh  and  turning 
prayer-wheels. 

We  went  out  before  it  grew  quite  dark,  and  had  a 
look  at  the  ponies.  Both  were  enjoying  the  sweet 
fresh  grass,  and  seemed  as  contented  with  their 
comfortable  quarters  outside  as  their  masters  were 
in.     Little  Karra,    as   soon    as  he  saw  us,  gave  a 


ODRGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  277 

shrill  neigh  of  welcome,  and  bucked  away  from  us 
ill  a  manner  that  speedily  set  my  mind  at  rest  on  his 
account ;  while  the  gluttonous  Chow  never  desisted 
for  a  second  from  the  occupation  that  he  was  best 
fitted  for,  that  of  filling  his  inside.  We  passed 
the  European  cemetery  on  the  way  back,  eight 
or  ten  roughly  made  graves,  mere  mounds  of  earth, 
with  huge  stones  heaped  on  them  to  keep  away 
the  dogs.  The  crevices  between  were  riddled  with 
holes  where  rats  had  tried  to  get  at  the  bodies. 
Only  one  grave  boasted  the  smallest  attempt  at 
adornment,  a  white  wooden  cross  with  black  letters, 
bearing  the  name  and  age  of  a  young  Russian 
girl  who  had  died  in  Ourga  a  few  weeks  back.  I 
could  not  help  wondering  if  the  poor  child  ever 
realized,  during  lifetime,  that  this  lonely,  neglected 
spot  would  ever  be  her  last  resting-place.  The 
graves  looked  weird  and  uncanny  in  the  dusk,  and 
one  was  glad  to  leave  the  place  and  return  to  the 
Consulate ;  where,  as  we  entered,  we  heard  in  the 
courtyard,  the  sharp,  shrill  words  of  command  in 
Russian,  as  our  friend  the  sergeant  set  the  watch  for 
the  night.  Even  in  the  cosy,  well-lit  drawing-room 
it  was  hard  to  shake  off  the  uncomfortable  feeling 
of  depression  and  undefined  apprehension  that  never 


278  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

quite  left  one  in  Ourga.  Whether  it  be  the  climate 
or  surroundings  of  the  place,  I  know  not ;  but  every 
European  traveller  who  has  visited  the  Mongolian 
capital  mentions  having  experienced  the  same  sen- 
sation. 

M.  Shishmaroff  arrived  next  day,  a  spare,  wizened 
little  man  about  sixty  years  of  age,  clean-shaved, 
with  long,  wiry  grey  hair,  and  a  complexion  the 
colour  of  a  walnut.  Colonel  Petroff,  the  commander 
of  the  Gruard,  a  red-faced,  burly  Cossack  officer,  ac- 
companied him.  They  had  been  away  for  a  three 
days'  fishing  expedition,  and  their  baskets  were  laden 
with  fine  trout  and  "  Tai-Ming"  from  the  Tola.  The 
latter  is  a  species  of  large  pike,  but,  unlike  it,  is 
caught  onlyin  running  streams.  It  is  delicious  eating. 
Curiously  enough,  though  this  fish  is  caught  through- 
out Siberia  to  the  very  foot  of  the  Oural  mountains 
on  the  Asiatic  side,  it  is  never  found  in  European 
Russia. 

Both  our  hosts  gave  us  a  true  Russian  welcome ; 
and  though  the  colonel  spoke  but  few  words  of 
French,  we  mutually  managed  to  supply  by  signs 
what  we  lacked  in  language.  The  Consul  himself 
spoke  French  fluently.  Although  he  had  held  the  post 
he  now  occupied  for  more  than  twenty  years,  much 


OUROA    TO    XTAKHTA.  279 

of  his  early  life  had  been  spent  in  Central  Asia,  in  the 
service  of  the  Russian  Grovernment.  "  But  I  never 
wish  to  leave  Ourga,"  he  said,  when  I  one  day 
casually  remarked  that  the  life  must  be  rather  a 
dull  one  for  a  man  of  his  talents  and  culture.  *'  I 
am  passionately  fond  of  my  books.  I  enjoy  the 
finest  climate  in  the  world.  I  am  madly  fond  of 
fishing,  and  get  as  much  as  I  want  of  the  finest 
sport  in  the  world  in  the  Tola  hard  by.  Above  all, 
I  am  my  own  master,  and  as  you  English  say, 
*  Monarch  of  all  I  survey.'  "What  can  a  man  wish 
for  more  ?  "  And  I  could  not  but  admit  there  was 
some  truth  in  his  reasoning. 

The  Cossack  colonel  was  a  character.  I  verily 
believe  he  slept  in  his  uniform,  spurs  and  all. 
His  duties  appeared  light  enough.  It  is  not 
a  great  tax  on  a  man's  energy  to  command 
and  drill  six  men,  yet  was  he  by  no  means 
content  with  his  lot.  Often  (after  dinner)  when 
the  good  old  Consul  had  exhausted  his  Central 
Asian  anecdotes,  and  retired  to  his  books  and  fish- 
ing flies,  our  military  friend  would  fling  open  his 
tunic,  and,  throwing  himself  at  full  length  on  an 
easy  chair,  bewail  his  fate,  and  curse  the  ill-luck 
that  had  ever  brought  him  to  Ourga.     "What  a 


280  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    EY    LAND. 

place  !  What  pigs,  these  Mongols  !  "  he  would  cry  in 
execrable  French,  at  the  same  time  pouring  down 
draughts  of  fiery  Vodka  that  would  have  made  any 
one  but  a  Russian  purple  in  the  face.  "  Ah ! 
mes  amis !  you  are  fortunate,  you  go  to  Kiakhta ! 
Beautiful  Kiakhta  !  What  fun!  What  gaiety  !  What 
women  !  Ah  !  mon  dieu !  Would  that  I  could  accom- 
pany you  !  "  Occasionally,  very  late  in  the  even- 
ing, he  would  pull  out  of  his  tunic  and  kiss  with 
much  effusion  a  tawdrily-coloured  miniature  of  a 
lady  with  a  countenance  as  of  the  rising  sun,  and 
what  looked  like  two  large  black  holes  for  eyes. 
"  I  shall  marry  her  some  day,"  he  would  say, 
gazing  pensively  at  the  portrait,  while  his  eyes 
filled  with  tears — and  Vodka.  "  Some  day,  my  little 
Olga,  you  will  be  mine."  I  never  interrupted  our 
military  friend's  rhapsodies,  or  inquired  as  to  her 
stature,  but,  judging  from  length  of  face  and  size  of 
feature,  Olga  must  have  been  misshapen  if  she  stood 
anything  under  six  foot  high  in  her  stockings. 

We  rode  through  Ourga  next  day,  and  found  it  a 
dull,  unpicturesque  city.  There  are  no  shops  or  stalls 
in  the  streets,  none  of  the  colour  and  movement  that 
make  most  Oriental  places  so  picturesque.  A  more 
melancholy,  depressing  place  I  have  seldom  seen;  one 


OURGA    TO    KTAKBTA.  281 

sees  nothing  on  all  sides  but  palisades  about  nine  feet 
high,  rough  pine-tree  stems,  stuck  into  the  ground 
close  together,  and  thickly  plastered  together  with 
clay.  The  dwellings  of  the  inhabitants  are  almost 
entirely  hidden  by  these  rough  wooden  walls. 
The  thousands  of  brilliantly  coloured  prayer-flags, 
covered  with  Mongohan  and  Tibetan  characters, 
give  a  spurious  look  of  gaiety  to  the  place,  which 
is  soon  dispelled  upon  looking  around  again 
at  the  silent,  desolate-looking  streets.  The  latter, 
though  unpaved,  were  clean  and  regularly  laid  out, 
debouching  frequently  into  open  spaces  of  waste 
land,  or  squares.  Erected  in  most  of  the  latter  were 
a  number  of  open  sheds,  with  what  looked  like 
huge  wooden  barrels  inside  them,  but  which  we 
afterwards  discovered  were  prayer-wheels,  hollow 
cylinders  filled  with  prayers  and  petitions  to  Buddha. 
We  must  have  seen  over  a  thousand  of  these  scattered 
about  Ourga,  for  public  use.  They  varied  consider- 
ably in  size,  from  those  ten  to  twelve  feet  hio-h. 
great  ponderous  things  that  took  three  or  four  men 
to  turn  them,  to  others  not  longer  than  a  man's 
hand,  affixed  to  the  street  corners.  These  wheels 
are  never  at  rest,  men  and  women  pause,  as 
they    hurry    along    the    streets,    to    give    a    turn 


282  FROM    PRKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LA^D. 

to  each  as  tliey  pass  them,  and  as  one  encounters 
one  every  twenty  yards  or  so,  the  amount  of  prayers 
turned  out  during  the  day  in  Ourga  must  be  some- 
thing enormous.  Prayer  in  Mongolia  is  all  done  by 
motive  power,  and  we  noticed  water-wheels  and  wind- 
mills thickly  covered  with  sacred  characters.  None  of 
the  people  dreamt  of  passing  one  in  the  street  without 
giving  it  a  turn.  Some  seemed  to  make  up  praying 
parties ;  for  we  once  saw  Uyo  women  and  three  men, 
grinding  away  at  a  big  wheel  near  the  Kootookta's 
palace,  for  at  least  half  an  hour  without  cessation. 
Some  of  the  more  devout  turned  miniature  wheels 
in  the  left  hand,  while  they  pushed  round  the  bigger 
ones  with  the  right. 

Thoughts  of  death  and  of  a  future  state  are  the 
chief  topics  of  conversation  in  this  weird  city,  and 
religious  ceremonies  and  duties  form  the  chief  occupa- 
tion of  the  inhabitants,  who  go  about  their  business, 
in  solemn  silence  and  with  long  faces  that  contrast 
strangely  with  the  gaudy  dresses  and  ornaments 
in  which  they  are  clad.  A  Mongol  may  be  as  cheer- 
ful and  boisterous  as  he  pleases  in  the  desert,  but 
once  in  the  capital  he  must  put  on  his  best  clothes, 
and  observe  a  reserved,  silent  manner  in  accordance 
with  the  solemn  surroundings.    Many  of  the  women 


OURGA   TO   XIAKHTA.  283 

were  beautifully  dressed  and  covered  with  hand- 
some gold  and  silver  ornaments.  They  had  in 
Ourga  a  curious  way  of  dressing  the  hair,  that 
we  had  not  seen  in  the  desert.  A  head-dress 
of  solid  silver,  studded  with  coral  and  turquoise, 
fits  flat,  and  closely  to  the  head.  From  under  this 
their  hair  was  brought  out  at  right  angles  to  the  head 
in  a  solid  band  about  six  or  seven  inches  broad: 
This  was  kept  stiff  by  a  plentiful  application  of 
mutton  fat  and  other  substances,  and  kept  out  by 
three  broad  wooden  bands.  At  the  shoulders  it  was 
gathered  up  and  allowed  to  fall  down  in  front  of 
each  shoulder  in  a  single  plait.  Their  painted  faces, 
flat  noses,  and  beady  black  eyes,  in  conjunction 
with  this  strange  head-dress,  gave  them  a  most 
grotesque  appearance,  and  utterly  spoilt  any  pre- 
tension to  good  looks  they  may  have  had,  although 
with  the  exception  of  Tsaira,  I  did  not  see  a  single 
good-looking  woman  or  girl  throughout  Mongolia. 
Onrga  is  said,  notwithstanding,  to  be  the  most 
immoral  city,  of  its  size,  in  the  world. 

Perhaps  one  of  the  most  curious  characteristics  of 
Ourga  is  the  silence  that  reigns.  There  is  here 
none  of  the  hum  or  bustle  usually  found  in  a 
place  where  some  thousands  of  human  beings  are 


284  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

gathered  together.  No  sound,  even  at  raid-day, 
breaks  the  solemn  stillness  but  the  eternal  creak 
of  prayer-wheels  and  tolling  of  deep- toned  gongs, 
save  when  a  discordant  blast  of  horns  announces 
the  celebration  of  some  ceremony  at  the  Kootookta's 
Palace,  or  a  tea- caravan  jingles  and  rattles  noisily 
through  the  quiet  streets  and  squares  on  its  wslj  to 
Siberia  or  China. 

The  chief  products  of  Ourga  appeared  to  be 
beggars  and  dogs.  The  latter  are  exceptionally  large 
and  ferocious,  so  much  so  that  Europeans  always 
ride  when  obliged  to  go  into  Ourga.  On  foot  one 
stands  a  very  fair  chance  of  being  torn  to  pieces  by 
the  huge,  savage  brutes,  who  do  not,  however,  harm 
or  take  any  notice  of  the  natives.  The  beggars 
fairly  swarm — loathsome,  abject  wretches,  many  of 
them  covered  with  sores,  and  quite  naked.  Wet  or 
dry,  hot  or  cold,  they  live  in  the  open,  subsisting  on 
alms,  or  whatever  offal  they  can  pick  up.  We  saw 
two  or  three  lying  dead  by  the  roadway.  No 
one  seemed  to  take  any  notice  of  the  corpses 
save  dogs  and  vultures.  Thousands  of  the  latter 
perpetually  hover  over  Ourga,  the  largest  I 
have  ever  seen,  and  as  bold  as  brass.  It  is  a 
common  thing  to  see  people  returning  from  market 


ODRGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  285 

have  their  provisions  snatched  out  of  their  hands 
and  carried  off  by  the  huge  birds.  I  could  not 
believe  this,  till  I  saw  it  nij^self.  No  one 
harms  them.  The  first  precept  of  Buddhism  is 
"  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  and  although  this  rule  is 
sometimes  broken  m  the  desert,  an  infringement  of 
it  in  the  city  of  the  Kootookta  would  meet  with 
summary  punishment. 

The  palace  of  the  Kootookta  and  Lamasery  or 
Buddhist  monastery  are  the  only  buildings  of  any 
size  or  importance  in  Ourga.  We  managed  to  get 
permission,  through  M.  Shishmaroff,  from  the  Grand 
Lama  of  Mongolia  to  visit  the  temple  attached  to 
the  palace.  We  were  very  curious  to  see  the 
Kootookta  himself,  but  one  might  as  well  have  tried 
to  gain  admission  to  the  presence  of  the  Emperor  of 
China.  He  was  moreover  absent  on  a  pilgrimage  to 
a  mountain  shrine,  some  hundred  miles  off,  during 
our  stay. 

The  temple  itself  is  a  whitewashed,  wooden 
building,  with  a  pink  and  blue  striped  dome,  sur- 
mounted by  a  huge  gilt  ball.  There  are  no 
windows.  It  was  some  time  on  entering  before  we 
could  make  out  the  huge  figure  of  Buddha ;  for  two 
guttering  oil  wicks  only  just  made  darkness  visible. 


286  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

The  idol,  whicli  is  of  gilt  bronze,  and  represented 
seated,  is  one  of  the  largest  in  the  world.     1  could 
not  ascertain  its  exact  height,  but  we  measured  one 
of  the  hands,  and  found  it  six  feet  long,  while  the 
rest  of  the  body  is  in  the   most  perfect  proportion. 
Surrounding  it  were  five  life-sized  wooden  figures  in 
Mongol  dress,  which  startled  one  not  a  little  at  first, 
they  looked  so  like  human  beings  in  the  dim  light, 
their   faces    and   hands   being    made    of    wax    and 
painted  flesh  colour.     Ranged  round  the  walls  from 
floor   to   roof   were    a    thousand   small    gilt   idols, 
each  in  its   own    glass-covered   niche,   while  from 
the  dome  hung  some  twenty   or  thirty  large   silk 
prayer-flags  beautifully  worked  with  Tibetan  and 
Mongolian    characters  in  gold.     Some  were  fairly 
rotting  with  age.     At  the  right  of  the  figure  stood 
the  Kootookta's  throne,  a  tawdry-looking  light  green 
erection  thickly  covered  with  ill-painted  flowers  and 
landscapes,  like  a  shooting-gallery  at  a  fair,  which 
detracted  not  a  little  from  the  beauty  of  the  place. 
We  could  not  see  the  face  of  this  huge  figure,  which 
was   lost   in    the    darkness  high  up   in  the  dome, 
but  M.  Shishmaroff  told  us  it  is  of  great  beauty. 
Where  this  huge  figure   was   cast  or  how  it  ever 
got  to  Ourga,  does  not  transpire.     It  is  of  enormous 


OUKGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  287 

antiquity,  and  was  placed  tliere  long  before  the 
"  Wliite  Barbarian"  ever  set  foot  in  these 
regions. 

Two  yellow-clad  Lamas,  with  shaven  heads  and 

bare  feet,  came  in  as  we  were  leaving,  to  trim  the 

lamps  and  collect  the  alms  and  offerings  that  had 

been  left  at  the  feet  of  Buddha  during   the    day. 

They  seemed  rude,  ill-conditioned  fellows  enough, 

and  by  no  means  pleased  to  see  us,  nor  did  the 

rouble  which  Petroff  gave  them  elicit  anything  but 

a    sulky   grunt   of  thanks.      "  Canaille   va !  "   said 

the  Cossack,  with  a  fierce  twist  of  his  moustache, 

as  we  emerged  into  the  open  air,  "  we  shall  teach 

you   a  lesson  some    day,"   a   remark  that    set  me 

thinking.     There  is  probably  no  race  so  jealous  of 

its   reliction   and    customs    and  so  intolerant   of    a 

stranger's  interference  as  the  Mongols.     It  was  with 

the  utmost   difficulty  that  I  managed  to  procure  a 

small  prayer- wheel  about  five  inches  long  (although 

there  were  probably  thousands  of  such  in  Ourga), 

and  then  only  through  the  mediation  of  the  Consul, 

to  whom   it  was  given,  not  sold  to,  by  the  owner. 

Though  there  are  five  or   six  of    these  miniature 

wheels  in  every  tent,  one  never  sees  them  exposed  for 

sale,  all  being  made  in  the  Lama  monasteries.     It 


288  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

was  getting  dusk  as  we  mounted  our  ponies  to  return 
to  the  Consulate.  This  seemed  to  be  the  favourite 
hour  for  prayer  in  Ourga,  for  the  thirty  or  more 
large  prayer-wheels  in  front  of  the  temple  were  all 
in  full  swing,  three  or  four  men  and  women  to 
each.  The  creaking  and  grinding  of  the  spindles 
was  deafening,  while  the  two  sloping  wooden 
platforms  in  front  of  the  palace,  used  for  the 
purpose  of  public  worship,  were  covered  with  pro- 
strate forms  at  evening  prayer. 

The  palace,  an  imposing  brick  building  of  Tibetan 
architecture,  stands  hard  by  the  temple,  with 
which  it  is  connected  by  a  covered  way  built  to 
screen  the  Kootookta  from  the  vulgar  gaze,  when 
he  oroes  to  his  devotions  or  a  council  of  Lamas. 
The  residence  of  the  human  god  is  handsome, 
though  somewhat  gaudy,  its  white  fagades  being 
picked  out  with  blue,  crimson,  and  gold.  The  ap- 
proach is  through  two  archways  of  Chinese  archi- 
tecture, at  thirty  yards'  interval,  richly  carved  and 
coloured  light  green  and  vermilion.  It  is  only  in 
winter  that  the  Kootookta  lives  in.  the  capital.  In 
early  spring  he-  is  taken  in  state  by  the  Lamas  to 
his  summer  palace,  about  five  miles  away,  on  the 
banks   of  the  clear,  swift-running  Tola  and  under 


OURGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  289 

the  very  shadow  of  the  sacred  mountain.  Here 
the  time  is  spent  in  prayer  and  meditation  till  the 
return  of  autumn. 

We  rode  past  some  tents  pitched  on  the 
open  space  in  front  of  the  palace,  an  encampment 
of  pilgrims  which  had  arrived  in  Ourga  the  week 
before  from  Manchuria.  One  tent,  that  of  their 
chief,  was  of  green  silk,  and  richly  ornamented 
with  gold  hangings  inside  and  out.  They  seemed 
cheery,  good-tempered  fellows,  and  gave  us  a 
pleasant  "  good  night "  as  we  passed  them,  seated 
outside  their  tents  discussing  the  evening  meal 
round  their  camp  fires.  Half  a  dozen  camels  and  a 
couple  of  ponies  formed  their  caravan.  They  had 
taken  more  than  three  months  to  do  the  journey, 
and  were  setting  out  again  to  return  home  the  follow  - 
ing  day. 

The  day  had  been  close,  and  a  shower  of  rain 
towards  sundown  had  made  the  atmosphere 
steamy  and  depressing,  as  we  rode  slowly 
home  through  the  twilight  to  the  Consulate. 
It  was  Petroff  who  first  called  my  attention  to  a 
faint  sickly  odour  I  had  noticed  on  and  off  all  the 
afternoon  during  our  peregrinations,  a  hot  pungent 
smell  as  of  decaying  matter,  which  I  had  detected 

VOL.  I.  IT 


290  FEOM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

in  my  bedroom  at  the  Consulate  the  day  before,  and 
which  seemed  to  pursue  one  everywhere  in  and 
about  Ourga.  "  You  had  better  hght  a  cigarette," 
said  the  colonel,  offering  me  his  case.  "  It  is  always 
worse  on  these  damp  evenings." 

"  Do  you  mean  to  say  the  Consul  has  not  told 
you  of  our  Golgotha,"  he  continued,  as  soon  as  we 
were  fairly  alight,  in  reply  to  my  innocent  query  of 
how  ''it"  was  occasioned.  "  Why,  it  is  the  sight  of 
the  place.  There  is  just  time  before  dinner;  we 
will  ride  home  that  way." 

I  was  no  longer  surprised  after  my  visit  to 
"  Golgotha,"  as  Colonel  Petroff  facetiously  termed 
the  place  where  hundreds  of  corpses  lay  rotting 
above  ground,  that  the  city  of  Ourga  did  not  smell 
as  sweet  as  one  could  wish.  My  only  surprise 
is,  after  visiting  the  spot  in  question,  that  plague 
is  not  always  raging  in  a  city  where  the 
inhabitants  never  dream  of  burying  their  dead, 
but  carry  them  to  a  spot  not  three  hundred  yards 
from  the  gates,  and  there  let  them  slowly  decom- 
pose in  the  open  air. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  imagine  a  more 
horrible  spectacle  than  met  our  eyes  on  arriving  at 
Golgotha,  an  open  space  or  cleft  between  two  low 


ourCtA  to  kiakhta.  291 

green  hillocks  just  outside  Ourga,  a  valley  literally 
crammed  with  corpses  in  every  stage  of  decomposi- 
tion, from  the  bleached  bones  of  skeletons  that  had 
lain  there  for  years,  to  the  disfigured,  shapeless  masses 
of  flesh  that  had  been  living  beings  but  a  few  days  or 
hours  ago.  The  moon  shed  a  pale,  unearthly  light 
over  the  grinning  skulls  and  grey,  upturned  faces 
of  the  dead,  some  of  whom  lay  stark  and  stiff  just 
as  they  had  been  left  by  their  friends,  others  with 
their  blue  shrouds  ragged  and  torn,  with  dis- 
figured faces  and  twisted  limbs,  lying  in  the 
horribly  grotesque  positions  in  which  the  dogs  or 
wolves  had  dragged  them.  Near  us  was  the 
body  of  a  woman  that  had  lain  there  but  a  few 
hours,  Petroff  said,  judging  from  the  clean  and 
untorn  appearance  of  her  shroud.  A  little  further 
off  a  number  of  huge  dogs  were  fighting  and 
snarling  over  the  remains  of  a  child.  Overhead 
great  carrion  birds  were  flapping  their  huge  black 
wings,  occasionally  swooping  down,  with  a  hoarse 
croak,  to  bury  beak  and  talon  in  some  newly  arrived 
corpse.  The  very  ground  we  trod  was  composed  of 
human  bones  which  crunched  under  our  ponies'  feet 
as  we  rode  a  short  distance  up  the  narrow,  ghastly 
defile.    The  stench  was  awful.    I  can  never  think  of 

TJ   2 


292  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  place  even  now  without  a  shudder,  and  devoutly 
wish  I  had  never  seen  it. 

A  Mongol  when   ill   has  but  a  poor  chance    of 
recovery  in   Ourga.     He  had  far  better  be   alone 
and  deserted  in  the  plains  than  handed  over  to  the 
tender  mercies  of  the  Death  Lamas.     There  is  a 
house  or  shed  in  Ourga  near  the  Lamasery  specially 
set  apart  for  the  dying,  for  it   is   considered   the 
worst  possible  luck  for  a  Mongol  to  die  in  his  own 
tent.     The  dwelling,   should  this   occur,  is  looked 
upon   as    accursed   for  evermore,  and    its    inmates 
shunned  like  lepers  by  their  neighbours.     Thus  it 
frequently  happens  that  a  poor  wretch  is  bundled 
off  without   ceremony  to  the   "dying  shed"   long 
before  there  is  any  need  for  it.     As  the  "  Death 
Lamas,"  who  receive  him,  do    everything   for   the 
cure  of  his  soul  and  nothing  for  the  good  of   his 
body,  the  invalid  has  a  bad  time  of  it.     It  is   not 
considered  the  proper  thing  to  leave  the    "  Death 
Chamber "  alive,  and   few  do    so,   however    slight 
their     ailment     when     they    are     once     admitted. 
We   tried    hard,   but    wei-e   not   allowed   to   enter 
the  sacred  precincts,  nor  is  any   one    who  is  not 
of  the  Buddhist  faith  and  in  extremis.     The   out- 
side world   is   therefore  ignorant  of  the  rites  and 


OUEGA   TO    KIAKHTA.  293 

ceremonies  practised  therein  by  the  Lamas,  but  the 
tortures  suffered  by  the  unhappy  patients  is  pretty 
apparent  to  any  passer-by,  judging  from  the 
groaning  and  moaning  that  we  heard  issuing  from 
this  gruesome  dwelHng.  When  dead,  everything  the 
patient  possesses  becomes  the  property  of  the  Lamas 
who  have  attended  him.  He  is  stripped  naked, 
wrapped  in  a  coarse  blue  cotton  shroud,  and  given  up 
to  his  friends,  who  bear  him  away  to  Grolgotha,  and 
there  leave  him  to  the  mercy  of  the  elements, 
dogs,  and  vultures.  Instances  have  been  known  of 
men  and  women  recovering  and  returning  from  the 
ghastly  spot  to  their  homes.  The  Mongol  is,  at  any 
rate,  free  from  an  evil  which  always  more  or  less 
threatens  us  of  superior  civilization — that  of  being 
buried  alive. 

I  had  not  much  appetite  for  dinner  that  evening, 
a  meal  we  always  partook  of  strictly  a  la  Btisse, 
which  means,  literally  speaking,  any  amount  of  rich, 
greasy  food,  but  no  drink  to  wash  it  down  with. 
However  thirsty  one  might  be,  wine,  beer,  and 
water  were  tabooed  from  the  dinner  and  breakfast 
table.  Each  guest  had  his  small  liqueur-glass,  but 
no  tumblers,  or  wine-glasses.  In  front  of  the 
Consul     stood     a     miniature    battery    of    Vodka, 


294  FE03I    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Kiimmel,  and  brandy  bottles,  and  on  these  he  rang 
the  changes,  replenishing  our  glasses  with  the 
contents  of  one  or  the  other  till  the  close  of  the  meal, 
when  the  hissing  Samovar  was  brought  in  and  tea 
brewed.  Our  mouths  by  this  time  resembled  a 
burning  fiery  furnace,  and  one  was  glad  of  a  draught 
of  the  cup  that  cheers,  hot  and  unrefreshing  as 
it  was.  Sometimes  "  Koumiss,"  or  fermented  mares' 
milk,  was  handed  round,  a  drink  of  which  the 
colonel  and  Consul  partook  largely,  but  the  violent 
attack  of  indigestion  that  half  a  glass  brought  on 
deterred  me  from  ever  drinking  the  vile  stuff,  which 
tastes  exactly  like  butter-milk  gone  bad  twice.  It 
was  not  till  bedtime  that  we  were  really  able  to 
slake  our  thirst  with  a  cool  draught  of  our  own 
whisky  and  water  from  the  bedroom  decanter. 
This  strange  custom  seemed  to  prevail  throughout 
Siberia.  Thirst  is  a  sensation  apparently  unknown 
to  Russians,  and  I  never  saw  either  the  Consul  or 
Petroff  drink  wine  except  when  once,  after  a  more 
than  usually  late  night,  the  latter  opened  a  bottle  of 
champagne  the  following  morning  in  our  honour, 
and  to  drink  to  his  speedy  union  with  the  fair  Olga. 
We  visited  Maimachin  the  following  day. 
Kiakhta   and   other  frontier-towns   all   have   their 


OUEGA   TO   KIAKHTA.  295 

Maimachins,  a  name  derived  from  two  Chinese 
words  signifying  "Maima,"  trade,  and  Cliing, 
*'  town,"  for  it  is  here  that  the  Mongols  purchase 
their  stores,  clothing,  and  provisions.  Although 
distant  only  a  mile  from  the  capital,  there  are 
probably  no  two  places  in  the  world  so  utterly 
different  in  appearance  and  character  as  these.  Of 
the  ten  thousand  inhabitants,  eight  thousand  at  least 
are  Chinese,  merchants  of  various  kinds,  and  all  men. 
There  is  not  a  Chinese  female  of  any  sort  or  kind  in 
the  place,  for  the  latter  are  forbidden  by  the  laws  of 
their  country  to  accompany  their  husbands  or  male 
relatives  into  Mongolia,  or  indeed  to  go  anywhere 
north  of  the  Great  Wall  of  China.  The  consequence 
of  this  is  that  many  of  the  Maimachinites  have 
intermarried  with  Mongol  women,  a  circumstance 
that  debars  them  from  ever  again  entering  the 
Chinese  empire  without  special  permission  from  the 
Court  of  Pekin. 

Maimachin  is  a  neatly-built  town  enclosed  in  a 
brick-battlemented  wall  about  fifteen  feet  in  height. 
The  streets  were,  like  those  of  all  Chinese  cities, 
abominably  dirty,  but  it  presented  for  all  that  a  very 
favourable  contrast  to  sad,  sombre  Ourga.  The 
houses  are  of  brick   for  the  most  part,  well-built, 


296       FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

substantial  dwellings  with  gardens  and  courtyards, 
wliile  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city  trees  (planted  by 
the  ever-industrious  Chinaman)  and  carefully  tended 
market  and  flower  gardens  relieve  the  monotony  of 
the  dead  green  plain.  A  Chinaman  much  resembles 
a  Frenchman  in  one  respect ;  put  him  into  a  swamp 
in  Mid-Africa,  and  he  will  make  his  immediate 
surroundings  ornamental,  or  at  any  rate  as  pretty 
as  circumstances  will  allow. 

The  Temple  of  Confucius  at  Maimachin  was 
a  pleasant  contrast  to  the  gaunt,  whitewashed 
structure  of  Buddha  at  Ourga.  Though  much 
smaller  in  dimensions,  it  was  a  model  of  symmetry 
and  beauty,  and  embelhshed  with  carvings  and 
sculpture  which  it  seemed  a  sin  to  have  covered 
with  the  eternal  gold  and  vermilion  so  dear  to  every 
celestial's  heart.  In  front  was  a  little  courtyard 
overhung  with  weeping  willows  and  paved  with 
smooth  grey  tiles,  round  the  edge  of  which  ran 
broad  beds  of  roses  and  mignonette,  while  in  the 
centre  a  fountain  plashed  lazily  into  a  basin  of  cool 
green  water,  covered  with  clusters  of  great  white 
water  hlies.  Hung  around  the  roof  of  the  temple 
were  hundreds  of  small  gilt  bells  with  sails  attached 
to  their  clappers,  which  at  the  slightest  breath  of 


OUKGA   TO   KIAKHTA.  297 

air  produced  a  sweet  musical  sound.  It  was 
a  relief  to  sit  in  this  pretty  cool  retreat  and 
forget  for  a  while  the  dirty,  dismal  city  with  its 
leprous  population  and  unburied  dead  not  two 
thousand  yards  off ! 

Moses  and  Co.  had  only  contracted  to  bring  us  as 
far  as  Ourga,  so  we  now  set  about  getting  fresh 
camels  for  the  journey  to  Kiakhta,  a  distance  of 
over  two  hundred  miles.  We  were  not  anxious  to 
prolong  our  stay  in  Ourga.  One  walk  through  the 
city  had  more  than  satisfied  our  curiosity,  and  the 
unsavoury  whiffs  that  came  in  at  our  open  windows 
whenever  the  wind  was  blowing  in  from  the  direction 
of  Golgotha,  only  made  us  the  more  anxious  to 
hasten  our  departure,  notwithstanding  the  kind  and 
pressing  invitation  of  our  good-natured  friend  and 
guide,  Petroff,  to  stay  a  few  days  longer  and  have 
some  trout-fishing,  a  sport  I  have  never  been 
particularly  fond  of,  though  I  believe  it  is  to  be 
had  in  perfection  in  the  waters  of  the  Tola,  judging 
from  the  large  basketsful  M.  Shishmaroff  brought 
in  almost  daily. 

We  procured  camels  with  less  difficulty  than  I 
had  anticipated,  though  not  without  a  good  deal  of 
haggling  and  discussion  as  to  price  with  the  greasy 


298  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

old  Mongol  whose  property  they  were.  The  old 
robber  insisted  on  payment  beforehand,  and  insisted 
on  its  being  made  in  hrich  tea,  which  gave  us  an 
enormous  amount  of  trouble  and  annoyance.  We 
managed  it  at  last,  with  the  aid  of  M.  Shoolingin, 
a  Russian  tea-merchant,  but  the  calculation  entailed 
a  consumption  of  tea,  Vodka,  and  cigarettes  that 
gave  us  a  headache  for  two  days  afterwards  !  It 
took  us  nearly  three  hours  to  convert  our  Kalgan 
bills  into  the  requisite  amount  of  the  awkward 
countersome  material  that  passes  current  for  coin  in 
Ourga  and  throughout  Mongolia.  The  tea  is  of  the 
coarsest  kind.  After  being  submitted  to  a  pressing 
and  drying  process,  it  is  cut  up  into  bricks  of  25 
cents,  50  cents,  and  $1  value.  The  latter  are  nearly 
two  feet  long.  The  cost  of  the  camels  for  our 
journey  to  Kiakhta  was  $35,  so  the  old  Mongol  had 
to  call  in  two  others  to  help  him  carry  away  his 
spoil,  under  which  he  staggered  away  with  a  grin 
and  a  leer  that  made  us  doubt  whether  he  had  not 
swindled  us,  which  we  afterwards  discovered  he  had 
to  the  amount  of  some  $15.  Bank-notes  have  lately 
been  introduced  by  the  Russian  tea-firms  in  Ourga, 
representing  so  many  bricks  of  tea  each.  These 
would  do  away  with  much  of  the  difficulty  attending 


OURGA   TO    KIAKHTA.  299 

the  carting  about  of  the  present  heavy,  clumsy 
currency,  but  the  natives  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  them. 

We  left  Ourga  at  5  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  the 
3rd  of  August.  Our  caravan  was  now  consider- 
ably reduced  in  size,  for  it  needed  but  four  camels 
(besides  the  two  for  the  carts)  to  carry  our  few 
remaining  stores.  Early  as  it  was,  the  Consul  and 
Petroff  were  at  the  gate  to  bid  us  good-bye.  The 
poor  colonel  looked  very  sad  and  down  in  the  mouth. 
He  was  thinking,  no  doubt,  of  Olga,  for  whom 
he  gave  me  innumerable  tender  messages.  As  they 
were  confided  verbally,  and  in  Russian,  it  is  per- 
haps as  well  that  I  never  made  the  acquaintance 
of  the  belle  of  "  Beautiful  Kiakhta."  She  would 
have  been  somewhat  confused  at  my  interpretation 
of  her  fiance's  messages,  and  might  have  taken  his 
declarations  ofundyinglove  and  devotionfor  my  own. 
As  the  caravan  moved  slowly  out  of  the  gate  on  the 
second  stage  of  our  weary  journey,  the  guard  gave 
us  three  hearty  cheers,  and  we  drank  a  final  Vodka 
with  Petroff,  arranging  to  meet,  if  all  went  Tv^ell,  the 
following  year  in  Petersburg,  a  place  the  gay, 
liffht-hearted  soldier  seemed  far  more  suited  to 
than  the  dreary  desert-city  in  which  we  left  him. 


300  FEOM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND, 

Pleasing  indeed  was  this  our  first  experience  of 
Russian  friendship  and  hospitality,  nor  had  we  ever 
cause  to  alter  our  opinion.  With  all  our  vaunted 
hospitality,  I  doubt  if  even  the  English  are  not 
behind  the  Russians  in  these  two  qualities,  which  I 
have  never  seen  so  general  as  in  Russia  and  Siberia. 

A  caravan  of  three  hundred  ox-carts  laden 
with,  timber  and  furs  passed  the  gates  as  we 
were  leaving,  going  in  the  contrary  direction 
to  ourselves.  They  were  bound  for  Dolonnor 
in  Manchuria,  a  town,  Petroff  told  us,  they  would 
be  entering  about  the  same  date  as  we  should  be 
nearing  the  English  Channel  at  Calais. 

Our  way  lay  straight  through  Ourga.  I  could 
not  help  wondering,  as  we  passed  Golgotha  for  the 
last  time,  and  noticed  the  thick  white  steam  rising 
from  it,  that  the  place  is  not  one  continual  hotbed 
of  cholera  and  typhus.  Yet  it  is  not  so.  The 
clear,  dry,  rarified  atmosphere  and  hot  sunshine  in 
summer  and  severe  frost  and  cold  in  winter  do  much 
to  mitigate  the  unhealthy  vapours  and  stench  that 
constantly  hang  over  the  city.  Ourga  is  as  a  matter 
of  fact  extremely  healthy,  and  cholera  is,  and  always 
has  been,  unknown  in  the  capital  of  Mongolia. 

Both  our  camel-drivers  being  Lamas,  they  asked 


OUEGA   TO    KTAKHTA.  301 

permission  to  bait  for  a  iew  minutes  as  we  passed 
the  Temple  Gates,  while  a  couple  of  rascally-look- 
ing priests  came  out  and  blessed  the  caravan,  an 
operation  which  was  witnessed  with  great  interest 
by  the  bystanders,  who  abandoned  their  occupation 
of  wheel-turning  and  came  up  and  leisurely  exa- 
mined the  inside  of  our  carts,  our  clothes,  boots, 
rifles,  &c.,  with  apparent  interest.  The  ceremony  of 
blessing  us  consisted  in  throwing  a  couple  of  gourds 
of  arrack  and  some  grains  of  millet  over  the  leading 
and  last  camel,  a  proceeding  that  is  supposed  to 
ensure  a  rajDid  and  prosperous  journey.  It  was 
rather  a  failure  in  our  case,  for  it  took  us  exactly 
a  week  to  get  to  Kiakhta,  a  voyage  usually 
accomplished  with  ease  in  three  days  by  the 
Russians  at  Ourga. 

Three  separate  ranges  of  mountains  lay  between 
us  and  Kiakhta,  one,  the  "  Bain  Gol  "  pass,  so  steep 
as  to  necessitate  the  using  of  bullocks  to  drag 
the  huge  unwieldy  carts  across,  for  the  Mongo- 
lian camel  has  the  greatest  objection  to  pulling 
weights  up-hill,  be  it  ever  so  slight  a  gradient. 
Two  broad  and  swift  rivers,  the  "  Kharra " 
and  "  Irul,"  have  also  to  be  crossed,  the  former 
forded,  the  latter  by  ferry.     Shishmaroff  specially 


302  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

cautioned  us  not  to  attempt  tlie  passage  of  the 
Irul  after  dark,  for  the  stream  is  dangerous  owing 
to  sunken  rocks,  and  the  ferry  old  and  unsecure. 

The  going  was  very  hard  the  first  two  days 
and  the  shaking  in  the  carts  far  worse  than  any- 
thing we  had  yet  experienced.  To  compensate  us 
for  the  discomfort  and  fatigue,  however,  we  passed 
through  some  of  the  loveliest  mountain  scenery  I 
have  ever  seen.  Game  was  abundant  the  whole 
way,  hundreds  of  partridges  (the  sand-grouse  is  not 
met  with  here)  and  hares,  with  an  occasional  shot  at 
a  golden  pheasant  with  which  the  dense  forests 
abounded.  We  passed  the  second  day  a  small  pond 
or  lake,  alive  with  duck  and  sheldrake.  Stopping 
the  caravan  for  a  few  moments,  we  bagged  a  couple, 
and  on  the  ^^ay  back  two  couple  of  snipe  from  the 
marsh  surrounding  the  water.  Though  we  had  to 
wade  waist  deep  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  it  was 
worth  the  trouble.  There  must  have  been  at  least 
thirty  duck  on  the  pond,  which  was  barely  twenty 
yards  wide. 

We  had  now  nothing  to  complain  of  with  regard 
to  excess  of  energy  and  activity  on  the  part  of  our 
drivers.  Our  difficulty  with  the  new  Mongols  was 
not  to  get  them  to  stop,  but  to  go  on.    The  leader,  a 


OUEGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  303 

fat,  stumpy  old  fellow,  with  eyes  like  an  owl,  slept 
calmly  and  peacefully  on  his  camel's  back  through- 
out the  day,  only  to  awake  at  the  midnight  halt 
from  which  hour,  till  we  started  again  at  six,  he 
would  devote  himself  to  gorging,  smoking  innumer- 
able pipes,  and  saying,  or  rather  singing,  his  prayers, 
an  operation  that  kept  us  awake  the  greater  part 
of  the  night.  I  verily  believe  we  went  quite  double 
the  distance  we  should  have  done,  owing  to  this 
old  wretch's  sleepiness  and  idiotcy.  Something 
was  always  going  wrong.  "Water  running  short, 
packs  f alhng  off,  the  caravan  filing  quietly  away  in 
a  direction  totally  different  to  that  it  should  have 
taken,  while  the  old  fellow  partook  of  nature's 
sweet  restorer,  blissfully  unconscious  of  our  cries 
and  threats.  No  amount  of  shouting  would  wake 
him — indeed,  nothing  short  of  pulHng  him  off 
his  camel.  At  such  times  he  would  look  at 
one  with  an  injured  stare,  shake  himself  into  his 
seat,  and  go  off  again,  only  to  fall  asleep  a  few 
hundred  yards  further  on,  when  the  operation  of 
pulling  off  had  to  be  repeated.  The  second  driver 
was,  luckily,  a  bright,  intelligent  boy  of  about 
twenty,  who  saved  things  from  going  utterly  to  the 
bad.     Had  it  not  been  for  him,  we  should  even  now 


304  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

be  vainly  endeavouring  to  reach  the  Russo-Chinese 
frontier. 

I  do  not  think  we  got  more  than  twelve  hours' 
sleep  in  all  during  the  journey  from  Ourga  to 
Kiakhta,  and  this  was  the  greatest  discomfort 
with  which  one  had  to  contend.  Even  when,  after 
an  uninterrupted  spell  of  hard  work  for  twelve 
hours,  the  caravan  halted  at  midnight  till  daybreak, 
sleep  was  often  impossible  from  the  very  knowledge 
that  in  five  hours'  at  most  one  would  have  to  be  on 
the  tramp  again.  Besides  the  hammering  in  of  tent- 
pegs,  chopping  of  firewood,  and  last,  but  not  least, 
the  semi-musical  prayers  of  our  somnolent  driver 
often  lasted  till  four  or  half  past,  and  put  sleep 
out  of  the  question.  A  Mongol  is  never  so  wakeful 
and  active  as  at  night,  and  if  he  is  musically  in- 
clined, always  indulges  this  propensity  in  the  dark- 
ness, when  all  right-minded  people  are  courting  the 
drowsy  god.  Expostulating  was  useless,  as  any 
one  who  has  ever  been  brought  in  contact  with  this 
strange  race  will  understand. 

We  were  now  a  good  deal  bothered  by  mosquitoes 
and  sandflies,  an  annoyance  fi:'om  which  we  had 
been  free  throughout  Northern  China,  and  the  desert 
proper.     Now,   however,   these   pests   attacked   us 


OURGA   TO    KIAKHTA.  305 

niglit  and  day  iu  myriads,  and  we  suffered  a  good 
deal  from  tlieir  bites,  which  were  unusually  severe 
and  poisonous. 

Our  younger  camel-driver  carried  a  very  original 
prayer-wheel,  a  sort  of  miniature  windmill  let  into 
the  butt-end  of  his  thick,  heavy  whip.  When  set 
going  and  held  against  the  wind,  this  ingenious 
contrivance  would  spin  away  without  cessation  for 
hours  together.  He  was  a  devout  youth,  and  it  was 
a  long  time  before  I  could  induce  him  to  part 
with  it,  but  love  of  filthy  lucre  finally  overcame 
religious  scruples,  and  I  managed  to  buy  it  of  him 
on  arrival  at  Kiakhta  for  a  couple  of  roubles,  under 
the  strictest  injunctions  not  to  tell  the  "  Old  Sheep," 
as  he  irreverently  termed  the  sleepy  Lama. 

We  reached  the  banks  of  the  Kharra  at  nine 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  August.  This 
river  is  a  tributary  of  the  Khon  River,  which  has  its 
source  near  the  Kara  Korum  Mountains  in  central 
Mongolia,  and  after  winding  its  course  of  nearly 
700  miles,  flows  into  the  great  inland  sea  of  Lake 
Baikal,  after  watering  the  towns  of  Kiakhta  and 
Selenginsk,  where,  however,  it  is  not  navigable. 
There  was  no  ferry,  but  we  managed  to  ford  it 
pretty  easily.     The  weather  had  been  dry,  and  the 

VOL.  I.  X 


306  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

stream,  whicli  in  time  of  flood  is  rapid  and  very 
dangerous,  was  never  above  our  girths  the  whole 
way  across.  The  water  was  beautifully  clear, 
with  a  shingly  bed,  and  we  took  the  opportunity  of 
filling  the  water-casks,  not  without  a  good  deal  of 
opposition  from  the  Mongols,  notwithstanding  that 
the  water  had  been  filthy  ever  since  leaving  Ourga. 
This  extraordinary  people  seem  to  prefer  drinking 
out  of  a  stagnant  pool  or  well,  in  which  a  dead  sheep 
or  camel  has  been  soaking  for  days,  to  filling  the  casks 
out  of  a  pure  running  stream.  On  the  banks  of  the 
river  were  three  dirty,  dilapidated  yourts,  empty, 
the  first  signs  of  a  habitation  we  had  seen  since 
leaving  Ourga. 

Lovely  weather  had  favoured  us  till  now ;  bright 
hot  sunshine  tempered  with  a  cool  fresh  breeze. 
But  it  was  too  good  to  last.  About  four  o'clock 
to-day,  the  bright  blue  sky  became  overcast,  and 
half  an  hour  later,  down  came  the  rain,  and  con- 
tinued steadily,  and  without  cessation,  till  2  a.m: 
The  roofs  of  our  carts,  warped  and  cracked  by 
the  heat  of  the  sun,  leaked  like  sieves.  But  the 
weather,  rough  as  it  was,  did  not  in  the  least  affect 
my  driver's  somnolent  propensities.  I  was  awoke 
that  night,  about  eleven,  out  of  a  fitful  doze,  by  a 


OURGA   TO    KIAKTITA.  307 

crash,  to  find  that  we  were  crossing  a  steep,  preci- 
pitous range  of  hills,  and  that  my  cart  was  balancing 
itself  on  one  wheel,  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice, 
the  bottom  of  which  was  invisible.  I  could  pretty 
well  gauge  the  height,  though,  by  the  sound  of  a 
torrent  dashing:  and  foamino^  over  some  rocks 
at  least  a  hundred  feet  below.  I  was  only  just 
in  time  to  catch  hold  of  his  nose- string,  and  wrench 
the  camel  back  into  safety.  In  another  moment  the 
whole  caravan  would  have  toppled  over.  It  was 
the  old  story.  The  Lama  had  been  asleep.  This 
last  straw  was  too  much,  and  in  a  fit  of  un- 
governable temper,  I  pulled  the  old  wretch  off  his 
camel,  and  sent  him  sprawling  on  his  back  on  the 
stony  pathway.  But  he  took  it  perfectly  coolly, 
merely  picking  himself  up  without  a  word,  and  witli 
the  usual  stolid  stare  of  mingled  surprise  and 
annoyance,  calmly  proceeded  to  clamber  up  again. 
Five  minutes  more  and  he  was  as  sound  asleep  as 
ever.  What  could  one  do  with  such  a  creature,  but 
give  it  up  in  despair !  I  took  the  precaution, 
however,  though  it  still  poured  with  rain,  of  walk- 
ing till  dayhght. 

A  bright  sunny  morning   made  up  for  the  dis- 
comforts of  the  night,  and  we  were  able,  while  fires 

X  2 


308  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

■were  being  lit  and  tea  prepared,  to  dry  our  clotlies 
and  mattresses  in  the  sun,  which  as  early  as  eight 
o'clock  was  too  warm  to  be  pleasant.     The  scenery 
throughout     the    day     resembled     one     enormous 
deer-park.     Grassy  slopes,  as  smooth  as  a  billiard- 
table,    and    every    now    and    again    large    clumps 
of  fir-trees,  which  grew    so  regularly,  they  looked 
as  if  art  and  not  nature  had  placed  them   there  ; 
while    on    the    horizon,    green,    undulating    hills, 
covered   with  forests   of    dark   pine-trees,  cut   the 
bright  blue   sky-line.      The  track  occasionally  led 
past   clear   broad    sheets    of   water    teeming    with 
fish,    occasionally    through    belts    of    copse-wood, 
of  silver  birch  and  hazel,  the  ground  one  blaze  of 
hyacinths,  wild  roses,  and  pinks  growing  in  the  thick 
rich  grass,   with  clear,  narrow  brooklets  running 
here  and  there  through  the  thick  undergrowth.     We 
saw  a  brace  of  pheasants  in  one  of  these  woods,  but 
too  far  off  to  get  a  shot.     About  mid-day  we  halted 
for  dinner  under  a  clump  of  fir-trees.     The  cattle 
grazing  in  the  sunshine,  the   quiet  stillness  of  the 
place,  broken  only  by  the  droning  of  insects,  and 
voices  of  children  playing  near  some  distant  yourt, 
was  intensely  refreshing  after  our  night  of  misery. 
"What  would  not  these  hundreds  of  miles  of  splendid 


OUEGA   TO    KIAKHTA.  309 

pasture  be  worth  at  home  ?  Is'o  wonder  the  Mongols 
are  a  contented  race  with  such  land  as  this,  and  no 
rent  to  pay ! 

Four  o'clock  the  following  morning  saw  us  at  the 
foot  of  the  mountain,  to  cross  which  we  were  to 
abandon  the  camels  and  take  to  oxen.  Sylvia  was 
despatched  in  quest  of  the  latter,  but  did  not 
return  with  them  till  nearly  three  o'clock  the  follow- 
ing afternoon.  We  thus  had  a  delay  of  nearly 
twenty-four  hours,  but  were  not  altogether  sorry, 
for  the  shaking  and  jolting  of  the  past  two  days 
made  one  glad  of  a  rest.  We  encamped  close 
to  a  limestone  mountain,  ahout  five  hundred  feet 
high,  from  the  summit  of  which  a  huge  piece  of 
rock,  quite  a  hundred  feet  in  height,  had  become 
detached,  and  crumbling  away  as  clean  as  if  cut 
with  a  knife,  had  fallen  on  to  the  caravan-track 
immediately  below.  It  was  six  o'clock  by  the 
time  we  had  got  the  bullocks  in  and  commenced 
the  ascent  of  the  pass,  which,  gradual  at  first, 
became  very  difficult  long  before  we  reached  the 
summit.  One  bullock  was  harnessed  to  the  shafts, 
the  other  to  the  axle  of  the  wheel,  but  so  severe 
was  the  strain  the  ropes  continually  broke  on  the 
way  up.     The  cart  and  pack  camels  were  in  readi- 


310  FKOM    TEKIN   TO    CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

ness  to  take  us  on  when  we  reached  the  other  side. 
Though  a  distance  of  only  five  miles  from  where 
we  encamped,  they  took  nearly  eight  hours  to  do 
the  journey. 

The  way  lay  at  first  through  a  narrow  ravine 
thickly  grown  with  pine  and  silver  birch.  Through 
the  centre  ran  a  clear  running  brook,  plashing  over 
limestone  rocks  and  boulders,  and  almost  hidden 
by  ferns  and  wild  flowers.  Above  us  towered  the 
almost  perpendicular  wall  of  rock  that  must  be 
conquered  before  nightfall,  if  we  wished  to  avoid 
camping  out  all  night  on  some  rocky  ledge — 
not  a  pleasing  prospect — for  it  was  already  bit- 
terly cold  out  of  the  rays  of  the  sun.  I  noticed 
here,  growing  in  great  luxuriance,  a  bright  yelloio 
poppy — a  colour  in  which  I  had  always  imagined 
that  flower  was  unknown.  This  part  of  the  moun- 
tain also  swarmed  with  enormous  hares.  We  must 
have  seen  some  thirty  or  forty,  and  could  easily  have 
bagged  half  a  dozen,  but  Moses  would  not  hear  of 
it,  or  of  our  delaying  the  caravan  for  a  moment 
to  get  out  our  guns.  As  the  ascent  was  getting 
harder  every  moment,  we  did  not  argue  the  matter. 

I  think  that  was  quite  the  worst  bit  of  mountain 
work  we  did  the  whole  journey.     Every  moment  I 


OURGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  3  1  I 

thought  the  bullocks  would  give  in,  or  the  carts  go 
to  pieces.  The  boulders  they  had  fco  get  over,  holes 
and  water-courses  to  get  out  of,  would  have  seemed 
incredible  to  any  one  unacquainted  with  Mongolian 
travel.  On  foot  it  was  bad  enough,  and  we 
were  glad  we  had  sent  on  the  ponies,  for  it 
would  have  been  impossible  to  climb  and  lead  them 
as  well.  Every  ten  minutes  or  so  a  halt  was  made 
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Thus  we  toiled  on,  till 
half-past  eight  o'clock,  when  we  found  ourselves  on 
the  summit,  after  four  hours  of  as  hard,  physical 
work  as  I  ever  experienced. 

The  moon  had  now  risen,  which  made  the  view 
from  the  summit  very  picturesque.     Round  us  on 
every  side  stretched  away  chains  of  lofty  mountains, 
their  limestone  peaks  gleaming  white  in  the  moon- 
light, while  a  grey,  flaky  mist  half  hid  the  deep 
gorges  of  pine  and  fir-trees  at  our  feet.     A  bright 
light  shining    out  of  the  darkness   in  the  distance 
showed    where    our    camels    awaited    us    on    the 
plain — twelve    hundred    feet    below.      We    rested 
for  an   hour,  to   give  the   bullocks  breathing-time, 
and  then  commenced  the  descent.     It  was  a  weird 
scene.     A   Chinese  lantern  just    sufficed   to    make 
darkness  visible,  and  show  that  we  had  halted  by 


312  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

the  side  of  a  huge  cairn,  about  twenty  feet  high, 
formed  of  stones,  bits  of  stick,  mutton  bones,  and 
strewn  here  and  there  with  bits  of  red,  yellow,  and 
white  cloth  covered  with  Tibetan  and  Mongol 
characters.  As  we  left  the  spot,  our  Mongols, 
unable  to  find  a  stone,  each  picked  up  a  branch  of 
fir,  and  placed  it  reverently  on  the  heap.  These 
are  looked  on  as  offerings  to  the  "  God  of  travellers," 
who  protects  the  faithful  from  peril  while  on  a 
journey.  We  reached  the  camels  again  at  ten  o'clock. 
One  tael  did  not  seem  exorbitant  for  the  hiring  of 
six  bullocks,  and  the  services  of  three  extra  Mongols, 
for  that  was  the  sum  Jee  Boo  told  me  he  paid  them, 
and  they  seemed  quite  satisfied.  Probably  the 
greater  part  of  that  found  its  way  into  our  trusty 
interpreter's  pockets. 

Our  road  was  now  clear  to  Kiakhta,  and  there 
were  no  further  dijQBculties  to  be  got  over,  excepting 
the  Irul  river — a  broad,  swift  stream,  the  crossing 
of  which  is  dangerous  at  certain  seasons.  Jee 
Boo,  ever  a  Job's  comforter,  told  us  that  the 
natives  reported  heavy  rains,  and  if  such  was  the 
case,  we  should  certainly  have  a  tough  job  of  it. 
But  he  had  so  often  cried  "  "Wolf,"  we  paid  no  heed 
to  his  statement. 


OUEGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  313 

We  travelled  on  all  night,  halting  at  nine  the 
next  morning  for  tea  and  biscuits.  Part  of  the 
work  was  very  fatiguing,  as  we  had  to  cross  several 
miles  of  country  thickly  covered  with  huge  mole- 
hills, over  which  the  carts  jolted  terribl}'',  for 
there  was  no  beaten  track.  The  shakina;  at  last 
became  so  unbearable  that  we  left  the  carts  at 
4  a.m.,  tired  as  we  were,  and  walked  till  the 
morning  halt.  We  passed,  just  after  sunrise,  a  large 
wooden  building,  a  monastery  of  Tibetan  architec- 
ture, its  white  facades  gaudy  with  blue  and  red 
stripes  and  a  gilt  cupola.  As  we  passed,  two  or 
three  Lamas  came  out  and  blessed  the  caravan  in 
the  usual  manner,  an  operation  which  necessitated 
a  stoppage  of  half  an  hour. 

Nearly  the  whole  of  this  day's  work  was  through 
deep,  drifting  sand — in  many  places  over  the  axles. 
At  mid-day  there  was  not  a  blade  of  grass  or 
vegetation  to  be  seen.  This  part  of  the  country  was, 
in  fact,  far  more  like  one's  idea  of  what  a  desert 
should  be  than  anything  we  had  come  through 
in  Gobi.  In  the  midst  of  this  sandy  waste  (about 
fifteen  miles  in  length),  we  came  to  a  green  valley  or 
oasis,  fresh  and  beautiful.  The  descent  to  it  (for 
it  lay  in  a  hollow  whence  not  a  particle  of  sand 


314  VllOU    TEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

was  visible)  was  about  fifty  feet  deep.     Grass  grew 
luxuriantly    here,    and    a  clear  brook   of    running 
water  springing  from  Heaven  knows  where,  ran  the 
whole  length  of  the  defile  into  a  small  lake  or  pond 
at  the  end — a  dark,  shady  pool  fringed  with  willows, 
and  covered   with  white,  broad-leaved  water-lilies. 
Wild    flowers    of    all   kinds    covered  the   roadway, 
among  them  the  forget-me-not  and  marguerites  of 
a  delicate   mauve   colour.     Although   the  sun  had 
been  hot  and   scorching  out  on  the   sand,  the  air 
struck  like  a  cold  bath  the  moment  we  entered  this 
fertile  valley,  but  so  damp  was  the  atmosphere,  that 
our  clothes  were  wringing  wet  when  we  emerged  at 
the  other  end.     The  mosquitoes  and  sandflies,  too, 
were  the  largest  and  most  venomous  I  have  ever  seen 
or  felt,  and  our  faces   and  hands  so  inflamed  that 
we  had  to  stop  the  caravan  and  bathe  them  with 
ammonia,  which,  however,  did  little  good,  for  we  got 
no  sleep  for  twenty-four,  hours    after.     The   bites 
took   days  to  heal.     Game  of  all  sorts,  duck,  teal, 
and  widgeon  appeared  to  abound  in  this   "  sleepy 
hollow,"    and  we   managed  to  bag  a  duck,  which 
made  a  welcome  addition  to  the  usual  menu  of  pre- 
served meat  and  sardines. 

The  morning  of  the  8th  August  broke  dull  and 


OURGA    TO    KIAKUTA.  315 

lowering,  and  about  mid-day  a  tliin  rain  commenced 
falling,  which  by  degrees  increased  to  a  steady 
downpour  at  4  a.m.  AYe  were  to  reach  the  Irul 
river  at  about  sunset,  and,  if  possible,  cross  before 
dark,  but  felt,  if  Jee  Boo's  prediction  were  true, 
that  we  should  indeed  have  our  work  cut  out.  The 
woolly,  grey  clouds  and  leaden  sky  gave  but  little 
promise  of  a  break  in  the  weather.  Our  only 
prayer  was  that  the  wind  might  not  rise,  but  in 
this  we  were  also  disappointed,  for  by  the  time  we 
had  reached  the  banks  of  the  river,  or  rather  the 
margin,  for  it  had  overflowed  for  a  considerable 
distance,  the  sky  was  as  black  as  ink,  the  rain  coming 
down  in  sheets,  and  the  wind  blowing  in  violent  gusts 
that  threatened  every  moment  to  blow  the  carts 
clean  over.  To  think  of  crossing  that  night  would 
have  been  madness.  To  say  nothing  of  the  fact 
that  another  caravan  was  waiting  to  be  ferried  over 
before  us,  the  ferryman  would  not  answer  for  the 
strength  of  the  rope  holding  out  against  the 
current  and  gale  combined.  Still,  if  the  Gos- 
podins  liked,  and  did  not  mind  risking  it,  the 
head  man  (who  was  a  Bouriatte,  and  spoke 
Russian  well,)  would  do  what  he  could  to  get 
them    over.      The    Gospodins,    however,    strongly 


316  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

objected  to  risking  it,  and  determined  to  make 
themselves  as  comfortable  as  circumstances  and 
the  last  half-bottle  of  whisky  would  permit,  till 
morning. 

I  thoroughly  enjoyed  that  night's  rest.  Whether 
it  was  the  consciousness  that  we  had  a  really  quiet 
night  before  us  (I  had  given  orders  not  to  be  "  called" 
till  nine),  or  the  hot  whisky  and  water,  I  know  not, 
but  I  had  not  enjoyed  such  a  night's  rest  since 
leaving  Pekin.  I  only  woke  once  during  the  night, 
woke  to  hear  the  rain  still  pattering  on  the  roof, 
and  to  find  myself  lying  in  the  usual  pool  of  water, 
while  the  wind  still  howled  mournfully  round  the 
carts.  The  sight  of  the  river  dashing  by  in  a 
sheet  of  white  foam  was  not  reassuring,  but  did 
not  interfere  with  my  slumbers,  for  rolling  myself 
in  sheepskins,  I  slept  away  peacefully  till  past 
nine  o'clock  the  next  morning,  when  Jee  Boo 
opened  the  door  to  let  in  a  bright  flood  of  sun- 
shine and  the  welcome  news  that  the  rain  had 
ceased. 

The  stream  was  still  swollen  from  the  incessant 
rain ;  but  the  caravan  that  had  encamped  next 
us  had  crossed  at  daylight  in  safety,  with  the 
exception    of    the    loss     of     one     bullock.       Our 


OURGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  317 

camels  were   taken    to    a   ford    about   a   mile    up 
stream,   and  we  preferred  accompanying  them    to 
trusting    ourselves    to   the   rickety   old   boat    and 
frayed,  rotten-looking  rope,  for  the  new  one  had 
not   yet    arrived.     The   ferry   itself   did    not    look 
capable  of  carrying  half  a  dozen   men,  much  less  a 
heavy,    clumsy  camel-cart.      Arrived    at  the  ford, 
however,     the     spectacle     of     the    leading    camel 
suddenly  disappearing   from  view   in   a  deep    hole 
made  us  change  our  minds  and  return  to  the  boat. 
The  first  cart  had  just  been  got  in,  and  we  leapt  on 
board  just  as  they  were  shoving  off  into  the  stream. 
Little    more    than    half    way    across,    a    huge 
snag   or   tree-trunk   got   entangled  with    the  rope 
and    impeded   our   passage.     I    thought    it     quite 
time  to  say  my  prayers,  for,  had  the  cart  tilted  over, 
we  must  have  followed  it.     It  was  a  trying  moment. 
The  deafening  roar  of  the  torrent,  pale,  scared  faces 
of  the  Mongols,  as  they  rushed  to  and  fro  screaming 
and  yelling  to   each  other,   but  doing   nothing  to 
lessen  the  strain  on  the  rope,  which,  stretched  to  its 
utmost,  threatened  to  snap  every  moment.     At  last 
one  of  the  men,  wiser  and  pluckier  than  the   rest, 
rushed  to  the  bows,  and  with  a  superhuman  effort 
dislodged   the  heavy  mass,    and    sent  it  tumbling 


318  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

away  down-stream,  and  we  forged  slowly  aliead 
again,  with  a  sigh  of  relief,  for  I  fully  expected  our 
last  hour  had  come. 

We  walked  up  to  the  ford  again  while  the  other 
carts  were  being  got  over.  About  fifty  or  sixty 
bullocks  belonging  to  a  tea-caravan  were  being 
driven  across  by  men  and  women  who  were  pelting 
them  with  stones  until  they  leapt  into  the  torrent, 
to  emerge  half  dead  and  prostrate  from  fright  and 
exhaustion  about  two  hundred  yards  lower  down. 
Many  of  the  caravan  people  were  women,  some 
young  and  good-looking,  though  their  costumes 
were  more  scanty  than  elegant.  One,  a  pretty, 
bright- eyed  girl  of  about  sixteen,  took  a  violent 
fancy  to  my  brown  boots,  and  it  was  only  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  I  could  prevent  her  from  cutting 
them  oS"  my  feet.  The  caravan,  laden  with  furs 
from  Irkoutsk,  was  bound  for  Pekin,  and  would 
probably  be  returning  four  months  later  with  tea  to 
Kiakhta. 

We  left  the  Irul  at  mid-day.  Travelling  was 
now  easier,  and  the  jolting  scarcely  perceptible  on 
the  hard,  gravelly  track  that  leads  from  the  banks 
of  this  river  right  into  the  town  of  Kiakhta. 
Although  the  country  is  uncultivated,  the  scenery 


OURGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  319 

we  passed  through  would  have  compared  favour- 
ably with  the  lovelier  parts  of  Switzerland  and  the 
Tyrol.  Green  fertile  plains  surrounded  by  chains  of 
undulating  fir-clad  hills,  occasional  belts  of  forest 
with  flowers  and  ferns  in  profusion,  bubbling  water- 
falls splashing  down  the  hill  sides,  through  the  moss- 
grown,  ivy-clad  boulders,  then  through  vast  plains 
of  pasture  again — such  was  the  scenery  we 
passed  through  the  day  before  reaching  Kiakhta. 
There  grew,  also,  throughout  this  region  (I  saw  it 
nowhere  else)  a  long-stalked,  star-shaped,  violet 
flower,  with  a  strong  scent  of  heliotrope.  The  air 
was  full  of  the  scent  for  miles  around,  and  one 
could  see  great  violet  patches  of  it  on  the  green  plain, 
stretching  away  at  intervals  to  the  horizon  on  every 
side.  I  doubt  if  there  is  a  country  in  the  world 
where  wild  flowers  grow  so  luxuriantly  as  in  parts 
of  Mongolia. 

The  succeeding  day  (August  10th)  we  got  into 
a  sandy  region  again,  with  intervals  of  grass  plain. 
Some  of  the  drifts  being  of  great  depth,  the 
camels  had  a  bad  time  of  it,  and  suffered  severely 
from  the  heat.  Poor  little  Karra  could  scarcely 
stagger  along,  and  had  Kiakhta  been  a  couple  of 
days  further,  I  doubt  if  he  would  ever  have  reached 


320  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Siberia.  Lancaster's  cart  seemed  under  a  curse;  for 
to-day,  the  driver  being,  as  usual,  asleep,  the  near 
wheel  ran  up  a  high  sand-hillock  and  upset  the 
whole  machine,  Lancaster  being  asleep  inside  at  the 
time.  It  was  luckily  deep  sand,  or  it  must  have 
been  a  nasty  fall.  It  was  fortunate,  too,  our  journey 
was  over,  for  the  camel,  falling  under  the  shaft,  had 
split  it  clean  in  two.  I  firmly  believe  the  Mon- 
gol would  have  been  sent  to  his  fathers,  had  a 
revolver  been  handy,  and  I  had  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty in  preventing  my  friend  from  going  for  him 
with  the  broken  shaft. 

About  four  o'clock  a  glittering  speck  on  the 
horizon  attracted  our  attention,  which  an  hour 
later  proved  to  be  the  spire  of  Kiakhta  Cathe- 
dral. By  six  o'clock  we  were  full  in  sight  of  the 
town  of  Maimachin,  the  Chinese  settlement,  its 
pagodas  and  quaint  architecture  standing  out  in 
striking  contrast  to  the  Russian  cathedral,  with  its 
golden  dome,  the  European  stone-built  houses,  and 
regular  streets  and  squares  of  Kiakhta.  Skirting 
the  wooden  walls  surrounding  Maimachin,  we  find 
ourselves  on  a  broad,  level  piece  of  ground  about  six 
hundred  yards  broad,  with,  on  the  right  hand,  a 
guard-house  and  high  wooden  gates,  surmounted  by 


OUBGA    TO    KIAKHTA.  321 

the  Imperial  Eagle,  while  to  our  left  the  Chinese  flag, 
hoisted  on  to  a  long  red  pole,  floats  in  front  of  the 
governor  of  Maimachin's  residence.  We  are  stand- 
ing on  neutral  ground,  and  in  another  minute  have 
passed  the  Cossack,  who  from  the  depths  of  a  black 
and  white  sentry-box,  eyes  the  caravan  with  a  stolid, 
indiff'erent  expression,  but,  curious  to  relate,  does 
not  ask  for  our  passports.  The  first  stage  of  our 
journey  is  over.     We  are  in  the  Russian  Empire. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

KIAKHTA    TO    lEKOUTSK, 

A  SQUARE,  wliitewaslied  room,  its  walls  and  un- 
carpeted  floor  reeking  with  filth,  and  devoid  of 
all  furniture  save  a  table  and  two  hard,  straight- 
backed  chairs,  and  an  overpowering  smell  of 
sewage  from  a  cesspool  beneath  the  open  window, 
through  which  a  crowd  of  shock-headed  Siberian 
boys  watch  our  every  movement.  An  old  man,  in 
greasy  rags  and  redolent  of  garlic,  who  resolutely 
refuses  to  allow  us  to  enter  even  this  fetid  den 
unless  the  lodging-money  is  prepaid.  No  bed,  no 
food,  no  drink,  no  washing  appliances — such  were 
the  comforts  awaiting  us  at  the  "Hotel  Glem- 
bodski,"  Kiakhta,  the  only  inn  in  the  place. 

It  was  disappointing,  to  say  the  least  of  it.     We 
had  passed  well-built,  luxurious-looking  houses  on 


KIAKHTA   TO    IKKOrTSK.       •  323 

our  vraj  tlirougli  the  town,  and  expected  to  find,  at 
any  rate,  the  bare  necessaries  of  life.  Nay,  more  ; 
when  we  saw  the  almost  palatial  houses  of  the 
tea-merchants  surrounded  by  gardens  and  conser- 
vatories, neat,  well-kept  public  gardens,  smart 
carriages  of  every  description,  and  men  and 
women  dressed  in  the  latest  European  fashion, 
visions  entered  the  mind  of  a  really  well-cooke  1 
dinner,  washed  down  with  iced  champagne ;  but, 
alas  !  not  for  long.  Ice  there  was,  certainly,  but 
we  drank  it  in  "quass;"  while  for  food  we  had  to 
fall  back  on  our  own  stale  provisions. 

'*  Can  we  have  anything  to  eat?"  was  our  first 
question,  when,  having  failed  in  getting  any  water 
to  wash  in,  we  made  up  our  minds  to  "  pig  it  "  that 
night,  and  present  our  credentials  to  the  governor  of 
Kiakhta  in  the  morning.  But  there  was  no  food  in 
the  house,  the  old  man  said,  and  all  the  shops  were 
shut.  To-morrow  they  would  be  open  at  six,  and 
we  could  breakfast  early,  he  added,  by  way  of 
consolation. 

A  pleasant  welcome  after  a  journey  of  eight  hun- 
dred miles,  I  thought  that  night  as  I  lay  down  in  my 
sheepskins  on  the  grimy  floor,  wondering  whether  it 

Y  2 


324  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    EY    LAND. 

would  be  as  bad  as  this  tlirougliout  Siberia.  The 
stench,  rats,  and  vermin,  kept  us  awake  more 
than  half  the  night.  I  would  have  given  a  good 
deal  to  be  back  in  mid-desert.  There,  at  least,  one 
had  fresh  air. 

We  were  besieged  next  morning  before  eight 
o'clock  by  half  a  dozen  Chinamen  from  Maimachin, 
who  calmly  walked  in  without  knocking,  and  seat- 
ing themselves  on  the  ground,  commenced  to  jabber 
away  in  Russian — not  a  word  of  which  I  could  under- 
stand. I  called  for  Jee  Boo,  and  found  they  were  tea- 
merchants,  and  had  come  to  buy  our  samples.  It  was 
a  long  time  before  they  could  be  persuaded  that  we 
had  none  to  sell,  never  dreaming  that  any  one  could 
be  mad  enough  to  cross  the  Gobi  Desert  for  pleasure  ! 

It  poured  with  rain  all  next  day.  Our  ill-luck 
did  not  desert  us,  for  on  calling  at  the  governor's 
house  in  the  morning,  we  were  told  he  was  away,  ' 
and  would  probably  not  return  for  a  fortnight  at 
least,  by  which  time  we  hoped  to  be  many  miles 
from  Kiakhta.  M.  Gribooshin,  a  tea-merchant,  on  • 
whom  I  had  a  letter  of  credit,  was  also  away  shoot- 
ing in  Mongolia ;  but  his  clerk  provided  us  with  the 
necessary  funds,  and  we  left  his  luxurious  mansion 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  o2o 

witli  a  sigh  of  regret  to  return  wet  and  dispirited  to 
our  squalid  room  at  the  inn,  and  settle  our  plans 
for  getting  out  of  the  dismal,  inhospitable  place  as 
quickly  as  possible. 

I  have  seldom  passed  a  more  miserable  day. 
0^0  fire  (for  it  was  cold  and  damp),  no  books,  no 
food  excepting  some  greasy  soup,  the  ingredients 
of  which  I  shudder  to  think  of ;  and  when  night 
came  on,  no  light  but  that  from  a  flickering  oil 
wick  which  just  sufficed  to  make  our  wretched 
surroundings  visible.  I  managed  to  glean  from 
our  host  that  he  was  a  Pohsh  exile,  and  had  been 
sent  here  after  the  insurrection  of  1864.  If  all 
his  countrymen  have  the  same  notions  of  comfort,  I 
thought,  banishment  to  Siberia  can  affect  them  but 
little. 

The  town  of  Kiahkta  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
Kiakhta,  the  town  proper,  where  the  governor  or 
frontier  commissioner  lives,  and  where  are  situated 
most  of  the  tea-warehouses  and  offices,  and  Troitz- 
kosavsk,  a  suburb  about  half  a  mile  distant,  almost 
entirely  composed  of  private  houses  belonging  to  the 
merchants.  The  population  of  Kiakhta,  with  Troitz- 
kosavsk,  is  a  little  under  six  thousand,  but  this  does 


326  FEOM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

not  include  the  Chinese  settlement  of  Maimachin, 
containing  four  thousand  souls,  all  of  whom  are  men. 
There  is  not  a  woman  or  child  in  the  place,  the 
Chinese  law  forbidding  wives  to  accompany  their 
husbands  beyond  the  Great  Wall  of  China.  We 
visited  Maimachin,  and  found  it  far  cleaner  than 
most  Chinese  towns.  There  were  but  eight  streets, 
all  wide  and  well-drained.  The  houses  are  of  wood 
and  brick,  and  some  of  them  gorgeously  decorated 
with  vermilion  and  gold.  Many  of  the  population 
spoke  Russian,  and  all  the  wealthier  merchants.  I 
visited  the  house  of  one  while  he  was  employed  in 
*'  tasting  tea,"  by  driving  a  hollow  piece  of  metal 
into  the  chest  like  a  cheese  scoop,  and  drawing  out 
a  small  sample. 

Our  hotel  was  situate  in  the  main  street  of 
Troitzkosavsk,  which  is  a  sad,  dreary-looking 
place.  Most  of  the  houses  are  of  unpainted  wood, 
which  give  it  a  sombre  look ;  though  the  college, 
church,  and  principal  merchants'  houses  are  built  of 
whitewashed  brick,  with  bright  green  roofs,  and 
detract  somewhat  from  the  depressing  aspect  around. 
Kiakhta  is  a  terrible  place  for  bells.  They  were 
eternally  going,  morning,  noon,  and  night — not  a 


KIAKHTA   TO   lEKOUTSK.  327 

lively,  cheery  peal,  but  a  slow,  solemn  tolling,  like 
a  continual  passing-bell.  But  for  this  Troitzko- 
savsk  is  the  sleepiest  and  most  dead-alive  town 
imaginable.  Except,  towards  evening,  when  the 
population  turn  out  en  masse  for  a  breath  of  fresh 
air,  there  is  seldom  a  sound  to  break  the  dead  silence 
that  reigns  in  the  unpaved,  dusty  street  that  con- 
stitutes its  main  thoroughfare,  from  morning  till 
night. 

Kiakhta  is  not  unhealthy.     It  is  not  subject  to 

the  violent  and  sudden  changes  of  temperature 
found  further  south  in  Mongolia .  It  seldom  rains, 
and  never  snows.  Travellers  in  winter  have  to 
drive  out  a  distance  of  eight  or  ten  miles  before 
they  can  get  into  the  sleigh  which  is  to  bear  them 
to  Irkoutsk,  Tomsk,  Yakoutzk,  and  other  parts  of 
Siberia.  The  coldest  and  hottest  weather  expe- 
rienced in  Kiakhta  summer  and  winter  are  95"^ 
and  33°  below  zero  respectively,  figures  that  may 
sound  startling  to  the  reader,  but  nothing  compared 
to  Yakoutzk,  where  in  mid-winter  it  sometimes 
exceeds  58°  below  zero.  The  earth  at  the  latter 
place  is  said  to  be  always  frozen  below  the  surface 
to  a  depth  of  over  thirty  feet,  summer  and  winter. 


328  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  is  the  busiest  part 
of  the  clay  in  the  frontier-city.  Then  it  is  that  the 
whole  population  turns  out,  the  wealthier  part  for 
its  evening  drive,  the  poorer  to  listen  to  the 
military  band  which  plays  every  day  throughout 
the  summer  in  the  public  gardens.  Had  it  not 
been  for  the  motley  crowd  of  Russians,  Chinese, 
Mongolians,  Bouriattes,  and  other  queer  races  in 
their  bright,  gaudy  costumes,  one  might  have  been 
in  the  gardens  of  some  garrison-town  in  France  or 
Germany,  so  civilized  were  all  but  the  human 
surroundings.  It  was  amusing  to  Avatch  the 
female  elite  of  Kiakhta,  the  wives  and  daughters 
of  wealthy  tea-merchants,  dressed  in  the  latest 
Paris  fashions,  flirting,  talking  scandal,  and  ruining 
their  neighbours'  reputations,  just  like  their  more 
civilized  sisters  ten  thousand  miles  away  in  London 
or  Paris.  Equally  interesting  was  it  to  stroll  about 
among  the  crowd  of  Cossack  officers,  resplendent  in 
white  and  gold,  Mongol  Tartars,  in  rags  and  silk, 
Siberian  peasants  in  Russian  dress,  Chinese  soldiers 
from  Maimachin,  Russian  soldiers  from  Kiakhta, 
nursemaids  with  children  and  perambulators,  and 
men  in  frock-coats  and  tall  hats.     The  gardens  at 


KIAKHTA   TO   lEKOUTSK.  329 

Kiakbta  were  a  siglit  wortli  seeing.  It  was  hard  to 
realize  that  the  desert  of  Gobi  is  but  a  stone's  throw 
from  this  scene  of  almost  European  civilization. 

"VVe  took  an  affectionate  farewell  of  Jee  Boo  two 
days  after  our  arrival.  The  carts  were  returning  to 
Kalgan,  and  as  Chinamen  have  an  innate  horror  of 
crossing  the  desert  with  strange  Mongols,  he  had 
determined  to  go  with  them,  though  we  offered  him 
a  good  round  sum  if  he  would  wait  and  see  us  out  of 
Kiakhta,  for  I  knew  but  a  few  words  of  Russian, 
certainly  not  enough  to  complete  the  purchase  of 
our  tarantass  or  travelling-carriage  satisfactorily. 
He  was  obdurate,  however,  also  the  Mongols,  so  we 
had  to  make  the  best  of  it,  trusting  to  find  some 
one  who  could  speak  a  few  words  of  English,  though 
that  seemed  improbable  enough  in  Kiakhta. 

But  we  found  a  friend  in  need,  and  when 
we  least  expected  it.  The  town  of  Troitzkosavsk 
boasts  a  college,  established  and  maintained  by  a 
private  individual — an  enormously  wealthy  gold- 
miner.  One  must  have  lived  in  a  place  where  not  a 
soul  understands  your  native  language  to  appreciate 

our  delight  when  we  met  Professor  R ,  a  German 

by  birth,  but  professor  of  English  at  the  college,  who 


330       FEOM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

had,  by  the  way,  only  just  arrived  here,  and  who 
greeted  us  in  our  own  tongue,  one  morning  with  a 
familiar  "  Good  morning,  gentlemen.  I  think  I  am 
addressing  the  two  travellers  from  Pekin."  Never 
did  the  English  tongue  sound  so  sweet  to  my  ears, 
for  we  were  now  out  of  our  dilemma,  and  accepting 
the  professor's  invitation,  followed  him  home  to  his 
rooms  for  breakfast. 

The  world  is  small  indeed,  for  Professor  R 

and  Tve  had  many  mutual  friends,  whose  names 
sounded  odd  in  the  mouth  of  a  stranger  at  what  might 
well  be  called  the  uttermost  ends  of  the  earth.  Our 
new  acquaintance  had  had  a  strange  career  before 
drifting  to  this  remote  part  of  Asia.  By  birth  a 
German,  and  a  gentleman's  son,  he  had  left  home 
when  a  lad,  and  enlisted  in  the  22nd  Piegiment, 
where  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  sergeant. 
Leaving  the  service  in  1870,  he  was  appointed 
teacher  of  the  German  language  at  Southsea  Naval 
College,  a  post  he  afterwards  left  to  assist  Mr. 
F ,  of  Storrington,  Sussex,  a  well-known  pri- 
vate tutor.     Professor  E. had  left  Storrington 

to  take  up  an  appointment  as  professor  of  German 
at    the    Royal   Naval    College,    Petersburg,    from 


KIAKHTA   TO   IKKOUTSK.  331 

whence  lie  liad  been  promoted  to  Senior  Professor 
of  Eno^lisli  at  tlie  Colleo^e   of   Kiakhta.      A   born 

linguist,    Herr    R was   proficient    in  English, 

French,  Russian,  Italian,  and  last,  but  not  least, 
Mongolian.  The  latter,  however,  he  had  only  taken 
up  for  a  few  months,  and  was  compelled  to  admit 
that  the  mastering  of  it  was  hardly  worth  the 
candle. 

"  We  will  go  for  a  walk  after  breakfast,"  said 
our  host.  "  But  I  must  first  introduce  you  to  the 
lions  of  Kiakhta,  after  which  we  will  see  about  the 
tarantass."  Breakfast  over,  we  set  out  with  our 
friend  for  a  ramble  round  the  place. 

The  professor  was,  like  all  Germans,  no  friend  of 
Russia.  ' '  What  are  they  but  pigs,  these  Siberians  ? ' ' 
said  he,  as  we  walked  down  to  Kiakhta.  "  The 
men  are  all  thieves,  do  nothing  all  day  but  smoke, 
drink,  and  play  cards.  As  for  the  women,  you  can 
easily  imagine  what  becomes  of  them  under  such 
circumstances.  There  is  no  rational  amusement  of 
any  kind  here,  no  sport  among  the  men,  no  music 
or  dancing  among  the  women,  nothing  but  vodka, 
vodka,  vodka,  cards,  cards,  cards,  all  day  long. 
Ah !    mon   cher,   n^en  paiions   i)lus.     Qe    sont    des 


332  FROM    PEKIX   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

canailles  !  "  I  then  tbouglit  our  friend  was  a  little 
hard  upon  the  good  people  of  Kiakhta,  but  had 
good  cause,  afterwards,  to  alter  my  opinion. 

The  cathedral,  which  was  entirely  built  by  tea- 
merchants,  is  a  beautiful  building  of  Byzantine 
architecture.  The  cost  is  said  to  have  been 
150,000L  sterling,  and  after  seeing  the  gor- 
geous decorations  of  the  interior,  one  had  no  diffi- 
culty in  believing  this.  The  altar  alone,  of  soUd 
gold,  silver,  and  platinum,  cost  30,000/.,  while  the 
principal  doors  of  the  building  are  of  solid  silver, 
and  weigh  200  lbs.  A  huge  candlestick  and  chande- 
lier studded  with  emeralds,  rubies,  and  diamonds, 
and  several  beautifully  executed  oil  paintings  from 
Europe,  together  with  some  Ikons  or  sacred  pic- 
tures, thickly  encrusted  with  precious  stones,  com- 
pleted the  decoration  of  the  interior  of  the  building, 
which  though,  like  most  Russian  churches,  of  a 
florid  style,  was  exceedingly  beautiful.  A  peal  of 
eight  bells,  made  in  Moscow,  and  of  great  weight, 
must  have  added  not  a  little  to  the  general  cost, 
for  they  had  to  be  dragged  two  thousand  miles 
through  the  deep,  muddy  roads  of  Siberia.  There 
are  two  smaller  churches  in  Kiakhta  besides  a  large 


KIAKHTA   TO   irvKOUTSH.  333 

cemetery,  lying  between  tliat  town  and  Troitz- 
kosavsk. 

"  They  are  perfect  Rothschilds  in  their  w^ay,"  said 
the  professor,  as  walking  home  I  noticed  what  pala- 
tial buildings  some  of  the  tea-merchants  and  gold- 
miners  had  erected,  "but  with  no  more  manners 
than  their  own  bullocks — in  fact  they  are  a  class 
of  themselves,  and  Siberia  is  the  very  best 
place  for  them.  No  one  would  stand  them  in 
Europe." 

There  are,  the  professor  told  us,  about  fifteen  of 
these  men  living  in  Kiakhta,  one  of  them  worth  at 
least  a  million  sterling.  Walking  back  to  Troitzko- 
savsk  that  day,  we  passed  a  huge  building  on  the 
roadside,  erected  by  M.  Nempshinof — the  millionaire 
in  question — for  a  mausoleum  for  himself,  at  a  cost 
of  40,OOOZ.  sterling.  But  all  this  is  done  more  for 
vanity  than  anything  else.  Their  donations  to  the 
poor,  their  gifts  to  the  church,  their  building  of 
churches,  is  not  charity  so  much  as  a  desire  to  show 
that  they  can  spend  more  money  than  their  neigh- 
bour.    In  Kiakhta,  Herr  R told  us,  their  daily 

life  consists  in  rising  about  mid-day,  winter  and 
summer,  going  down,  if  in  the  tea-season,  to  inspect 


334  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  tea-bags  and  chests  which  sometimes  burst  or 
break  in  transit  across  Gobi,  after  which  they  visit 
each  other's  houses  and  settle  down  to  cards  and 
champagne  (at  Rs.  13  [II.  lOs.]  a  bottle),  with  short 
intervals  for  refreshment,  till  four  or  five  the  next 
morning,  when,  helplessly  drunk,  they  reel  home 
to  bed,  or  rather  to  a  chair  or  sofa,  for  there  are 
no  beds  in  Kiakhta,  even  in  the  best  regulated 
families.  The  favourite  game  in  Kiakhta  is  nap,  at 
which  these  men  gamble  for  tremendously  high  sums, 
sometimes  playing  lOOOL  a  trick.  Intellectual 
amusements  they  have  none,  indeed  the  majority 
cannot  even  read  !  But  I  shall  have  more  to  say  of 
these  strange  creatures  anon,  and  must  now  give 
the  reader  a  full  and  graphic  account  of  an  evening 
party  a  la  Sib^rienne  ! 

"  M.  Wormoif,  my  colleague,  has  deputed  me  to 
invite  you  to  dine  this  evening,"  said  the  professor, 
as  we  were  about  to  bid  him  good  evening.  '*  Will 
you  come  ?  Do  not  let  rae  persuade  you  against 
your  will,  but  I  think  you  will  be  amused  at 
our,  or  let  me  rather  say  their,  manners  and 
customs." 

We  gladly  accepted,  and  presented  ourselves  at 


KIAKHTA    TO   IRKOUTSK.  335 

^I.  Wormoff's  residence  at  nine  o'clock,  the  liour 
mentioned.  Rather  late,  we  thought,  but  no  doubt 
the  Siberian  custom,  though  having  tasted  no  food 
since  breakfast,  Glembodski  having  (as  usual)  no- 
thing in  the  house,  we  would  willingly  have  dined 
an  hour  or  two  earlier. 

The  guests  were  already  assembled  when  we 
arrived,  including  our  German  friend,  who  intro- 
duced us  to  all  present;  Professor  Wormoff,  his 
newly  married  wife,  a  pretty  little  woman  from 
Tomsk,  Captain  Cherkoff,  of  the  Cossacks,  who 
evidently  thought  Madame  Wormoff  a  pleasant  ad- 
dition to  Kiakhta  society,  a  Russian  professor  of 
music,  of  mathematics,  and  chemistry  (the  last  a 
German),  the  post-master,  and  ourselves.  Of  these 
Cherkoff  and  the  chemist  spoke  French,  the  others 
not  a  word  of  anything  but  Russian. 

"Wormoff  had  a  charming  house,  and  evidences  of 
his  wife's  good  taste  could  be  everywhere  seen  in 
the  drawing-room,  into  which  we  were  shown. 
Introductions  over,  everybody  sat  solemnly  down 
without  a  word,  and  Madame  Wormoff  left  the  room. 
I  confess  I  hoped  she  had  gone  to  see  about  dinner, 
but  half-past  eight,  nine,  half-past  nine  came,  and  no 


336  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

signs  of  moving.  About  this  time  Clierkoff  offered 
me  a  cigarette,  which,  more  to  stave  off  the  pangs 
of  hunger  than  anything  else,  I  accepted  and  lit. 
There  was  a  magnificent  grand  piano  (by  Erard)  in 
the  room,  upon  which  I  was  asked  to  perform,  and 
played,  with  as  much  spirit  as  I  could  muster,  the 
Russian  Hymn  and  other  patriotic  tunes,  but  they 
fell  flat,  and  no  wonder.  Everybody  appeared  to 
me  to  be  getting  gradually  paler  and  paler  with 
hunger,  nor  could  I,  T\ath  any  propriety,  get  any- 
where near  R ,  who  was  sitting  next  our  host, 

to  ask  him  if  we  were  ever  going  to  have  anything 
to  eat. 

At  last,  about  11.30,  the  door  opened,  and  a 
servant  entered,  bearing  a  tray  with  two  large 
bottles  of  vodka.  This,  I  thought,  looked  like  a 
preliminary  to  food,  at  any  rate  the  spirit 
kept  faintness  off!  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later 
Madame  Wormoff  returned  to  announce  that  dinner 
(dinner  at  11.80  !  !)  was  ready,  and  we  adjourned 
gravely  to  an  upstairs  apartment,  where  the  repast 
awaited  us.  In  a  corner  of  the  room  stood  a  small 
table  set  out  with  smoked  herrings,  salmon,  cheese, 
caviar,  and  flanked  by  half  a  dozen  huge  bottles  of 
vodka,  cognac,  Curasao,  kiimmel,  and  other  liqueurs. 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKODTSK.  337 

Here  every  one  took  a  morsel  of  cheese  or  fish  iu 
his  fingers,  and  gravely  drank  our  health  one  by 
one,  turning  their  glass  up,  if  we  did  not  drain  ours 
to  the  dregs,  to  show  that  it  was  empty.  By  the 
time  supper  was  served  my  head  began  to  swim, 
for  I  had  had  to  imbibe  in  this  way,  and  on  an 
empty  stomach,  seven  or  eight  glasses  of  vodka, 
a  liquid  to  which  I  was  totally  unaccustomed,  and 
which  is,  I  need  not  say,  extremely  potent. 

One  diminutive  chicken  and  half  a  dozen  small 
cutlets  do  not  go  far  among  half  a  dozen  hungry 
men,  but  that  was  literally  the  only  food  there 
was.  There  was  plenty  to  drink  ;  but  what 
drink  !  Brandy,  vodka,  and  white  port  (English 
made).  Beer,  claret,  or  sherry,  there  were  none,  or 
even  water,  for  after  devouring  salt  fish  like  so 
many  Esquimaux,  one  would  gladly  have  put  up 
with  the  latter,  had  there  been  any. 

Madame  Wormoff  retired  to  rest  shortly  after 
midnight.  Strangely  enough,  we  mis,sed  our  friend 
the  Cossack  at  the  very  same  moment.  Such  a 
proceeding  would  have  seemed  somewhat  strange 
anywhere  else,  especially  as  the  gallant  Captain 
returned  in  half  an  hour,  after  a  prolonged 
tete-a-tete    with    Madame,    and    joined    us    again. 

z 


338  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

But  nobody,   evea  Wormoff,  seemed   in  the  least 
surprised. 

The  lady's  departure  was  the  signal  for  real  hard 
drinking  to  commence,  though,  indeed,  our  com- 
panions had  lost  no  time  before  she  left.  In 
vain  I  protested  that  I  never  drank  port,  that 
strong  liquor  disagreed  with  me  ;  my  hosts  either 
would  not  or  could  not  understand,  and  insisted  on 
my  drinking  with  them  separately  and  in  turn. 
"  Do  not  refuse,  or  they  will  pick  a  quarrel  with 

you,"  whispered  R ;  and  not  wishing  to  be  mixed 

up  in  a  melee  with  these  giants,  not  one  of  whom 
was  under  six  feet  high,  I  made  a  virtue  of  necessity. 
It  reminded  me  of  the  scene  between  the  celebrated 
Mr.  Jorrocks  and  his  huntsman,  who,  when  they  had 
exhausted  all  other  toasts,  drank  the  healths  of  all 
the  hounds  separately.  When  our  friends  had 
exhausted  the  Czar,  the  army,  the  navy,  the  Queen 
of  England,  and  all  reigning  potentates,  including 
the  Emperor  of  China,  they  fell  back  on  them- 
selves. I  must  have  drunk  at  least  three  bottles  of 
port  that  night,  to  say  nothing  of  vodka,  and 
by  the  time  we  left  the  table  to  adjourn  to  the 
piano  and  wind  up  the  evening,  or  rather  morning 


1 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  339 

■with  song,  my  throat  was  like  a  lime-kiln,  and  my 
head  spinning  like  a  teetotum. 

All  at  the  table  were  the  worse  for  liquor; 
but  the  scholastic  representatives  of  mathe- 
matics and  chemistry  were,  to  say  the  least  of 
it,  very  drunk  indeed.  I  was  the  innocent 
cause  of  a  severe  and  sanguinary  combat  be- 
tween them.  Earlier  in  the  evening,  our  con- 
versation having  turned  upon  duelling,  I  had 
related  to  the  Cossack  captain,  much  to  his 
amusement,  the  story  of  the  three-cornered  duel 
in  "Mr.  Midshipman  Easy,"  which  is  probably 
familiar  to  the  reader.  The  mathematical  pro- 
fessor insisted  on  the  joke  being  translated  to 
him  by  the  professor  of  chemistry,  which,  with 
no  little  diflSculty,  the  latter  did,  but  it  instantly 
led  to  a  wrangle.  No  three  men,  said  the 
mathematician,  could  fire  at  each  other.  The 
thing  was  absurd,  unfair,  preposterous  ;  one  of 
them  must  be  at  a  disadvantage.  The  discussion 
became  so  heated  at  last  that  "Wormoff  had  to 
put  a  stop  to  it,  thinking  every  instant  the  pair 
would  come  to  blows,  and  peace  was,  for  a  time, 
restored. 

z  2 


340  FEOM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

We  then  adjourned  to  the  drawing-room,  where 
all  sang  and  shouted  at  the  top  of  their  voices, 
regardless  of  time  or  tune,  till  past  4  a.m.  -  If 
poor  Madame  Wormoff  slept  anywhere  near,  she 
must  have  had  a  bad  time  of  it.  Suddenly,  while 
at  the  piano,  a  low,  choking  sound  attracted  my 
attention,  and  I  looked  underneath  to  find  Russia 
(represented  by  the  mathematician),  lying  on  the 
top  of  Germany  (represented  by  the  chemist),  and 
slowly  but  surely  throttling  her.  The  thing  had 
been  done  so  gently  that  neither  Lancaster  nor 
myself  had  noticed  it.  The  others  had  returned 
to  the  dining-room  and  vodka.  Quickly  summon- 
ing Wormoff,  we  managed  to  get  them  apart,  but  not 
without  difficulty.  The  Russian  had  decidedly  the 
best  of  the  combat,  for  the  chemist  was  half  dead, 
his  face  purple,  and  eyes  protruding.  It  took  at 
least  half  a  bottle  of  vodka  to  bring  him  round 
again,  and  enable  him  to  inform  us  that  the 
casus  belli  was  still  the  triangular  duel !  The 
Cossack  was  all  for  blood,  and  wanted  them  to 
fight  it  out  with  pistols  in  the  morning.  Nothing, 
he  said,  would  settle  the  question  but  practical 
demonstration,  and  he  would  be  charmed  to  make  a 
third,  but  this  was  fortunately  averted. 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  341 

It  was  broad  daylight  when  we  separated, 
EngHsh  bottled  stout  being  handed  round  as  a 
finale  to  the  entertainment.  It  costs  about  a 
guinea  a  bottle  in  Kiakhta,  and  we  drank  it  out  of 
small  wine-glasses.  Then  every  one  kissed  every 
one  else  (this  we  found  one  of  the  most  trying 
ordeals  in  Siberia),  and  we  separated,  having  accepted 
an  invitation  to  dine  next  evening  with  the  post- 
master, but  dearly  hoping  by  that  time  to  have  left 
Kiakhta,  little  knowing  that  he  alone  had  the  power 
to  grant  us  a  Podarojna  and  horses  to  take  us  to 
Irkoutsk.  Cherkoff  insisted  on  seeing  us  home 
to  the  door  of  the  hotel,  where,  after  affectionately 
kissing  me  on  the  forehead,  he  left  us,  and  tacked 
up  the  street,  his  sword  rattling  between  his  legs, 
to  morning  parade  at  5.30.  So  ended  our  first 
evening  party  in  Siberia  ! 

We  bought  a  tarantass  next  morning,  and  were 
lucky  enough  to  get  a  very  good  one,  though  it  had 
just  done  a  long  journey,  and  necessitated  a  delay  of 
a  couple  of  days  to  have  the  wheels,  axles,  &c., 
thoroughly  overhauled  before  setting  out  on  the 
two  thousand  miles  of  rough  and  trying  road  that  lay 
between  us  and  Tomsk.  There  was  little  trouble 
about  stores.     A  small  box  of  tea,  a  bag  containing 


342  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

sugar,  two  or  tbree  loaves  of  white  bread,  and  half 
a  dozen  lemons  are  all  the  Siberian  travels  with, 
and  we  resolved  to  do  the  same,  indeed  there  would 
have  been  no  room  for  more,  for  the  tarantass  was 
already  full  to  overflowing  with  our  portmanteaus 
and  gun-cases.  It  may  here  be  as  well  to  give  the 
reader  a  brief  description  of  the  vehicle,  which  in 
summer  replaces  the  sleigh  in  Siberia,  and  which 
is  admirably  adapted  for  long  journeys  and  rough 
roads. 

A  tarantass  resembles  a  large  cradle  on  four  wheels. 
The  body  of  our  vehicle  was  about  seven  feet  in 
length  by  five  feet  broad,  and  the  bottom  being 
concave,  gave  us  plenty  of  room  wherein  to  pack  our 
portmanteaus  and  other  luggage  impedimenta.  There 
are  neither  seats  or  springs,  the  occupants  lying  at 
full  length  on  a  mattress  placed  over  the  luggage  or 
bottom  of  the  carriage.  A  hood,  capable  of  being 
folded  back,  covers  the  occupant  partially,  and  from 
this  hood  to  the  driver's  seat  in  front  can  be  spread 
an  apron  to  serve  as  a  further  protection.  The  body 
of  the  tarantass  rests  on  poles,  and  these  rest  in 
turn  on  the  axletrees  and  wheels.  The  poles  are 
generally  springy,  and  much  longer  than  the  body  of 


KIAKHTA   TO    IRKODTSK.  343 

tlie  veliicle,  the  fore  and  liind  wheels  are  placed  as 
far  apart  as  the  length  of  the  poles  will  allow,  and 
the  body  is  placed  mid-way  between  the  wheels,  so 
the  want  of  proper  springs  is  partially  compensated 
for,  inasmuch  as  the  occupant  does  not  feel  the  force 
of  the  jolting  as  he  would  do  if  he  were  seated 
directly  over  the  wheels.  Such  is  a  brief  description 
of  the  vehicle  in  which  we  travelled  a  distance  of 
considerably  over  a  thousand  miles,  from  Kiakhta 
to  Tomsk.  The  price  we  paid  for  ours  was  280 
roubles,  which,  considering  all  things  and  the 
distance  we  were  from  civilization,  was  not  out 
of  the  way. 

The  next  thing  was  to  get  rid  of  our  ponies.  Chow 
and  Kharra.  I  knew  the  kind  of  life  they  would  lead 
had  we  sold  them  to  our  Kiakhta  friends,  so  we 
gave  them  away  to  a  party  of  Mongols  setting  out 
for  the  desert.  Poor  little  Kharra !  He  has,  at 
any  rate,  a  better  time  of  it  on  his  native  breezy 
steppes,  than  in  the  streets  of  hot,  dusty  Pekin. 
Nearly  the  whole  day  was  spent  in  preparations 
for  departure  ;  packing  the  tarantass,  obtaining  our 
Podarojna,  and  so  forth.  For  the  latter  we  had  to 
apply  to  our  friend  of  the  evening  before,  the  post- 


344  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

master,  wlio  was  most  reluctant  to  give  us  the 
document,  and  begged  us  to  make  a  longer  stay  in 
Kiakhta.  Seeing  we  were  determined,  however, 
he  gave  it  us  at  last,  reminding  us  that  dinner 
would  be  on  the  table  at  ten  o'clock  sharp  that 
evening. 

The  market  at  Troitzkosavsk  is  an  interesting 
sight.  It  is  a  square  open  building,  the  shops 
around  belonging  partly  to  Chinese  and  partly  to 
Europeans,  and  the  medley  of  eastern  and  western 
population  was  most  curious.  The  Russian  shops 
were  principally  for  the  sale  of  stores,  tobacco, 
provisions  of  all  kinds,  and  ironmongery,  but  those 
of  the  Chinese  devoted  exclusively  to  tea  auvd  silks, 
in  both  of  which  there  is  an  enormous  trade  in 
Kiakhta.  Adjoining  this  was  the  fish-market, 
where  sturdy  Siberian  fishwives  appeared  to  be 
doing  a  roaring  trade  in  salted  salmon,  trout. 
''  Omul,"  carp,  and  other  fish  from  Lake  Baikal. 
Fresh  fish  is  seldom  obtainable  at  Kiakhta,  the 
Little  Bura  river  which  flows  through  beinor  nothinof 

o  o  o 

more  than  a  dry  ditch  in  summer,  and  frozen  over 
in  winter.  Having  occasion  to  send  a  telegram,  I 
went  to  the  office  on  my  way  home,   and  was  sur- 


KTAKHTA    TO    lEKOUTSK.  345 

prised  at  tlie  absurdly  low  tariff,  one  rouble,  or 
rather  under  one  and  eightpence  for  ten  words  to 
Petersburg,  and  all  otlier  parts  of  the  Russian 
empire  from  tlie  Baltic  to  the  Sea  of  Okhotzk. 

We  were  to  start  for  Lake  Baikal  at  nine  next 
morning — at  least  horses  had  been  promised  us  for 
that  hour,  yet  when  we  arrived  at  the  post- 
master's with  R ,  it  was  getting  on  for  10.30, 

there  were  no  signs  of  dinner.  The  party  was  in 
point  of  fact  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  repetition 
of  the  night  before,  with  the  addition  of  about  a 
dozen  male  and  half  a  dozen  female  guests.  We 
saw,  with  a  shudder,  that  the  postmaster  had 
resolved  to  make  a  night  of  it,  and  our  hopes  of 
getting  away  anything  like  early  on  the  morrow 
vanished  into  thin  air. 

The  company  was  rather  more  orderly,  however, 
at  first,  and  we  had,  for  a  wonder,  something  to  eat. 
Among  the  ladies  was  a  young  "  Bouriatte  "  lady, 
who  had  just  returned  from  a  finishing  school  in 
Irkoutsk.  The  Bouriattes  are  an  aboriginal  tribe 
inhabiting  the  country  north  and  east  of  Irkoutsk, 
and  were  but  a  short  time  since  very  little  removed 
from  the   Mongols  in    point  of   civilization.     This 


346  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

young  lady  had  the  queer  physiognomy  peculiar  to 
her  race,  the  flat  nose,  high  cheek  bones,  thick  lips, 
and  narrow,  twinkling  eyes,  which  made  a  strange 
contrast  to  a  European  gown  of  the  latest  fashion 
that  she  wore.  Still  more  curious  was  it  when  she 
sat  down  at  the  grand  piano  and  gave  us  Mendels- 
sohn's "  Lieder,"  and  one  of  Liszt's  "  Rhapsodies  " 
with  an  execution  and  feeling  that  I  have  seldom 
heard  surpassed  by  an  amateur.  Classical  music 
was  evidently  not  appreciated  in  Kiakhta,  and  the 
bright  jingling  music  of  the  "  Cloches  de  Corneville  " 
and  "  Le  petit  Due"  were  much  more  enthu- 
siastically received  when  Madame  B ,  a  pretty 

little   woman,  the  wife  of  the  military  doctor,  sat 
down  to  the  instrument  and  rattled  them  off. 

Our  friend.  Captain  Cherkoff,  came  in  rather  late, 
having  been  out  with  his  men  at  target  practice  by 
moonlight — the  order  for  this  practice  had  only  just 
been  promulgated  from  Petersburg,  and  it  really 
seems  a  very  sensible  proceeding.  Three  times  a 
week,  wet  or  dry,  the  troops  were  exercised  at  this 
manoeuvre  from  ten  o'clock  till  midnight. 

The  first  part  of  the  evening  was  pleasant  enough, 
though  the  manners  of  some  of  the  guests  were,  to 


KIAKHTA   TO    IKKOUTSK.  347 

say  tlie  least  of  it,  curious.  Many  liad  never  been 
fifty  miles  from  Kiakhta  in  their  lives,  so  were  to  be 
pardoned,  though  it  did  not  make  their  behaviour 
any  the  less  unpleasant  to  their  neighbours.  The 
women,  poor  things,  noticed  this,  and  kept  apologizing 
for  the  behaviour  of  their  male  relatives.  We  took 
leave  of  them  at  about  two  o'clock,  on  the  plea  that 
we  should  have  to  be  leaving  early.  I  noticed  at  the 
time  a  covert  smile  pass  over  the  face  of  the  post- 
master, but  attributed  no  importance  to  it,  and 
sought  my  hard  couch  with  a  feeling  of  relief  that 
to-morrow  would  see  us  fairly  off  for  Irkoutsk. 

The  horses  were  to  be  in  by  nine,  we  were  told, 
but  we  waited  till  eleven  o'clock,  without  a  sign  of 
their  arrival.  Losing  all  patience,  I  walked  up  to 
the  post-master's,  and  found  him  still  sleeping  off 
the  effects  of  the  night's  debauch  on  two  chairs. 
I  knew  that  the  slightest  show  of  temper  would 
only  haA'e  made  matters  worse,  so  waking  him  as 
gently  as  I  could,  asked  politely  why  the  horses 
had  not  arrived.  For  some  minutes  his  fuddled 
brains  could  not  grasp  my  meaning,  till  a  sudden 
light  burst  on  him :  "  Ah,  to  be  sure,  the  horses. 
Alas  !  my  friend,  there  are  none  for  you  :  besides, 


348        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

you  cannot  go  to-day.  After  you  had  left,  our 
mutual  friend  Cherkoff  commissioned  me  to  ask  you 
to  breakfast  with  him  at  the  barracks,  and  I  took 
upon  myself  to  accept  for  you,  and  gave  your 
'  Troika '  to  some  one  else.  There  is  no  hurry. 
You  shall  go  to-night.  In  the  meantime  I  will 
dress,  and  we  will  go  up  to  the  barracks  together. 
It  is  already  past  twelve." 

I  could  have  shaken  the  little  wretch  with 
vexation.  While  he  was  dressing,  however  (an 
operation  that  consisted  of  putting  on  his  boots 
and  coat),  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
better  to  appear  pleased,  a  Russian  post-master 
being  as  omnipotent  in  his  small  way  as  the 
veriest  African  tyrant.  I  was  beginning  to  think 
that  Siberian  travel  is  not  unlike  African.  The 
difficulty  is  not  so  much  getting  to  a  place  as 
getting  away  from  it ! 

The  barracks  contained  two  or  three  hundred 
men,  a  company  of  Cossacks  under  the  command 
of  Cherkoff,  who,  like  all  captains  of  the  Russian 
army,  had  obtained  his  brevet  colonelcy  on  crossing 
the  Ourals  into  Siberia.  The  garrison  of  Kiakhta 
is  over  eight  hundred    strong,  but  this  is  mostly 


KIAKUTA   TO    IRKOUTSK.  349 

made  wp  of  militia.  Several  of  the  men  were 
standing  about  the  barrack-yard  as  we  entered, 
broad,  swarthj,  sunburnt  fellows  in  white  linen 
uniforms,  who  looked  fit  to  go  through  anything, 
but  had  not  a  trace  of  smartness  about  them. 

On  arrival  at  the  barracks  we  were  ushered  into 
a  large,  bare,  whitewashed  room  crowded  with 
people,  who  had  apparently  just  risen  from  a  table 
covered  with  the  usual  salt  fish  and  other  thirst- 
producing  comestibles.  One  could  hardly  see 
across  the  room  for  cigarette-smoke.  Nor 
did  it  take  us  long  to  discover  that  most  of 
the  party,  some  twenty  in  number,  had  already 
breakfasted  not  wisely  but  too  well.  All  our  old 
friends  were  there.  The  ladies  (in  low  dresses)  had 
wisely  retired  into  an  inner  apartment,  where  they 

sat  alone.     "  You  are  late,"  said  Professor  R , 

*'but  will  not  miss  anything,  unless  you  care  for 
salt  fish.  This  is  a  true  Siberian  breakfast,"  he 
added,  with  a  smile  at  our  astonishment. 

Never  shall  I  forget  that  afternoon.  The  place 
reeked  with  the  fumes  of  tobacco  and  spirits, 
mingled  with  a  sickening  smell  of  fish.  Thouo-h 
barely   three    o'clock   in    the   afternoon,    half    the 


350  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

men  were  intoxicated,  alternately  singing,  fight- 
ing, and  drinking.  Cherkoff,  I  am  bound  to 
say,  looked  ashamed  of  his  guests,  as  well  he 
might.  The  bright  sun  streaming  in  on  their 
drink-heated  faces  and  disordered  dress  was 
not  a  pretty  spectacle.  Little  Madame  B-^ — , 
a  native  of  Moscow,  confided  to  me,  with 
tears  in  her  eyes,  what  a  dog's  life  it  was  for 
a  woman.  I  sincerely  pitied  her.  It  seemed 
hard  that  one  of  her  refined  taste  and  ideas 
should  be  condemned  to  live  in  such  a  human 
Zoological  Garden. 

The  tarantass  arrived  about  four  o'clock,  much 
to  our  relief,  and  we  commenced  to  take  leave  of 
our  hosts.  I  say  commenced,  for  the  operation 
lasted  quite  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  we  having 
to  drink  a  glass  of  vodka  separately  with  each  man. 

This  ordeal  over,  we  descended  on  either  side 
of  Cherkoff,  the  entire  party  following,  to  the 
barrack-square,  where  the  whole  company  of  Cos- 
sacks was  drawn  up  in  line.  Upon  our  appearance 
all  struck  up  a  hymn  which,  upon  any  other  occasion, 
I  could  have  listened  to  with  pleasure,  but  which, 
now   that   I    felt  it  made   another   hour   of  delay. 


KIAKHTA    TO   IRKOUTSK.  351 

bored  me  beyond  measure.  The  song  finished,  a 
sergeant  approached  us,  bearing  in  each  hand  a 
huge  tumbler  of  vodka.  "  One  of  you  must  drink 
it  off,"  whispered  our  guide,  philosopher,  and  friend, 

Herr  R .     "  This  is  considered  a  great  honour." 

Handing  me  one  glass,  the  captain  took  another,  and 
facing  me  in  front  of  his  men,  cried  out,  '*  Ala  Reine 
d'Angleterre  !  "  to  which  I  replied,  "  A  I'Empereur 
de  Russie !  "  tossing  off  at  the  same  time  the 
whole  of  the  vodka  at  a  gulp.  It  was  like  liquid 
fire  !  but  I  was  not  allowed  much  time  for  thouerht, 
for  in  a  second,  at  a  sign  from  Cherkoff,  the  Cos- 
sacks had  seized  Lancaster  and  myself,  and  sent  us 
whirling  ten  feet  into  the  air,  catching  us  again  in 
their  hands  and  arms  as  we  alighted.  Once,  twice, 
three  times  I  was  sent  up  ;  and  then,  giddy  and 
out  of  breath,  we  returned  to  the  balcony.  By 
this  time,  what  with  the  shouting,  the  tossing,  and 
the  vodka,  I  hardly  knew  whether  I  was  on  my  head 
or  my  heels  !  A  dance  among  the  men  followed  this 
performance,  a  dance  favourite  with  the  Cossacks, 
accompanied  on  a  kind  of  tom-tom,  with  much 
shouting  and  clapping  of  hands.  Having  watched 
this  for  a  few  moments   we  first  quietly  took  leave 


352  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

of  R.,  tlien  bidding  good-bye  to  Cherkoff  (wliom  we 
left  dancing  witb.  his  men),  we  jumped  into  tbe 
caiTiage  while  the  remainder  of  the  guests  were 
looking  the  other  way.  But  they  were  too  quick 
for  us,  for  just  as  we  were  moving  off,  two  of  them 
caught  sight  of  the  tarantass,  and,  dashing  through 
the  crowd,  leapt  in,  to  accompany  us,  Siberian 
fashion,  to  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  One  of  them 
had  concealed  a  bottle  of  vodka,  which  he  produced 
when  we  reached  the  town-gates,  and  insisted  on 
our  drinking  with  him  and  his  friend.  But  we  were 
firm,  and  they  very  drunk,  so  we  soon  managed  to 
give  them  the  slip.  They  were  sitting  in  the 
road,  the  last  we  saw  of  them,  embracing  each 
other,  the  empty  vodka  bottle  beside  them. 

It  was  growing  dusk  as  we  left  Kiakhta  ; 
but  the  cool  night-air,  rapid  motion,  and  ex- 
hilarating jingle  of  the  bells  as  the  three  sturdy 
little  horses  tore  along  the  hard,  level  road,  soon 
cleared  the  cobwebs  from  our  brain,  and  made 
one  forget  the  scenes  of  debauch  of  the  past 
three  days.  The  entertainments  we  had  attended 
left  the  same  impression  on  my  mind  as  a  head- 
feast  I  once  witnessed  in  Central  Borneo — a  kind  of 
wonder   that   human   beings,   however  uncivilized. 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  353 

could  become  so  animal,  not  to  say  bestial,  in 
their  minds  and  habits.  I  have  not  exaggerated 
the  state  of  things  at  Kiakhta,  though  must,  in 
justice,  add  that  it  was  the  most  dissolute  and 
drunken  place  we  came  across.  Some  excuse,  too, 
must  be  made  for  people  living  in  a  land  with  such 
squalid,  depressing  surroundings,  and  having  abso- 
lutely no  intellectual  pursuits. 

There  are  two  roads  from  Kiakhta  to  Lake 
Baikal ;  one  the  old  post-road,  the  other  a  private 
one,  made  and  used  by  the  tea-merchants,  or  by  those 
having  their  permission.  The  latter  is  a  hundred 
and  eighty  versts  shorter  than  the  old  government 
post-road.  By  the  intervention  of  Herr  R.,  we  were 
permitted  to  use  the  private  road,  and  luckily,  for 
we  had  but  three  days  before  us  to  catch  the  steam- 
boat at  Moushafskaya,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the 
lake.  We  reached  the  first  stage,  twenty  versts  from 
Kiakhta,  just  before  midnight.  Here  we  first  began 
to  taste  the  delights  of  Siberian  posting,  for  there 
were  no  horses,  nor  would  there  be  till  next  morn- 
ing. The  post-house  was,  however,  bran  new,  and 
as  clean  as  a  new  pin  inside  and  out ;  and  we  were 
not  sorry  for  the  rest  afforded  by  the  delay.  Had 
all  the  post-houses   in  Siberia   been  as  clean  and 

A  a 


354  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

comfortable  as  those  in  tlie  Trans-Baikal,  we  sbonld 
have  had  little  to  complain  of.  But  the  Russian 
government  has  a  very  different  way  of  doing 
things  to  its  wealthy  and  luxurious  purveyors  of 
tea. 

We  were  away  again  shortly  after  seven  o'clock, 
but  began  the  day  badly.  Of  our  "  Troika,"  ^  two 
were  bolters  and  one  a  jibber  ;  and  a  slight  differ- 
ence of  opinion  at  the  start  ended  by  the  bolting  of 
the  two  outside  horses,  who  dragged  the  jibber  along 
with  them  by  main  force.  They  tore  along  at  a  mad 
gallop  for  a  couple  of  hundred  yards,  the  heavy 
tarantass  swaying  to  and  fro,  till  a  friendly  sand- 
bank brought  us  up  all  standing,  the  off- wheel 
buried  in  the  earth,  the  near  one  whirling  round  in 
the  air.  As  for  the  yemstchik,  he  had  disappeared, 
and  presently  emerged  like  a  water-god,  dripping 
with  water,  and  covered  witb  duck-weed,  for  he  had 
been  shot  into  a  pond  the  other  side  of  the  bank. 
We  got  righted  witli  the  aid  of  some  peasants,  and 
by  dint  of  lashing,  yelling,  and  cursing,  got  the 
unruly  team  off  again  at  a  gallop  ;  and  though  for  a 
mile  or  so  we  were  as  often  off  the  road  as  on  it,  we 

'  Russian  for  a  team  of  three  liorses. 


KIAKllTA    TO    IKKOUTSK.  355 

met  with  no  further  misadventure,  for  a  time,  at  least. 
"  Pour  une  personne  qui  n'aime  pas  les  emotions," 
as  the  French  say,  posting  in  Siberia  is  rather  a 
strain  on  the  nerves.  Tlie  yemstchik  has  no  idea 
of  danger,  will  drive  at  full  gallop  down  a  hill  like 
the  side  of  a  house,  though  it  may  be  half  a  mile 
long,  and  there  is  nothing  to  stop  you  at  the 
bottom  but  a  river  or  precipice  without  a  guard- 
rail, or  standing  up  on  the  box  and  lashing  the  horses 
into  a  furious  gallop  in  places  where  a  broken  rein 
or  the  falling  of  one  horse  would  send  the  whole 
concern  to  kingdom  come — yourself  included.  And 
yet  it  is  surprising  how  few  serious  accidents  do 
occur  on  the  great  post-road.  Yemstchiks  seem, 
like  drunken  men,  to  be  under  the  special  care  of 
Providence. 

We  reached  the  Selenga  river  about  mid -day,  a 
deep,  swift  stream  about  half  a  mile  broad,  and 
crossed  by  a  ferry.  This  was  our  first  experience  of 
a  Siberian  ferry,  but  we  were  not  allowed  to  examine 
it  long,  for  turning  on  to  the  wooden  landing-stage, 
our  yemstchik  shaved  the  side  so  close  that  the 
bank  gave  way,  and  the  off-side  of  the  tarantass 
fell  bodily  over  almost  into  the  stream.     Luckily, 

A  a  2 


356  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

one  of  the  posts  of    the  bridge    caught    the   axle 
of  the  ^'heel,  and  we  jumped  out  quick  as  lightning, 
only  to  see  that  our  vehicle  was  hanging,  saved  only 
by  a  thread  from  utter  destruction.     Had  not  the 
post  been  of  the  strongest  pine,  it  must  have  given 
way.       The  yemstchik  stood   by   whimpering,  evi- 
dently expecting  what  he  would  have  had  if  his  pas- 
sengers had  been  Russians,  a  sound  thrashing,  and 
I  felt  sorely  inclined  to  give  it  him,  except  that  it 
would  have  lost  time,  and  every  moment  the  strain  on 
our  sole  hope,  the  wooden  post,  was  getting  more 
severe.     It  took  us    some  time  to  get  the  horses 
out,  for  they  were  plunging  and  kicking  so  that  I  ex- 
pected every  moment  to  see  them  dislodge  the  heavy, 
cumbersome  carriage,  and  send  it  plunging  into  the 
river.     There  was  but  one  thing  to    do,    cut    the 
traces,  and  as  soon  as  this  was  done  Lancaster  and 
I    set  to   Avork    and   got    all   the    luggage   out  to 
lio-hten   it   as   much  as  possible.     The   yemstchik, 
delio'hted   to   find   his    skin    whole,    worked    away 
like  a  Trojan,  and  with  the  aid  of  some  men  from 
the  ferry,  we  managed  to  get  two  or  three  planks 
from  the  stage.     These  we  placed  under  the  car- 
riao-e,  and  I   breathed   again.     Our  tarantass   was 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  357 

saved.  But  though  all  actual  danger  of  losing  it 
was  over,  it  was  by  no  means  an  easy  task  to  hoist  it 
on  terra  firma.  There  were  but  two  peasants  in 
charge  of  the  ferry — a  very  old  man  and  a  very 
small  boy,  and  our  united  efforts  never  made  it 
budge  an  inch.  There  was  nothing  left  but  to  send 
for  help  to  a  village  about  three  miles  off,  and 
patiently  sit  down  and  wait  with  the  pleasing  con- 
viction that  we  had  for  a  certainty  lost  the  steamer 
at   Shamoufskaya. 

It  was  not  till  nearly  four  o'clock  that  the 
men  arrived,  and  past  five  before  we  had  got  the 
things  in  again,  rigged  up  some  traces,  a  simple  job 
enough  in  Siberia,  where  they  are  made  of  rope, 
and  got  our  carriage  safely  hoisted  on  to  the  ferry. 
"\Ye  then  crossed  safely,  and  proceeded  on  our 
journey. 

The  ferry  across  the  Selenga  is  constructed  on 
the  same  plan  as  over  every  other  Siberian  river  we 
crossed.  A  large  barge  is  moored  mid-stream  about 
two  hundred  yards  above  the  ferry.  To  this  is 
attached  a  stout  chain,  connected  by  means  of  a 
number  of  smaller  boats,  to  the  bows  of  the  ferry. 
On  being  cast  off  from  the  shore,  the  mere  force  of 


358  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  Stream  is  sufficient  to  propel  the  ferry  from  bank 
to  bank.  This  seemed  a  simple  and  effectual  plan, 
particularly  in  Siberia,  where  the  rivers  are  mostly 
of  great  size  and  swiftness. 

The  scenery  from  here  to  Monshafskaya  was 
lovely,  and  perhaps  the  more  civilized  nature  of  the 
landscape  made  one  appreciate  it  more  from  just 
leaving  the  bare,  monotonous  steppes  of  Mongolia. 
It  seemed  almost  as  if  one  were  home  again,  to  see 
the  large  enclosed  meadows,  the  ruddy  peasantry  in 
the  hay-fields,  and  the  pretty,  rustic-looking  vil- 
lages, with  their  gabled  cottages,  and  picturesque 
church  towers.  The  bright  warm  sun  lent  an  air 
of  gaiety  to  the  scene,  and  everything  looked  happy 
and  contented,  from  the  rosy-cheeked  peasant  girls 
with  their  hay-rakes  and  milk-pails,  to  the  fat  sleepy 
cattle  browsing  in  the  fields. 

There  were  no  horses  to  be  had  till  mid- 
night at  the  next  stopping-place,  so  we  made 
ourselves  comfortable  and  got  the  post-master's 
wife  to  give  us  some  supper,  a  delicious  meal 
of  black  bread,  eggs,  and  thick  clotted  cream, 
with  some  berries  of  her  own  preserving.  All 
was    excellent    but    the    black    bread,  a  substance 


KIAKUTA    TO    IKKOUTSK.  359 

not  unlike  siiet  mixed  with  soot  and  treacle.  The 
postmistress  herself  brought  us  supper,  but  her 
lord  and  master  was  terribly  jealous,  and  never 
let  her  out  of  his  sight  for  a  moment,  a  circum- 
stance that  seemed  to  afford  her  the  greatest 
amusement.  She  was  a  true  Russian  from  Nijni 
Novgorod,  she  told  us,  and  not  a  Siberian.  Her 
name  was  Olga,  and  she'd  just  had  a  baby,  and 
would,  I  believe,  have  told  us  the  whole  particulars 
of  its  birth,  had  not  Benedick,  who  scowled  in  a 
corner  the  whole  time,  sent  her  off  to  bed.  We 
carried  on  the  conversation  by  means  of  a  dialogue 
book,  and  she  laughed  till  she  cried  at  my  attempts 
at  Russian.  The  walls  of  the  post-house  were 
covered  with  pictures  cut  from  illustrated  papers. 
Among  others  one  of  Mrs.  Langtry  out  of  the 
Graphic.  '*  Krasivia  Dama  Ingliska,"  "  said  pretty 
Olga,  as  she  pointed  it  out.  I  have  often 
wondered  how  it  ever  drifted  to  this  outlandish 
place,  and  if  Mrs  Langtry  is  aware  that  her  fair 
fame  has  spread  as  far  as  the  Russo-Chinese 
frontier. 

The  country  became  more  mountainous  after  this 

"  A  pretty  English  lady. 


360  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  less  cultivated,  though  one  passed  every  now 
and  again  fertile  valleys  well  stocked  with  rye,  corn, 
and  barley,  and  prosperous-looking,  fair-sized  vil- 
lages nestlino:  in  the  hills.  The  roads  were  ex- 
cellent,  far  better  than  any  others  we  met  with 
throughout  Siberia.  Their  comparative  newness, 
and  the  small  amount  of  traffic  that  goes  this  way 
compared  to  the  other,  no  doubt  accounts  for  this. 
We  were  fairly  lucky  too  in  obtaining  horses,  and 
were  only  detained  twice,  once  on  the  occasion  I 
have  mentioned,  and  the  other  the  night  before  we 
reached  Monshafskaya  on  the  Baikal  at  Abukansk. 
As,  however,  we  made  the  acquaintance  of  a 
charming  fellow-traveller  on  the  second  occasion, 
who  was  in  the  same  plight  as  ourselves,  we  did  not 
mind  the  delay.  Had  it  not  been  for  this  chance 
friend,  we  should  have  been  quite  ten  days  reaching 
Irkoutsk  instead  of  five.  M.  Eadovitch  was  a 
Eussian  in  Government  employ,  on  his  way  to 
Irkoutsk.  He  had  already  been  at  Abukansk  some 
hours  when  we  got  there,  and  when  we  entered  the 
post-house  addressed  us  in  excellent  French,  much 
to  our  delight.  We  spent  quite  a  pleasant  evening, 
for  the  post-house  was  clean  and  comfortable,  and 
next  morning  at  4  a.m.,  the   horses  being  ready, 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  3G1 

started  off  together  for  Monscliafskaya,  Rudo- 
vitch  in  a  telega  or  public  travelling-carriage,  a 
vehicle  built  on  the  same  lines  as  a  tarantass,  but 
having  the  great  disadvantage,  that  the  traveller 
must  change  into  another  at  every  station. 

The  approach  to  Lake  Baikal  lies  through  a  valley 
or  gorge  with  steep  rocky  mountains,  pine-clad 
almost  to  their  summits,  on  either  side.  So  narrow 
is  the  road  in  parts  that  there  is  barely  room  for  two 
vehicles  abreast,  while  a  precipitous  torrent  about 
fifty  feet  below  dashes  along  amid  huge  rocks  and 
boulders  to  fall  into  thelakejustbelowMonshafskaya. 
A  great  part  of  the  road  is  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock 
and  must  have  cost  a  fabulous  sum  to  make.  We 
arrived  at  this,  the  most  difficult  and  dangerous  part 
of  the  road,  just  before  sunset.  It  was  rather  nervous 
work,  for  there  was  no  guard-rail  or  attempt  at  protec- 
tion, and  the  slightest  shy  or  false  step  of  the  horses, 
who  were  not  of  the  steadiest,  would  have  precipi- 
tated one  on  to  the  rocks  below.  Presently  we  left 
the  ravine  to  ascend  a  steep  hill,  so  steep  indeed  that 
four  horses  could  hardly  get  us  along.  Luckily 
it  was  barely  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  summit. 
Restins:  here  awhile  for  our  tired  horses  to  reofain 
breath,  we  heard  a  sound  as  of  waves  beating  on  a 


3G2  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

rocky  shore.  Walking  on  a  few  yards,  we  came  to 
the  edge  of  a  cliff.  The  thick  undergrowth  and 
dense  forest  had  up  till  now  hidden  it  from  view, 
for  suddenly  there  at  our  feet,  the  snow-clad  sum- 
mits of  its  coasts  glowing  in  the  sunset,  a  sea  of 
sapphire  flecked  with  Avhite  waves,  lay  fathomless 
Lake  Baikal. 

We  skirted  the  lake  for  some  time,  now  on  a 
level  with  the  shingly  beach,  now  hundreds  of  feet 
above  it,  before  we  got  to  Monshafskaya,  at  dusk. 
The  steamer,  to  our  great  relief,  was  a  day  late,  and 
would  not  be  leaving  for  Listvenitz  (the  port  for 
Irkoutsk)  till  the  following  day  at  noon.  The  rest- 
house  was  crowded  with  travellers,  one  a  special 
Government  courier  from  Nicolaiefsk,  whom  Rado- 
vitch  knew  and  introduced  us  to  :  a  pleasant,  chatty 
fellow,  who  had  once  held  a  commission  in  a  crack 
calvary  regiment,  but  having  lived  not  wisely  but  too 
well,  had  sold  out  and  joined  the  Courier  Service. 
On  the  occasion  of  the  late  Czar's  assassination  he  was 
sent  (in  winter)  from  Irkoutsk  to  Nicolaiefsk  (on  the 
sea  of  Okhotzk)  and  performed  th.e  journey  in  twelve 
days,  an  unprecedented  feat,  though  on  arrival  at 
Nicolaiefsk   he  was    lifted   out  of  his   sleio:h    more 


KIAKHTA    TO    lEKOUTSK.  363 

dead    tliaii    alive,    and   did    not   recover    for   some 
months. 

Monshafskaya  is  but  a  small  village  consisting 
of  the  rest-house,  half  a  dozen  cottages,  and  the 
"  Ostrog  "  or  prison.  A  sentry,  with  loaded  rifle, 
stood  at  the  gate,  and  eyed  us  rather  suspiciously 
when  we  approached  to  look  closer  at  the  faces  that, 
pressed  against  the  iron  bars  of  the  small  square 
windows,  were  watching  our  every  movement. 
Most  of  them  were,  Radovitch  told  us,  on  their 
way  to  the  gold-mines  of  Nertchinsk,  and  were  of 
the  lowest  order  of  criminals,  the  sweepings  of 
Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg.  More  villainous  faces 
I  have  seldom  seen.  The  four  large  windows 
of  the  cells  reserved  for  political  prisoners  showed 
us  but  one,  a  young  and  good-looking  man,  who 
when  we  looked  at  him,  instantly  averted  his 
gaze.  "  He  is  for  Karra,"  said  the  sentry,  with  a 
leer,  to  Radovitch.  "Won't  he  enjoy  himself?" 
None  but  Black  Nihilists,  of  which  he  was  one,  and 
murderers  are  sent  to  this  hell  upon  earth,  which  is, 
except  Sakhalien,  the  most  dreaded  prison  in  Siberia. 
The  unhappy  wretches  exiled  to  Siberia  for  political 
offences,   are  undoubtedly  far  worse  off  than  the 


364  FROM    PEXm    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

criminals  sent  there  for  tlief t  or  murder.  Pens,  ink, 
and  paper,  to  say  nothing  of  books,  are  rigorously 
forbidden,  and  this  isthe  cruellest  punishment  for  men 
of  intellect  who,  taken  from  a  life  of  mental  activity 
in  civilized  Europe,  are  thrust  perhaps  for  life  into 
a  prison  with  absolutely  nothing,  not  even  physical 
work  to  divert  their  thoughts  from  their  shame 
and  misery.  As  for  the  criminal  classes,  they  care 
little  so  long  as  they  get  their  vodka  smuggled  in, 
in  the  entrails  of  a  pig  or  sheep,  or  can  bribe 
or  cajole  their  guards  out  of  a  screw  of  tobacco. 
Siberia  may  truly  be  called  the  criminal's  heaven 
and  the  Nihilist's  hell.  Once  past  the  Oural  moun- 
tains, every  liberty,  every  indulgence,  is  accorded  to 
the  former  to  induce  them  to  colonize  and  become 
respectable  citizens  ;  for  the  latter  there  is  nothing 
but  insult,  harsh  treatment,  and  injustice. 

Monshafskaya  is  surrounded  by  dense  pine 
forest,  through  which  runs  the  great  post-road 
fringed  by  high  banks,  on  which  were  hedges 
of  hops  and  wild  raspberries  in  full  bearing. 
The  fruit  was  quite  equal  in  flavour  to  the  real 
thing,  though  much  smaller.  The  soil  round  here 
seemed  wonderfully  adapted  for  fruit-growing. 
Raspberries,  currants,  strawberries,  and  gooseberries 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSR.  3G5 

grew  luxuriantly  in  all  the  cottage  gardens,  and  the 
natives  preserve  tliem  largely  for  sale  at  Irkoutsk 
and  other  towns  of  Eastern  Siberia.  The  place 
has  rather  a  depressing  appearance,  nevertheless,  the 
houses  of  unpainted  wood  giving  a  sombre  look 
at  first  sight,  for  the  only  spot  of  colour  against  the 
dark  forest  was  the  rest-house,  with  its  white  walls 
and  bright  green  roof.  Turning  seaward,  or  rather 
lakeward,  however,  the  view  was  very  different. 
It  was  a  clear,  though  rather  cold  day,  with 
a  strong  north-wester  blowing,  just  sufficiently 
strong  to  cover  the  bright  blue  waters  with  curling 
white  waves,  and  show  one  that  if  the  wind  rose 
any  higher  things  might  be  unpleasant  before  we 
reached  Listvenitz,  for  Radovitch  gave  us  lamentable 
accounts  of  the  steamer.  It  was  just  like  being  at 
the  seaside  in  England.  One  almost  fancied  one 
smelt  the  ozone,  while  the  sound  of  the  waves, 
beating  on  the  beach,  heightened  the  illusion. 
The  opposite  coast  was  quite  invisible,  clear 
day  though  it  was,  while  to  the  left  and  right 
of  us  extended  broad  stretches  of  shingly  beach 
alternating  with  patches  of  bright  golden  sand 
standing  out  bright  and  distinct  against  the  dark 
green   pines  growing    down    to  the  water's  edge. 


366  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

To  complete  the  resemblance,  a  wooden  jetty,  with 
a  lighthouse  at  the  end,  ran  out  for  a  distance 
of  fifty  yards  into  the  lake,  forming  a  small 
harbour  in  which  lay  moored  a  number  of  small 
fishing-boats  and  two  large  black  hulks,  prison 
barges,  waiting  to  be  towed  back  to  Listvenitz  for 
a  fresh  convoy.  Such  was  the  scene  from  our  rest- 
house  on  the  hill.  Has  the  reader  ever  seen  the  village 
of  Olovelly,  in  Devonshire  ?  If  so,  let  him  substitute 
pines  for  oak  and  beech-trees,  unpaved  paths  for 
cobbled  streets,  wooden  huts  for  stone  houses,  and 
he  has  seen  Monshafskaya  as  I  saw  it  that  bright 
Auofust  momino^,  when  for  the  first  time  I  looked 
on  the  waters  of  the  Holy  Sea  of  Siberia,  for 
by  this  name  alone  is  Lake  Baikal  known  by 
the  natives  inhabiting  its  shores.  To  call  it  a 
lake  to  a  Siberian  is  an  insult.  He  will  invari- 
ably correct  you  with  the  rebuke,  "  I  suppose 
you  mean  our  Sea."  Among  the  peasantry  it 
is  believed  to  bring  dire  misfortune  on  any 
one  daring  to  call  it  by  any  other  name.  Lake 
Baikal  was  first  discovered  by  one  Ivanoff,  who, 
travelling  downwards  from  Yakoutsk,  was  pro- 
specting for  silver.  Like  Magellan,  "  He  was  the 
first   that    ever  burst  into  that   silent  sea,"   about 


KIAKIITA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  307 

the  year  1600.     The  first  caravan  crossed  the  lake 
from  China  to  Europe  a.d.  1670. 

Lake  Baikal  is  three  hundred  and  fifty  miles  long 
by  about  forty  at  the  lowest  point,  and  is  the  largest 
fresh- water  lake  in  Asia,  or  indeed  the  whole  world, 
America  excepted.  The  most  peculiar  characteristic 
about  Baikal  is  its  enormous  depth.  Soundings  have 
been  taken  in  parts  of  four  thousand  feet  in  the 
centre,  in  other  parts  lines  of  five  thousand  and  six 
thousand  feet  have  been  used,  but  no  bottom  found, 
and  some  of  the  smaller  rivers  running  into  the  lake, 
streams  of  fifty  or  sixty  yards  broad,  have  been 
found  to  be  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  deep. 
There  are  many  rivers  running  into  the  Baikal,  but 
only  one  that  runs  out,  the  "  Angara,"  which,  eventu- 
ally joining  the  Yenisei  river,  flows  into  the  gulf  of 
that  name  in  the  Arctic  Ocean,  thus  traversing 
nearly  half  the  breadth  of  Asia.  The  current  of 
this  immense  body  of  water  is  so  impetuous  that 
although  the  distance  is  only  thirty  miles,  vessels 
sometimes  take  four  and  even  five  days  to  do  the 
distance  from  Irkoutsk  to  Lake  Baikal,  which  is 
sixty  feet  higher  above  sea-level  than  the  capital  of 
Eastern  Siberia,  the  lake  being  twelve  hundred  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea.     Baikal  is  occasionally 


368  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

visited  by  terrible  hurricanes.  On  such  occasions 
the  loss  of  life  is  great,  for  the  ramshackle  boats  in 
which  the  natives  fish  soon  go  to  pieces  in  a  sea. 
The  Garra  or  mountain  wind  is  the  one  most 
dreaded  by  the  natives,  and  when  this  is  blowing 
even  the  steamers  do  not  put  out.  Lake  Baikal 
that  derives  its  name  of  Holy  Sea,  from  the  fact 
our  Saviour,  when  visiting  this  part  of  Asia, 
is  supposed  to  have  mounted  to  the  summit 
of  Olkon,  an  island  about  sixty  miles  long  by 
fifteen  broad,  in  the  middle  of  the  lake,  and  sur- 
veyed the  surrounding  countries.  Having  blessed 
the  land  on  the  north  and  west,  He  turned  to  the 
south-west,  and,  stretching  out  His  hands,  cried, 
''Beyond  this  shall  be  desolation."  On  this  account, 
say  the  natives,  the  "  Dauria  "  region  is  so  sterile 
that  not  a  grain  of  corn  will  grow  there. 

I  think  I  am  right  in  saying  that  Baikal  is  the 
only  fresh- water  lake  in  the  world  wherein  seals  are 
found.  About  two  thousand  are  killed  annually, 
and  sent  to  Irkoutsk  for  sale.  Bell,  the  English 
traveller,  1788  (the  first  Englishman,  by  the 
way,  who  ever  got  as  far  east  as  this),  men- 
tions this  circumstance,  and  says,  "  Bay-Kail 
(sic),  is  furnished  with  excellent  fish,  particularly 


KiAKHTA  TO  irkoutse:.  369 

sturgeon.  It  also  produces  great  numbers  of 
seals,  wliose  skins  are  preferred  in  quality  to 
those  caught  in  salt  water.  I  am  of  opinion 
that  both  the  seals  in  Bay  Kail  came  originall}^ 
from  the  Northern  Ocean,  as  the  communication 
between  them  is  open,  though  the  distance  be  very 
great."  The  above,  though  written  in  1788,  is 
perhaps  the  most  likely  explanation  of  the  matter. 

Atkinson,  the  English  traveller,  is  the  only  Euro- 
pean who  has  ever  thoroughly  explored  Baikal. 
He  made,  forty  years  since,  a  most  interesting 
journey  from  its  northern  to  its  southern  extremity 
in  an  open  boat,  a  hazardous  experiment,  for  Baikal 
is  a  miniature  Mediterranean  in  the  way  of 
sudden  and  violent  squalls.  Atkinson  found  the 
shores  surrounding  the  lake  at  the  southern  end  to 
be  chiefly  granite  cliffs  capped  by  dense  forests. 
Proceeding  due  north,  the  granite  changes  to  an 
imperfect  conglomeration  of  stone,  the  beach  being 
composed  of  mixed  debris.  The  northern  shore  is 
the  steepest,  and  its  precipices  nine  hundred  to 
twelve  hundred  feet  high,  with  soundings  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  a  boat's  length  from 
their  base.  "  The  whole  country  round,"  says  the 
same    traveller,    "  shows    unmistakable    signs     of 

B  b 


370  FROM    PEKTN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

volcanic  eruption,  and  in  the  ravines  are  lava  strata 
of  great  magnitude.  This  is  probably  the  outcome 
of  an  extinct  crater  to  the  north  of  the  Baikal  chain 
in  whose  neighbourhood  hot  mineral  springs  are 
plentiful. 

M.  Menshikoff,  an  Irkoutsk  tea-merchant,  was  the 
first  to  introduce  steamers  on  Lake  Baikal.  The 
passage,  as  it  was  made  forty  years  ago,  in  open 
boats,  was  very  dangerous,  and  travellers  were 
frequently  obliged  to  remain  for  days  exposed  to 
great  hardships,  without  being  able  to  approach  the 
land.  The  cost  of  the  steamer  was  of  course  enor- 
mous, the  engines  having  to  come  over  four  thousand 
miles  from  St.  Petersburg.  But  the  difficulty  was 
at  length  surmounted,  and  rather  more  than  twenty 
years  ago  bi-weekly  steam  communication  between 
the  eastern  and  western  shores  of  the  lake  was 
established,  which  has  been  kept  up  ever  since.  There 
were,  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  two  steamers  on  the 
lake,  and  another  building  at  Listvenitz.  The 
navigation  of  the  Baikal  is  suspended  abont  the  end 
of  October,  sometimes  earlier,  according  to  the 
severity  of  the  season.  Although  there  has  been  a 
road  within  late  years  round  the  southern  side  of 
the  lake,  it  is  rarely  used,   and    the   usual   mode 


KIAKHTA   TO   IKKOUTSK.  371 

of  crossing*  iu  winter  is  by  sleigh.  The  ice  is 
over  seven  feet  thick,  so  there  is  no  danger  of 
immersion,  although  I  must  confess  I  should  not 
care  to  do  the  journey  myself.  In  mid- winter,  when 
the  ice  is  in  good  condition,  the  distance  of  thirty 
miles  across  is  frequently  done  in  two  to  three 
hours,  but  in  the  spring,  huge  cracks  appear 
in  the  track,  which  impede  the  horses  a  good  deal. 
There  were  also  formerly  rest-stations  at  intervals 
of  every  seven  or  eight  miles,  but  on  one 
occasion,  the  ice  melting  suddenly,  one  of  them 
was  found  missing,  since  which  the  traveller 
embarks  upon  the  frozen  waters  with  no  prospect 
of  rest  or  refresment  till  he  gets  to  the  other 
side. 

The  steamer  hove  in  sight  about  mid-day  with  a 
large  convict  barge  in  tow.  By  two  o'clock  she 
was  alongside  the  jetty,  and  we  walked  down  to 
see  the  prisoners  land.  Thirty  or  forty  Cossacks, 
with  loaded  rifles,  stood  in  a  double  row  at 
the  gangway,  and  as  soon  as  the  huge,  uuwieldj^ 
barge  was  safely  moored,  some  three  hundred 
convicts  stepped  on  to  the  landing-stage.  All  wore 
the  prison  dress,  a  long  loose  grey  cloak  covering  a 
coarse  drab  suit,  and  many  wore  leg-irons.     There 

£  b  2 


372  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

were  no  political  prisoners  or  women  among  this 
batcli,  though  pretty  nearly  every  race  of  Asiatic  or 
European  Russia  was  represented.  Swarthy  Cau- 
casians, Kirghiz  Tartars,  Jews  from  Odessa,  thieves 
from  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg,  every  race  and 
age,  from  beardless  boys  to  decrepit  old  men,  were 
represented.  One  got  callous  to  it  after  a  time, 
but  my  first  meeting  with  a  gang  of  prisoners  en 
route  to  the  mines  was  one  I  shall  never  forget. 
One  poor  old  fellow  especially  excited  sympathy : 
a  man  of  sixty  or  seventy  years  old,  with  a  refined, 
aristocratic  face,  who  had  evidently  seen  better  days, 
and  who  could  scarcely  stagger  along  under  his 
heavy  chains.  It  would  have  been  ridiculous,  had  it 
not  been  pitiable,  to  see  the  little  luxuries  the  old 
fellow  had  provided  himself  with  :  a  little  brass  tea- 
pot, a  bag  of  tea  slung  round  his  neck,  a  loaf  of 
white  bread  in  his  arms,  and  a  huge  umbrella  !  At 
length  the  hulk  was  empty,  the  officer  gave  the  word, 
"  Quick  march,"  and  the  long  grey  procession  filed  off 
up  the  hill  and  into  the  drab-coloured  prison,  which 
the  gang  we  had  seen  in  the  morning  had  just 
vacated  for  their  use.  The  incident  cast  quite  a 
gloom  over  our  spirits,  and  I  remembered  for  man}- 


KIAKHTA    TO   IRKOUTSK.  373 

days  the  sad,  wistful  look  tlie  poor  old  fellow 
gave,  as  he  entered  the  prison-gate,  at  the  bright 
blue  waters  of  the  lake,  beyond  which  lay  the 
home  he  would  never  see  again — for  his  crime 
was  forgery — his  sentence,  life  at  the  gold-mines 
of  Nertchinsk. 

It  was  nearly  six  o'clock  before  we  got  away,  for 
there  were  three  tarantasses  besides  our  own  to  be 
hoisted  on  board.  The  fare  across  was  not  ruinous, 
eight  roubles  first,  and  five  roubles  second  class,  the 
freight  of  the  tarantass  being  twelve  roubles.  I  was 
rather  relieved  at  this,  for  funds  were  running, 
uncomfortably  short,  a.nd  I  did  not  relish  the  idea  of 
being  stranded  on  the  road.  Counting  our  combined 
purses,  we  found  the  amount  was  under  forty 
roubles,  and  we  were  still  more  than  thirty  miles 
from  Irkoutsk,  and  a  night's  lodging  to  pay. 
Our  course  was  an  oblique  one  across  the  lake 
about  W.S.W.  to  Listvenitz,  near  the  mouth  of  the 
river  Angara.  Some  distance  from  the  shore  the 
water  became  marvellously  transparent.  From  the 
bows,  before  the  ripple  had  disturbed  the  surface, 
one  could  distinguish  large  fish  swimming  about 
at  least  thirty  feet  down,  so  clear  was  the  water. 


374  FEOM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

The    steamer,  though    crowded   with   people,    was 
clean  and  well  appointed.     There  was  no  food  on 
board,  thougli  a  huge  samovar,  flanked  by  glasses, 
hissed  in  the  cabin,  for  the  use  of  those  who  wished 
to  make  tea. 

It  became  very  cold  after  sundown,  and  we 
retired  to  the  tarantass  forward,  where,  the  head 
being  to  the  wind,  we  kept  pretty  warm.  In  the 
hold  were  twenty  convicts  returning  to  their 
homes  after  a  captivity  of  twenty  years  at 
Nertchinsk  and  Chita.  One  of  them,  who  looked 
at  least  fifty,  was,  lie  told  Radovitch,  only  thirty- 
three,  and  had  been  in  the  mines  ever  since  he 
was  sixteen.  All  were  still  in  prison  dress,  and 
seemed  rather  ashamed  of  mixing^  witli  the  other 
passengers.  When  it  became  dark,  however,  they 
lost  their  shyness,  and,  seated  in  a  ring  on  deck, 
sang  several  prison  songs — melancholy,  dirge- 
like airs  in  the  minor  key.  One  appeared  to 
be  a  great  favourite,  for  passengers  and  sailors 
alike  joined  in  the  chorus.  It  was,  Radovitch  told 
us,  composed  originally  by  a  prisoner,  the  refrain 
being,  "  Whither  leads  the  dark  road  of  Siberia  ?  " 
and  was  so  weird  and  beautiful,  that  it  rang  in  my 
ears  for  days  afterwards. 


KIAKHTA    TO   IRKOUTSK.  375 

The  passengers  on  board  were  of  a  mixed  kind, 
but  civil  and  good-humoured.  It  was  rather 
trying,  till  one  got  used  to  it,  being  stared  at  in  our 
tarantasses  like  wild  beasts  in  a  show,  but  one  got 
used  to  it  in  time.  After  all  it  was  only  natural, 
for  few  of  our  fellow-passengers  had  ever  seen  an 
Englishman  before.  There  were  many  Jews 
among  them  :  fat,  greasy  fellows,  with  large  gold 
thumb-rings,  and  flowing  hair,  and  some  of  the 
loveliest  children  I  ever  beheld.  One,  a  little  girl 
of  about  fourteen,  with  very  light  flaxen  hair,  the 
lightest  of  blue  eyes,  and  thick,  black  lashes,  was  a 
perfect  picture. 

"We  arrived  at  Listvenitz  about  1  a.m.,  having 
taken  about  eight  hours  to  do  the  passage,  a  little 
more  than  the  distance  from  Dover  to  Calais  !  On 
landing  we  were  ushered  into  the  Custom-House,  a 
long,  bare  room,  where  our  luggage  was  minutely 
examined,  two  Cossacks  being  on  guard  the  while 
to  see  that  no  one  escaped  inspection.  It  was 
not  the  brief  examination  we  are  accustomed  to  in 
Europe.  A  Customs'  officer,  gorgeous  in  green  and 
gold,  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  called  out 
our  names  one  by  one,  each  having  to  bring  up  his 
luggage  as  best  he  could,  for  there  were  no  porters. 


376  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

As  there  were  over  one  liimdred  passengers,  this 
performance  lasted  some  hours,  no  one  being 
allowed  to  leave  till  every  box  in  the  place  had  been 
opened  and  carefully  searched.  By  the  time  we  got 
to  the  rest-house  it  was  nearly  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  It  was  a  dirty,  ill-smelling  place,  and  we 
were  devoured  by  vermin,  but  managed  to  get  some- 
thing to  eat  before  we  turned  in,  the  only  food 
we  had  tasted  the  whole  day  being  a  couple  of 
eggs  and  some  black  bread  at  mid-day. 

But  another  diflSculty  now  arose.  The  duty  that 
we  had  paid  on  tobacco,  &c.,  had  dwindled  our  little 
store  down  to  ten  roubles  and  a  few  kopeks.  The 
bare  posting-fare  to  Irkoutsk  was,  we  ascertained, 
six  roubles,  and  there  would  be  our  night's  lodging 
to  pay,  which  would  come  to  five  roubles  more  at 
the  very  least.  Money  was  awaiting  us  at  Irkoutsk, 
but  how  to  get  at  it  ?  There  was  but  one  way 
out  of  the  dilemma;  one  of  us  must  remain  at  List- 
venitz  while  the  other  posted  on  to  Irkoutsk  and 
procured  the  needful.  Radovitch  entering  while  we 
were  discussing  the  subject,  overheard  part  of  our 
conversation.  "You  are  short  of  money?"  said 
the  friendly  Russian ;  "  why  did  you  not  ask  me 
before  ?  "  at  the  same  time  producing  a  fifty  rouble 


KIAKHTA   TO   IRKOUTSK.  OU 

note.  "  Here,  take  this ;  you  can  pay  me  back  at 
Irkoutsk,  or  where  you  like.  I  am  off  now.  We 
shall  meet  again  to-morrow.  I  suppose  you  will 
go  to  the  Moskovskaya,"  and  he  had  gone,  and 
we  heard  him  jingle  away  in  his  tarantass  before 
we  could  stammer  out  a  word  of  thanks. 

A  message  came  shortly  after  from  the  Chief  of 
Police,  to  say  that  he  would  call  at  eleven  o'clock,  and 
that  we  must  not  leave  Listvenitz  till  our  tarantass 
had  been  searched.  This  was  vexing,  as,  the 
Customs'  examination  over,  we  had  replaced  all  our 
luggage,  and  any  one  who  has  ever  packed  one  of 
these  vehicles  knows  what  a  weary,  heart-breaking 
job  it  is.  However,  it  was  no  use  grumbling,  and 
we  set  to  work  and  laid  the  things  open  on  the 
ground,  pending  the  great  man's  arrival. 

He  turned  up  about  mid-day,  a  tall,  strapping 
fellow,  with  long  Dundreary  whiskers,  accompanied 
by  his  interpreter,  a  Polish  exile.  The  exa- 
mination took  over  an  hour,  for  he  looked  at 
everything,  more,  I  soon  saw,  from  curiosity  than 
anything  else.  My  journal  especially  attracted  his 
attention. 

"  Read  some  of  it  out,"  he  said  to  his  attendant, 
settling  himself  comfortably  on  the  steps  of  the  rest- 


378  FROM    PEKIN    TO   CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

house  and  lighting  a  cigarette.  I  was  somewhat 
nervous  at  this,  having  expressed  my  views  as  to 
Russian  habits  and  customs  rather  freely  since 
leaving  Kiakhta.  The  Pole  opened  the  book  at 
the  very  place  I  wished  him  to  avoid,  but,  to  my 
surprise,  he  turned  hastily  over  to  the  next  page, 
winking  covertly  at  me  as  he  did  so,  and  I  breathed 
again.  On  being  told  there  was  nothing  offensive 
in  the  MS.,  his  chief  became  qnite  jocose  and 
friendly,  insisted  on  our  drinking  with  him,  pumping 
me  the  while  as  much  as  he  was  able  on  the 
subject  of  India.  What  area  was  it?  what  popula- 
tion? were  there  many  railways?  Did  we  allow 
Russians  to  enter  ?  &c.  "  Tell  him,"  he  said  as  he 
rose  to  go,  and  I  had  answered  as  best  I  could 
his  somewhat  vague  questions,  "  that  we  shall  take 
it  from  them  some  day,"  with  which  polite  remark 
he  bade  us  good  day,  swaggered  away  down  the 
street,  and  we  saw  him  no  more. 

Listvenitz  is  built  in  a  sort  of  lagoon,  or  land- 
locked habour.  It  is  used  by  the  people  of 
Irkoutsk  as  a  watering-place  in  summer,  and 
there  were  many  pretty  villas  and  lodging-houses 
built   about  en  the  beach,  which  is  of  hard  sand, 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  379 

and  affords  capital  bathing,  though  it  shelves  in  a 
fe^  feet  to  a  depth  of  twenty  or  thirty  fathoms. 
We  were  to  have  horses  at  six  that  evening,  and 
took  a  stroll  after  the  mid-day  meal  to  a  low  hill 
about  a  mile  distant,  whence  there  was  a  pic- 
turesque view  of  the  little  cluster  of  pretty 
villas  nestling  in  woods  and  gardens.  It  was  a 
lovely  day,  with  a  blue,  cloudless  sky ;  and  the 
civilized  surroundings,  picturesque  peasantry,  and 
great  sheet  of  water  sparkling  in  the  sunshine, 
reminded  one  not  a  little  of  Swiss  or  Italian  lake 
scenery. 

The  Polish  interpreter  called  on  us  in  the 
afternoon,  bringing  with  him  a  book  of  photo- 
graphs, the  portraits  of  brethren  who  were 
suflfering  in  the  cause  of  freedom.  His  story 
was,  if  true,  a  remarkable  one.  Sent  to 
Vologda  in  European  Russia  in  1867  for  a  trifling 
offence,  he  managed  to  escape  to  Odessa,  and 
thence  to  New  York,  returning  to  Paris  in 
1870  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the  Commune. 
He  again  managed  to  escape  when  the  Imperial 
troops  entered  Paris,  and  luckily,  for  himself,  for  if 
caught  he  would  assuredly  have  been  shot.    After  a 


380  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

short  residence  in  Geneva,  lie  was  sent  by  his  society 
on  a  secret  mission  to  St.  Petersburg  ;  but  this  time 
his  luck  deserted  him,  and  he  was  captured  and  sent 
to  Siberia,  first  to  the  mines  of  Kara,  then  to 
Listvenitz  for  life.  Among  the  photographs  was  one 
of  a  young  and  pretty  girl  about  eighteen  or  twenty 
years  old.  "  That,"  said  the  Pole  with  pride,  "is 
Vera  Figner,  who  shot  dead  the  Police  Commissary  of 
Odessa.  She  is  my  sister-in-law,"  he  added.  "  This 
is  ray  wife,  who  was  concerned  in  Alexander's 
assassination.  "Would  you  like  to  know  her  ?  My 
house  is  but  a  stone's  throw  from  here."  But  we 
politely  refused  the  invitation,  and,  to  our  great 
relief,  he  shortly  afterwards  left  us,  with  the  remark, 
"  Well,  good-bye,  gentlemen,  you  have  been  a  ray 
of  sunshine  in  my  life.  It  is  dark  enough,  God 
knows,  but  I  do  not  despair.  I  hope  to  do  some 
good  loorh  yet !  "  He  was  a  mean-looking,  insig- 
nificant little  fellow,  but  we  heard  afterwards  at 
Irkoutsk  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  dangerous 
characters  in  Siberia.  His  greatest  punishment 
was,  he  told  us,  being  shunned  by  everybody  in  the 
place  (for  he  was  the  only  exile  there)  and  being 
deprived    of   books    and    papers.      Murderer    and 


KIAKHTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  381 

Nihilist  though  he  was,  one  could  not  help  pitying 
him. 

Our  horses  arrived  about  seven  o'clock,  and  after 
a  final  examination  of  the  tarantasa,  we  rattled 
away  from  Listvenitz,  hoping  to  reach  Irkoutsk  by 
midnight.  The  country  west  of  Baikal  is  densely 
wooded,  but  not  mountainous.  There  is  a  good 
deal  of  cultivated  ground  between  the  mouth  (or 
rather  source)  of  the  Angara  and  the  city,  and 
the  country  is  fairly  populated.  The  road,  too,  was 
in  better  order  than  any  we  had  yet  experienced, 
and  we  dashed  along  merrily  to  the  end  of  the 
second  stage,  Patrone,  where  our  high  spirits 
underwent  a  slight  check.  We  could  have  no 
horses  till  5  a.m.  It  was  now  ten  o'clock,  and 
though  only  eighteen  versts  from  Irkoutsk,  we  were 
compelled  to  sleep,  or  rather  wait  in  the  filthy  post- 
house  till  morning.  It  is  curious  that  we  invariably 
found,  throughout  our  journey,  the  nearer  the  town 
the  dirtier  the  post-house.  The  one  or  two  first 
stages  from  Irkoutsk,  on  the  other  side,  were  simply 
uninhabitable. 

The  road  follows  the  banks  of  the  Angara  all 
the  way  to  Irkoutsk.     The  river,  rather  more  than 


382  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAXD. 

a  mile  wide  at  the  mouth,  rolls  down  a  tremendous 
volume  of  water,  a  steep  incline  at  the  inlet,  and 
forms  a  huge  rapid  nearly  three  miles  long.  Half- 
way across  is  the  "  Shaman  Kamen,"  or  Spirit  Stone, 
a  bare  rock  nearly  hidden  in  the  seething  mass 
of  foam  and  breakers.  There  is  a  legend  among 
the  peasantry,  that  were  this  island  washed  away, 
Lake  Baikal  would  overflow,  destroy  the  capital, 
and  turn  the  whole  Angara  Valley  into  one  huge  sea. 
The  "  Chamans,"  a  sect  now  nearly  died  out,  believe 
that  the  souls  of  the  departed  are  transported  to 
the  "  Shaman  Kamen,"  and  are  compelled  to  cling 
for  a  night  to  the  steep,  slippery  rock ;  a  very  diflS- 
cult  proceeding.  If  they  succeed  in  remaining  till 
the  following  morning,  they  are  saved,  and  received 
into  eternal  bliss ;  if  not,  they  are  engulfed  for  ever. 
Seen  from  above  the  rapids,  the  seething  mass 
of  white  foam,  the  precipitous,  rugged  cliffs  on 
either  side,  thickly  clad  with  pine  and  cedars, 
and  the  blue  waters  of  the  lake  stretching  away  to 
the  foot  of  the  Amar  Daban,  with  itssnowy  summit 
on  the  Trans-Baikal  shore,  combine,  on  a  clear 
evening,  to  make  this  one  of  the  most  wird  and 
beautiful  panoramas  imaginable. 


KIAKUTA    TO    IRKOUTSK.  383 

"We  called  for  the  samovar,  and  beguiled  the  weary 
hours  with  "  chi  "  till  past  midnight.  The  post- 
house  swarmed  with  vermin,  and  we  here  made  the 
acquaintance,  for  the  first  time,  of  a  small  white 
bug,  peculiar  to  Siberia.  Its  bite  is  very  poisonous, 
and  sets  up  a  state  of  intolerable  irritation  and 
inflammation,  for  it  burrows  under  the  skin. 
]S"othing  but  copious  applications  of  ammonia  gave 
relief,  and  our  clothes  and  bodies  swarmed  with 
tliese  when  we  reached  Irkoutsk  a  few  hours  later. 
I  give  these  details,  which  may  seem  repulsive  to  the 
reader,  to  show  exactly  the  amount  of  discomfort 
one  has  to  go  through  in  the  shape  of  minor 
annoyances  as  well  as  greater  ones  on  the  great 
Post-Road. 

About  daybreak  the  jingle  of  collar-bells 
announced  the  arrival  of  the  horses.  The  landscape 
now  became  less  wooded,  the  broad  blue  river 
running  through  fields  of  rye  and  barley,  while 
the  banks  on  either  side  of  the  road  were  covered 
with  lilies  of  the  valley  and  violets,  which  deliciously 
perfumed  the  clear  morning  air.  Presently  we 
left  the  river,  to  emerge  on  a  sandy  plain.  Here 
our  driver   alighted,  and  removed  the    yoke-bells, 


384  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

a  law  prevailing  in  Siberia  whicli  forbids  their 
being  used  in  cities.  A  few  minutes  more  and  we 
were  well  in  sight  of  the  white  buildings,  golden 
domes,  and  green  roofs,  of  the  capital  of  Eastern 
Siberia,  Irkoutsk. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

IRKOUTSK. 

There  is  probably  no  country  in  the  world  of 
which  the  generality  of  English  people  are  so 
ignorant  as  Siberia.  The  very  word  conveys  to  the 
mind  visions  of  frozen  steppes  and  lonely  pine  forests, 
with  nothing  to  break  the  monotony  of  the  white 
and  dreary  landscape  but  an  occasional  gang  of 
prisoners  or  pack  of  wolves.  Many  asked,  on  my 
return  to  England,  if  I  had  not  suffered  terribly 
from  the  cold,  and  seemed  quite  surprised  to  hear 
that  the  Siberian  climate  is,  in  summer,  often  too 
warm  to  be  pleasant,  that  the  country  itself  is  in 
many  parts  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  beautiful  in 
the  world. 

The  city  of  Irkoutsk,  which  has  a  population  of 
over  50,000,  was  founded  in  the  year  1680,  and  is 
situated  on  a  peninsula  formed  by  the  confluence  of 

c  c 


386  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

two  rivers,  the  Angara,  wliicb,  rising  in  Lake  Baikal, 
joins  the  river  Yenisei  just  below  Yeniseisk,  and 
falls  with  it  into  the  frozen  ocean,  and  the  small  and 
less  important  Irkout  River.  In  spring,  when  the 
Angara  is  swollen  by  the  breaking  of  the  ice  in 
Lake  Baikal,  inundations  at  Trkoutsk  are  frequent, 
and  cause  great  destruction  to  life  and  property. 

The  great  province  or  Government  of  L'koutsk  is 
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Pacific  Ocean,  on  the 
north  by  the  Frozen  Ocean,  on  the  west  by  the 
province  of  Tomsk  (Western  Siberia),  and  on  the 
south  by  the  vast  chain  of  mountains  known  as  the 
Altai  range,  which  divide  Siberia  from  the  Chinese 
possessions  in  Mongolia.  The  Government  is 
divided  into  four  districts,  viz.  Irkoutsk  proper, 
Nertchinsk,  Yakoutsk  and  Okhotsk.  A  great  pro- 
portion of  the  inhabitants  of  this  enormous  area 
are  Toungouses  and  Yakouts,  wandering  semi- 
savage  tribes  who  live  by  hunting  and  fishing, 
and  of  which  the  Toungouses  are  the  most 
numerous.  The  residence  of  the  Governor-General 
of  Eastern  Siberia,  who  at  the  time  of  our  visit  was 
General  Ignatieff,  a  brother  of  the  famous  diplomat, 
is  at  Irkoutsk. 


lEKOUTSK.  387 

The  climate  is,  on  tlie  whole,  good.  Irkoutsk  is 
not  nearly  so  cold  in  winter  as  many  other  Siberian 
towns.  In  summer  the  temperature  is  pleasant 
and  equable,  the  unhealthiest  time  of  year 
being  the  autumn,  when  dense  fogs  are  productive 
of  much  rheumatism  and  lung  disease,  but  as  a 
rule  the  public  health  is  excellent,  for  the  city 
is  beautifully  drained.  It  would  be  strange  were  it 
otherwise,  w4th  the  broad,  resistless  flood  of  the 
Angara  for  ever  foaming  by.  Epidemics  are  rare, 
with  the  exception  of  small  pox,  a  disease  fre- 
quently brought  to  Irkoutsk  and  other  towns  of 
Eastern  Siberia  by  tea-caravans  from  China. 
Cholera  is  unknown. 

My  ideas  of  Siberia  were,  before  I  left  Eng- 
land, extremely  vague.  It  is  a  country  in  which, 
before  I  undertook  this  voyage,  I  had  taken  but 
little  or  no  interest.  There  are  but  few  works 
written  bearing  upon  the  region  we  passed 
through.  The  only  ones  I  had  ever  read  on 
the  subject  were  "  Michel  Strogoff "  and  "  Called 
Back"!  The  reader  will  judge  for  himself  how 
faithfully  these  authors  have  portrayed  Irkoutsk, 
the  scene  of  the  "  Courier  of  the  Czar's  "  triumph, 

c  c  2 


388  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  tlie  meeting  between  "  Dr.  Ceneri,"  and 
"  Gilbert  Vanglian  !  " 

It  was  a  bright  sunny  morning,  when,  about 
8  a.m.  on  tlie  12th  of  Auofust,  we  dashed  into 
the  city,  and,  after  a  longish  drive  through  its 
])road  and  deserted  streets,  drew  up  with  a  flourish 
at  the  door  of  the  '*Moskovskaya  Podovorie,"  the 
principal  hotel.  Let  not  the  reader  imagine  a  dilapi- 
dated wooden  hut,  such  as  I  myself  had  conjured 
up  visions  of,  but  a  handsome,  four-storied  stone 
building,  with  gorgeously  furnished  apartments,  a 
lift,  electric  bells,  and  "  Table-d'hote  a  6  heures  "  ! 
As  we  ascend  the  broad,  well-carpeted  stairs,  with 
a  polite  and  white-waistcoated  manager  leading 
the  way,  while  a  gold-lace-capped  porter  follows 
with  our  luggage,  it  is  hard  to  realize  that  we 
are  still  on  the  borders  of  China,  and  over  four 
thousand  miles  from  a  railway. 

Irkoutsk  presents,  at  first  sight,  an  untidy,  un- 
finished appearance.  Like  most  Siberian  towns, 
its  buildings  are  a  strange  mixture  of  squalor 
and  grandeur.  The  majority  are  of  brick,  for  since 
the  great  fire  of  1879  a  law  has  been  passed  for- 
bidding   the    construction    of    any   more    wooden 


lEKOUTSK.  389 

dwellings.  The  consequence  is  that  the  greater  part 
of  the  city  presents  a  patch-work  appearance,  the 
lofty  mansion  of  a  millionaire  gold-miner,  with  its 
conservatories  and  gardens,  often  standing  next 
door  to  the  dilapidated  wooden  hovel  of  some 
peasant  with  half  its  roof  off,  which  has  been 
partially  saved  from  the  flames.  One's  first  feel- 
ino;  on  walkino-  throuo-h  the  streets  is  one 
of  intense  depression,  for  a  more  melancholy- 
looking  city  does  not  exist.  The  streets, 
though  wide  and  regular,  give  one  the  idea 
of  being  continually  up  for  repair.  One  looks 
instinctively  for  the  "  No  Thoroughfare "  board. 
Although  so  much  care  is  lavished  on  the  archi- 
tecture and  decoration  of  buildings,  the  streets 
are  apparently  left  to  look  after  themselves. 
Unpaved  and  uneven,  one  comes  across  holes 
that  would  play  sad  havoc  with  a  springed 
carriage,  which  article,  however,  does  not  exist 
here,  at  least  among  the  public  vehicles. 
The  pavements,  which  are  of  rough  pine  with 
light  wooden  guard-rails,  are  barely  three  feet 
wide. 

The   "  Grande    Rue "    is   the    principal    street ; 


390  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

a  thoroughfare  nearly  a  mile  long,  which  would 
not  disgrace  a  European  city,  so  far  as  build- 
ings are  concerned.  It  is  the  only  street  whence 
the  old  wooden  dwellings  have  entirely  disap- 
peared, to  give  place  to  fine,  well-built  houses 
and  Government  oflBces.  The  principal  shops  are 
situated  here,  but,  though  one  may  buy  almost 
anything  in  this  far-away  corner  of  the  globe, 
from  an  English  steam  plough  to  a  Parisian  bonnet, 
there  is  no  outward  or  visible  sign  in  any  of 
the  windows  of  the  goods  sold  within.  Merely 
a  roughly  painted  board  over  the  doorway  indi- 
cating the  name  and  business  of  the  proprietor, 
and  a  notice  to  the  effect  that  from  twelve 
o'clock  mid-day  till  three  p.m.  he  is  not  at  home. 
To  the  nakedness  of  the  shop-windows,  perhaps, 
among  other  reasons,  may  be  attributed  the  dismal 
appearance  the  place  presents.  Perhaps,  too,  the 
black  roads,  total  absence  of  trees  or  gardens,  or 
indeed  of  colour  of  any  kind,  has  much  to  do  with 
the  sense  of  depression  that  fastens  on  one  after 
ever  so  short  a  residence  in  any  Siberian  town.  I 
cannot  say  exactly  why,  but  one's  only  thought, 
after   a    couple    of   days   was   invariably,    "  "When 


IRKOUTSK.  391 

shall  I  get  away  ? "  and  this  though  the  sun 
was  shining  brightly  at  the  time,  and  the  day 
in  any  ordinary  country  would  have  been  one 
to  raise  and  enliven  the  spirits.  Here  the 
sunshine  only  served  to  reveal  more  plainly  the 
dirty,  unwashed  appearance  which  everything, 
including  the  natives,  presented. 

You  can  seldom  tell  a  Siberian  (so-called) 
gentleman  apart  from  the  lower  orders,  though 
the  income  of  the  wealthier  gold-miners  would 
enable  them  to  live  in  luxury  in  London  or 
Paris.  It  should,  one  would  think,  also  pro- 
vide them  with  an  occasional  collar  and  a  clean 
shirt  once  a  week,  but  it  doesn't.  "Wealth  in 
Siberia  apparently  makes  no  difference  to  the  garb 
of  an  individual.  All,  high  or  low,  wear  the  same 
suit  of  rusty  black ;  all  have  the  same  dirtj^, 
unkempt  look.  A  pair  of  high  boots,  with  square 
toes  and  very  high  heels,  and  small,  narrow- 
peaked  caps,  complete  the  costume.  All  look 
as  if  they  slept  in  their  clothes,  which,  by  the 
way,  they  probably  do,  for  sheets  are  unknown  in 
Siberia  (except  at  the  Moskovskaya  Podovorie), 
and  in  many  houses,  beds  also.     I  heard,  when  at 


892  FEOM    PEKIX   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

Tomsk,  of  a  gold-miner,  worth  some  thousands 
sterling  a  year,  wlio  always  slept  on  two  cliairs. 
but  at  the  same  time  imported  his  horses  and 
carriage,  grapes  and  hothouse  pines  from  St. 
Petersburg,  and  had  had  a  grand  piano  sent  out  to 
him  from  Paris.  The  women  in  Irkoutsk  dressed 
well  as  a  rule,  and  some,  but  not  many,  were  good- 
looking.  A  Siberian  lady  seldom  wears  a  hat  in 
summer,  but  a  black  or  white  silk  handkerchief 
twisted  round  the  head.  Nor  is  this  head-dress 
with  a  pretty  face  beneath  it,  by  an}^  means  unbe- 
coming. 

We  were  not  sorry  to  turn  in  to  bed  and  enjoy 
a  good  ten  hours'  rest  after  the  fatiguing  journey 
from  Kiakhta,  and  slept  none  the  less  soundly 
for  the  knowledo-e  that  when  we  woke  what  the 
Americans  call  a  good  square  feed  would  be 
awaiting  us,  a  luxury  we  had  not  enjoyed  since 
leaving  Pekin.  The  hasty  snatches  of  food  we 
got  at  Kiakhta  were  too  frequently  interrupted  by 
pugilistic  encounters  and  toasts  in  "Vodka"  to  be 
dignified  by  the  name  of  meals  ! 

A  slight  disappointment  awaited  us,  though, 
on  waking,  at  the   scanty  washing  appliances  this 


IRKOUTSK.  393 

gorgeous  hostelry  provided.  Baths  there  were  of 
course  none.  "We  did  not  expect  it,  but  we  had  at 
any  rate  looked  forward  to  a  wash-hand  basin. 
But,  the  only  appliance  furnished  was  a  small  tin 
vessel  holding  about  a  pint  of  water,  and  nailed 
up  against  the  bedroom  wall.  On  turning  a  small 
tap,  a  thin  trickling  stream  of  water  ran  out,  so 
that  by  holding  your  hands  under  it  for  half  a  minute 
or  so,  you  could  just  manage  to  wet  them  all  over, 
and  with  this,  we  had  to  manage.  One  had  at  any 
rate  the  advantage  of  privacy,  and  could  wash  (so 
to  speak)  in  one's  own  bedroom.  It  was  better 
than  at  Tomsk,  where  the  hotel  only  boasted  one 
of  these  tin  abominations,  and  it  was  fixed  up  in 
the  passage,  j;ro  bono  imhlico. 

TVe  strolled  out  in  the  evening  to  the  public 
gardens,  gardens  in  name  only,  for  the  stunted 
shrubs  are  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  trees, 
and  there  were  no  flowers  and  very  little  grass. 
The  lovely  night,  had  brought  out  all  the  elite 
of  Irkoutsk,  to  listen  to  the  band  of  a  Cossack 
regiment,  which  performed  in  a  brilliantly  lighted 
kiosk  in  the  centre  of  the  square.  But  our 
light      tweed     suits     and     high       brown     boots 


394  FROM    PEKIN    TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

attracted  so  much  attention  and  created  such 
consternation  among  the  rook-hke  garments  of 
the  inhabitants,  that  we  nearly  beat  a  hasty 
retreat.  The  temptation  of  good  music  and  a 
cigar  in  the  moonhght,  however,  was  too  much 
for  us,  and  we  remained  undeterred  by  the  searching 
and  not  altogether  complimentary  glances  of  those 
around  us,  who  seemed  to  look  upon  the  appear- 
ance of  any  stranger  in  their  midst  as  an  un- 
warrantable intrusion  and  insult.  I  am  bound  to 
say  that  for  downright  rudeness  and  vulgarity,  the 
Siberian  male,  pur  et  sim.ple,  is  unequalled.  It 
seems  the  more  strange  that  their  countrymen  west 
of  the  Ourals  are  undoubtedly,  next  the  French,  the 
most  courteous  and  polite  nation  in  the  world. 

There  are  three  distinct  classes  of  society  in 
Irkoutsk  :  the  Government  officials,  millionaire 
gold-miners,  and  tradespeople.  It  is  probably  the 
only  city  in  the  world  where  the  latter  are  in 
reality  the  most  aristocratic  portion  of  the  com- 
munity, for  the  simple  reason  that  they  are  most  of 
them  political  exiles  who,  in  Russia  or  Poland, 
were  of  good  birth  and  position  till  they  lost 
name  and  individuality  in  a  prison   number.     The 


IRKOUTSK.  395 

Government  officials  and  military  stationed  in 
Irkoutsk  form  a  clique  of  their  own,  from  which 
they  rigidly  exclude  the  gold-mining  millionaire,  a 
class  of  men  the  like  of  which  I  have  never  met, 
thank  Heaven,  out  of  Siberia. 

Most  of  the  latter  commence  life  as  common 
miners,  and  gradually  rise,  more  by  luck  than  any- 
thing else,  to  a  position  of  affluence;  indeed  many 
of  them  make  colossal  fortunes.  In  summer  they 
live  at  the  mines,  working  like  the  very  labourers 
nature  intended  them  to  be ;  but  the  early  part  of 
November  sees  them  back  in  Irkoutsk  or  Tomsk, 
as  the  case  may  be.  Then  commences  a  life  of 
unbridled  debauchery  and  dissipation,  which  only 
ends  with  the  return  of  the  spring. 

Vanity  and  snobbishness  are  the  chief  failings  of 
these  men,  who  will  not  notice  you,  though  you  may 
have  dined  with  them  the  preceding  evening,  if  you 
happen  to  be  walking,  not  driving,  in  the  street, 
or  wearing  astrakhan  instead  of  beaver.  I 
asked  one  why  he  did  not  go  to  St.  Petersburg 
or  Paris  and  enjoy  his  enormous  income  instead 
of  burying  himself  in  the  wilds  of  Asia.  The 
reply    was     characteristic :    "  Here   in    Irkoutsk    I 


396  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND, 

am  a  great  man,  what  sliould  I  be  in  Paris 
or  St.  Petersburg  ? "  I  knew,  but  did  not  tell 
bim. 

The  find  of  gold  is  yearly  increasing  in  Siberia. 
It  is  found  in  large  quantities  at  Nertchinsk  and 
Kara  in  the  Trans-Baikal  districts,  but  the  most  pro- 
ductive mines  are  those  lying  around  Yeneseisk, 
Kansk,  and  the  sources  of  the  great  Lena  River, 
Yuz  and  Abakansk  in  Southern  Siberia.  Any  one 
(being  a  Russian  subject)  may  work  the  gold,  but 
all  that  is  found  must  be  sold  to  Government  only, 
a  private  individual  discovered  with  nuggets  or  gold 
dust  in  his  possession  is  severely  punished,  be  he 
owner  or  the  lowest  workman  in  the  mine.  At 
first  sio'ht  the  rent  of  a  mine  in  Siberia  seems 
absurdly  low.  For  instance  the  Yuz  Gold-field  in 
Southern  Siberia,  a  tract  of  land  five  versts  long  by 
four  broad,  is  leased  to  the  workers  at  300  roubles  ^ 
per  annum.  On  the  other  hand,  the  royalty 
is  high,  and  the  cost  of  labour  enormous.  The 
commonest  miner  earns  his   1800  to  2000  roubles 

'  The  word  "  Eouble  "  is  derived  from  the  Eussian  word  Roupit 
"  to  cut,"  so  called  because  up  to  four  hundred  years  ago  the 
Ivussians  used  bar  silver  as  coinago. 


IRKOUTSK.  397 

during  tlie  season,  wliich  lasts  from  April  to  the 
middle  or  end  of  October,  according  to  the  severity 
or  mildness  of  the  weather. 

But  the  outlay  is  well  worth  it.  Two  mine- 
owners  round  Krasnoiarsk  made,  in  less  than  ten 
years,  over  two  million  pounds  sterling,  and  there 
is  now  in  Irkoutsk  a  M.  Trapeznikoff  who  is  worth 
his  four  millions  at  the  very  least.  The  latter, 
a  bachelor  under  fifty  years  of  age,  hardly  ever 
leaves  his  palace  at  Irkoutsk,  except  for  a  few 
weeks  in  the  summer  to  visit  the  mines.  He  is, 
unlike  the  majority  of  his  confreres,  an  educated 
man  and  a  gentleman.  Here  is  a  chance  for 
mothers  with  marriageable  daughters.  The  journey 
to  Irkoutsk  will  be  easily  made  in  another  year 
or  so  by  railway  from  Tomsk. 

It  seems  a  pity  that  millions  of  money  should 
be  thrown  away  on  such  savages.  Though  there 
is  plenty  of  sport  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood, 
good  deer  and  bear  shooting,  and  excellent  salmon 
fishing  in  the  Angara,  they  never  dream  of  taking 
out  a  gun  or  rod.  The  millionaires  of  Irkoutsk 
have,  with  few  exceptions,  but  little  idea  of  real 
comfort.     You  call  upon  one  of  these  Siberian  Van- 


SOS  FEOM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

derbilts  at  11  a.m.,  and  he  will  produce  cham- 
pagne, and  be  offended  if  you  refuse  to  drink  with 
him.  Dine  Av-ith  him,  and  though  you  may  be 
raging  with  thirst,  you  will  only  get  Kiimmel, 
Chartreuse,  or  sticky  messes  of  a  like  nature, 
to  wash  down  your  dinner,  though  it  be  prepared 
by  a  "  Chef  "  from  Paris,  in  receipt  of  a  higher 
salary  than  many  an  English  rector.  Stay  the  night 
with  your  host,  and  you  will  be  shown  to  a  bedroom 
gorgeously  furnished,  and  a  chef-d'oBUvre  of  the  up- 
holsterer's art,  replete  with  every  luxury  that  money 
can  buy,  with  one  exception  :  you  will  search  in  vain 
for  a  bed,  and  must  turn  in,  as  you  are,  clothes 
and  all,  on  the  sofa.  Look  under  the  thick 
Turkey  carpets,  and  you  will  find  the  flooring  an 
inch  thick  with  dust,  and,  behind  the  curtains,  the 
plate-glass  windows  coated  with  dirt ;  comfort  and 
cleanliness  everywhere  given  up  to  ostentation  and 
swagger.  In  one  house  that  I  dined  at,  an 
enormous  gold  nugget  was  placed  on  the  table,  and 
used  as  an  ash-tray,  our  host  announcing  in  a  loud 
voice  that  its  use  in  this  capacity  lost  him  annually 
300/.  sterling  in  interest !  We  had  a  couple  of 
introductions  to  these   merchant-princes,  but  only 


lEKOUTSK.  399 

handed  one,  fearing  tliat  on  a  second  occasion  our 
temper  might  get  the  better  of  our  good  manners. 
On  our  entry  into  the  drawing-room,  onty  the  hostess 
and  her  daughters  favoured  us  by  shaking  our  hands.. 
The  men  stood  round,  made  remarks  to  each  other 
on  our  personal  appearance,  and  every  now  and 
then  burst  into  fits  of  half-suppressed  laughter. 
I  am  bound  to  admit  the  women  looked  ashamed  of 
their  male  relations,  as  well  they  might.  Be  it 
understood  I  am  now  talking  of  a  particular  class, 
for  among  the  Siberian  peasantry  rudeness  is  very 
rare,  and  we  met  with  nothing  but  hospitality  and 
kindness.  I  have  already  described  the  manner  in 
which  the  merchants  of  Eastern  Siberia  spend  their 
evenings.  There  is  no  difference,  except  that  in 
some  houses  the  givers  of  the  entertainment  do  pre- 
cede their  orgies  with  a  hurried  meal,  eaten  standing. 
The  sooner  over  the  better,  so  that  the  real  business 
of  the  evening,  drinking,  may  commence.  I  only 
twice  assisted  at  these  evening  parties  in  Siberia, 
once  at  Kiakhta,  and  once  at  Irkoutsk.  As  I 
have  said,  each  left  the  same  impression  on  my 
mind  as  a  head-feast  I  once  witnessed  amonsf 
a  race   of  savages  in   Central   Borneo,  who  after  a 


400  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

victory,  deliberately  got  drank  for  three  days  on  end. 
But  the  "  untutored  savage "  was  far  less  idiotic 
and  revolting  on  these  occasions  than  the  Siberian 
"  Gentleman,"  could  such  an  anomaly  as  the  latter 
exist. 

The  ladies  of  Irkoutsk   are    for   the   most  part 
lazy,    indolent   creatures,    with    no    ideas    beyond 
immoral   intrigues,    dress    (on    "which    they  spend 
thousands),    and  Zola's  novels,   which,   translated 
into  Russian,  have  an  enormous  sale  in  the  towns 
of    Siberia.      The    greater     part    of    the    day    is 
spent   in    sleeping    and    smoking    cigarettes,    for 
in  winter   they    seldom   retire  to   rest  till  five   or 
six  in  the  morning.      Though  most  of  their  houses 
boast  a  grand  piano,  the  instrument  is  solely  kept 
for    ornament,    and   seldom  opened.     Two   schools 
for  girls  have,  however,  lately  been  established,  and 
many  of  them  now  speak  French  and  German,  and 
are   well  educated    in    other    ways,    but    morality 
at  Irkoutsk  is  at  a  very  low  el)b.     One  can  scarcely 
wonder  at  it,  considering  the   frivolous,  excitable 
lives  of  the  women,  and  drunkenness  and  sensuality 
of  the  men. 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  we  found  the  society  of 
the  tradespeople  in  Irkoutsk  far  more  congenial  to 


IRKOUTSK.  401 

our  taste  than  that  of  their  so-called  superiors. 
Many  of  the  former  are  exiles  sent  to  Siberia  after 
the  Polish  insurrection  of  1862,  and  permitted  after 
their  five  years  of  imprisonment  at  Nertchinsk  or 
Kara  to  settle  and  obtain  employment  in  the  capital. 
I  met  one  (a  photographer)  who  had  had  hotels  at 
Paris  and  Warsaw  and  his  villa  on  the  Riviera 
in  happier  times,  a  charming  old  man  with  an  only 
daughter,  a  pretty  girl  of  sixteen,  who,  he  used 
to  say  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  would  probably 
never  see  dear  Poland.  His  wife  had  died  on  the 
road  in  giving  birth  to  the  child,  who,  in  sad 
memory  of  those  dark  days,  the  old  man  had  named 
"  Kara." 

We  had  many  a  laugh  together  over  the  vulgar 
eccentricities  of  his  rich  customers.  "  They  are 
terrible,  are  they  not?"  he  would  say  with  a  shrug 
oihis  shoMlderSf  ^' mais  que  voulez-vous  ?  What  can 
this  cursed  country  produce  but  men  like  that,  con- 
victs, bears,  and  wolves  !  " 

I  never  could  discover  who  my  old  friend 
was,  for,  like  most  of  his  countrymen,  he  aban- 
doned his  name  or  title  the  day  he  crossed  the 
Ourals  into  Asia.  Nor  would  he  ever  volunteer 
any    information     respecting    his    past    life ;    but 

D  d 


402  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

he  seemed,  on  the  whole,  fairly  contented  with 
his  lot.  Sixteen  years  of  exile  had  reconciled  him 
more  or  less  to  the  loss  of  the  home  he  would 
never  see  again. 

A     common     expression     among     exiles,     even 
of    a    higher    class,    when    they    want    to    fix  the 
date    of   any  past   event  is,  "  It   was    six  months 
after   I   left   prison."     "  It    was  a   year    before    I 
got  my  discharge,"    &c.      They  do   not  seem   the 
least  ashamed  of  their  incarceration  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, are  rather  proud  of  it.     The  barman  of  the 
Moskovskaya    Podovorie,    who    presided    over     a 
glittering  array  of  champagne  and  liqueur  bottles, 
smoked  ham,   caviare,   pickled    salmon,    and    other 
delicacies,  in  the  cafe  just  below  our  window,  had 
served  five    years    in  the  Nertchinsk    mine.     This 
same  cafe,  by  the  wa}^,  was  rather  a  nuisance,  for  it 
formed  the  favourite  tr^^sting-place  of  the  Jeunesse 
Boree   of  Irkoutsk  at  the  closing  of  the  theatres, 
and    they   sometimes   kept   it  up   till   four   in   the 
morning.     Another  custom  in  Siberian  towns    ex- 
tremely irritating  to  those  of  a  wakeful  disposition, 
is  the  incessant  beating  together,  by  the  watchman, 
of    two  pieces  of  metal,  which   produces  a  sharp. 


lEKOrTSK.  403 

ringing  sound.  This  noise,  which  goes  on  in 
every  street  without  intermission  from  sunset  to 
sunrise,  is  made  to  warn  thieves  and  malefactors 
that  the  police  are  on  the  alert,  a  watchman  to  every 
street.  I  could  never  understand  why  such  pains 
should  be  taken  to  herald  their  approach,  and 
fancy  some  of  our  English  burglars  would  give  a 
good  yearly  subscription  to  have  the  same  practice 
instituted. 

One  was  constantly  being  assailed  in  Irkoutsk 
by  mysterious  individuals  with  documents  which 
they  wished  delivered  to  their  friends  in  Europe. 
I  was  asked  to  do  this  by  at  least  a  dozen  suspicious- 
looking  characters,  who  forced  their  way  into  our 
room  at  the  hotel  without  knocking,  and  often  de- 
clined to  leave.  The  mention  of  the  word  "  Police," 
though  usually  had  the  desired  effect.  One  of  these 
letters  was,  I  remember,  addressed  to  a  house  in 
Greek  Street,  Soho.  I  passed  the  latter  only  the 
other  day,  and  was  sincerely  glad  that  I  had 
not  undertaken  the  commission.  Judging  from 
the  look  of  the  place,  one  would  have  stood  a 
good  chaace,  even  in  the  day-time,  of  being 
robbed    and    murdered,    to    say   nothing    of    the 

D  d  2 


404  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

clanger   of  being    cauglit    by   the    Siberian    police 
with  a  compromising  paper  in  one's  possession. 

The   exiles    do   not    have    such   a   bad   time   of 
it  as  we,  in  England,  are   generally  led  to  believe. 
Tlieir   term   of  imprisonment    over,   they  are  free 
to  come  and  go  as  they  please,  and  enjoy  absolute 
freedom  so  long  as  they  behave  themselves,  and  do 
not  give  vent  to  their  opinions  too  freely.       I  met 
many,  of  good  birth   and   position,  but  from  none 
did    I    hear    the    harrowing   tales    of  persecution 
and    cruelty    that  in    England    seem    inseparable 
from  the  very  name  of  Siberia.     Cruelty  may,  and 
no  doubt  does,  exist  in  the  convict  settlements  of 
Kara  and  JSTertchinsk  in  the  Trans-Baikal  districts, 
where    the     worst     characters    are     sent, — Black 
nihilists,    for     instance,    or    those    who    have    at- 
tempted the  life  of  the  Czar.     The  latter  do  not,  Hke 
minor  political  offenders,   get  their  ticket-of-leave, 
but    remain   in   the    mines    for    life.      There   is    a 
prevailing  impression  at  home  that  "  in  the  mines  " 
means    literally    what     the     words     convey,    that 
prisoners    are    sent    down   a  pit   to    work    all    day 
and   a  greater  part   of  the  night,  never   again    to 
see  daylight   till    they  have   become  reduced  to    a 
dying  state  by  the  poisonous  exhalations  of  quick- 


IRKOUTSK.  405 

silver.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  not  a  quirk- 
silver  mine  in  the  ivhole  of  Siberia,  those  at  Kara 
and  Nertchinsk  being  of  gold  and  silver.  Quick- 
silver may  exist  in  small  quantities,  but  is  not, 
and  never  has  been,  worked. 

In  former  days  exiles  made  the  journey  from 
European  Eussia  to  Trkoutsk,  or  whatever  dis- 
trict they  were  sentenced  to,  on  foot,  but  nearly 
half  the  journey  to  Kara  (the  most  remote  penal 
settlement  excepting  Yakoutzk  and  Sakh alien)  is 
now  done  by  steamboat  and  railway.  Prisoners 
are  sent  from  all  parts  of  Russia  to  Moscow, 
where  they  are  divided  into  gangs  of  three  or 
four  hundred.  From  Moscow  they  travel  by  rail 
to  Nijni  Novgorod,  and  thence  to  Perm  in  a 
prison  ship  or  barge.  From  Perm  the  railway 
conveys  them  to  Tinmen,  whence  another  prison 
barge  carries  them  down  the  Obi  River,  dis- 
tributing en  route  all  those  destined  for  places 
in  Western  Siberia,  until  at  Tomsk  the  remainder 
are  disembarked,  and  the  long  tramp  across  Asia 
commences.  Xo  travelling  is  done  in  winter.  The 
transportation  season  commences  on  the  15th  of 
April  and  ends  on  the  7th  of  October.  As  for  the 
march  itself,  it  is  a  very  different  thing  to  what  I 


406  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

pictured  it  before  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  liow 
well  Russian  prisoners  are  treated.  I  shall  per- 
haps hardly  be  believed  when  I  say  that  crimes 
are  sometimes  committed  by  the  lower  orders  in 
European  Russia  on  purpose  to  be  sent  to  Siberia. 
The  criminals  know  that  their  term  of  imprison- 
ment over,  they  will  (if  well  behaved)  have  a  grant 
of  land  and  a  house  given  them,  and  begin  life 
afresh  in  a  new  country. 

We  passed  many  hundreds  of  prisoners  on  the 
postroad  between  Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk,  but  in  no 
single  instance  did  I  see  a  case  of  cruelty  such .  as 
that  mentioned  by  the  author  of  "  The  Russians  of 
To-day."  Were  the  voyage  to  Siberia  anything 
like  the  following  description,  it  would  indeed  be  a 
"  Via  Dolorosa."     He  says  : — 

"  The  convicts  are  forwarded  to  Siberia  in  convoys 
which  start  at  the  commencement  of  spring,  just 
after  the  snows  have  melted  and  left  the  ground  dry. 
They  perform  the  whole  journey  on  foot,  escorted 
by  mounted  Cossacks,  who  are  armed  with  pistols, 
lances  and  long  whips,  and  behind  them  jolt  a  long 
string  of  springless  tumbrils  to  carry  those  who  fall 
lame  or  ill  on  the  way.  The  start  is  always  made 
in  the  night,  and   care  is  taken  that  the  convoys 


IRKOUTSK.  407 

shall  only  pass  through  the  towns  on  their  road 
after  dark.  Each  man  is  dressed  in  a  grey  kaftan, 
having  a  brass  numbered  plate  fastened  to  the 
breast,  knee-boots  and  a  sheep's-skin  bonnet.  He 
carries  a  rug  strapped  to  his  back,  a  mess-tin  and  a 
wooden  spoon  at  his  girdle.  The  women  have  black 
cloaks  with  hoods,  and  march  in  gangs  by  them- 
selves with  an  escort  of  soldiers  like  the  men, 
and  two  or  three  female  warders,  who  travel  in 
carts." 

In  another  part  of  the  book: — "  Nihilist  conspi- 
rators, patriotic  Poles,  and  young  student  girls 
are  all  mixed  up,  and  tramp  together  with  the 
criminals." 

This  is  indeed  a  sensational  picture,  but  I 
cannot  think  the  author  has  ever  visited  the 
scene  he  so  graphically  describes.  As  for 
"  care  being  taken  that  convoys  shall  only  pass 
through  towns  on  their  road  after  dark,"  the 
largest  gang  of  prisoners  I  ever  saw  was  in 
the  streets  of  Irkoutsk  at  three  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon.  The  Cossacks  who  accompany  the 
prisoners  are  not  mounted  at  all,  nor  are  they 
armed  with  lances  or  whips,  but  simply  loaded 
rifles. 


408  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Whenever  we  passed  a  gang,  once  a  day  on 
an  average,  the  prisoners  seemed  to  be  the  last 
thing  the  Cossacks  were  thinking  of,  as,  at  intervals 
of  about  twenty  yards,  the  latter  lounged  slowly 
along,  picking  berries  and  smoking  cigarettes,  while 
the  convicts  in  the  road-way  chatted,  laughed  and 
joked  among  themselves  (and  sometimes  with  their 
guards)  in  a  very  different  frame  of  mind  from  that 
described  by  the  author  I  have  mentioned.  The 
women,  it  is  true,  marched  with  the  men,  but  the 
bare  idea  of  "  nihilist  conspirators  "  being  "  mixed 
up  and  tramping  together "  with  the  criminals  is 
as  absurd  as  it  is  incorrect.  Political  prisoners 
are  allowed  in  Siberia  to  "mix  up"  with  no  one, 
but  sent  alone  in  charge  of  two  gendarmes  to 
whatever  town  or  village  they  are  destined.  Not 
only  are  they  kept  apart  in  the  prisons,  where 
separate  cells  are  provided  for  them,  but  also 
on  the  road.  ISTor  are  they  sent  with  gangs 
of  criminals,  or  in  the  prison  barges,  but  taken 
by  passenger-steamer  to  Tomsk,  and  thence  in  a 
four-wheeled  cart  or  telega,  to  their  destination. 
Should  ifc  be  indispensable  to  send  them  with 
a  gang,  they  travel  in  carts  at  an  interval  of 
one    or    two    miles    from    the    main    body.     The 


t/^4^ 


/^\ 


'    V;- 


IRKOUTSK.  409 

gendarmes  never  let  them  out  of  sight,  and 
allow  them  to  speak  to  no  one,  though  they  may 
retain  and  wear  their  own  clothes  till  they  arrive  at 
the  mines,  if  condemned  there.  Many  are  simply 
sent  to  reside  at  some  town  or  village  till  their 
term  of  punishment  is  over. 

Convicts  were  formerly  sent  to  Saghalien  by 
road,  via  Irkoutsk  and  the  Amur,  but  are  now 
transported  direct  from  Odessa.  I  was  told  at 
Moscow,  that  a  few  years  lience  all  criminals  and 
political  offenders  will  be  sent  to  Saghalien  by  sea 
direct,  aud  banishment  to  Siberia  become  a  thing 
of  the  past.  For  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  how- 
ever, I  cannot  vouch. 

The  usual  marching  is  two  days'  work  to  one 
day's  rest,  travelling,  on  an  average,  about  eighteen 
to  twenty  miles  a  day.  There  are  about  four  hun- 
dred prisons  in  all  in  Siberia,  in  fact  every  village 
we  passed  on  the  road  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk  had 
its  "  ostrog."  All,  from  the  shores  of  the  sea  of 
Okhotzk  to  the  Oural  mountains,  are  built  exactly 
alike  of  wood  painted  a  light  yellow,  the  roof  being 
of  a  dull  brick-red  colour.  In  each  prison  are  four 
or  more  cells  for  the  politicals.  The  criminals, 
men    and    women,    are    herded    together    in    one 


410  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

large  room,  round  the  sides  of  which  are  inclined 
wooden  planks  to  sleep  or  lounge  upon.  The 
town  prisons  are  built  of  stone,  and  are,  of  course, 
very  much  larger.  The  Alexandreffski  prison, 
for  instance,  about  thirty  miles  from  Irkoutsk, 
contains  over  twelve  hundred  convicts. 

The  number  of  exiles  sent  to  Siberia  during  the 
past  few  years  has  been  on  an  average  15,000 
to  18,000  per  annum,  including  women  and 
children.  As  a  rule,  the  lesser  criminals  are  sent 
to  settlements  in  Western  Siberia,  nihilists  and 
murderers  to  Kara  and  Saghalien,  some  of  the 
former  even  as  far  as  Yakoutsk,  which  is  said  to  be 
the  hottest  place  in  summer,  and  coldest  in  winter, 
in  the  world.  From  Kara  there  is  no  escape. 
Few  ever  try  to  get  away,  for  the  uninhabited 
regions  on  the  north,  and  desert  of  Gobi,  on  the 
south,  effectually  cut  off  all  chances  of  escape,  while 
east  and  west  a  prisoner  stands  the  chance  of  being 
shot  down  by  the  Bouriates  and  other  wandering 
tribes,  a  reward  of  three  roubles  a  head,  living  or 
dead,  being  offered  by  Government  for  runaways. 
On  the  whole,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Russian 
Government  treats  its  prisoners  far  better  than  we 
in  England  are  inclined  to  give  it  credit  for.     Even 


IRKOUTSK. 


411 


nihilists  are  fairly  well  treated,  though,  of  course, 
the  majority  of  them  are  educated  men,  and  feel  their 
degradation  far  more  keenly  than  the  hardened,  low- 
born criminals. 

As  for  the  latter,  they  have  no  complaint 
whatever  to  make  as  to  food  and  clothing;  each 
man  has  two  pounds  of  black  bread,  three- 
quarters  of  a  pound  of  meat,  and  a  small  allow- 
ance of  quass  daily.  This,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, is  what  Government  actually  allows  him. 
He  may  make  what  he  can  on  the  road  in  addi- 
tion to  this,  by  soliciting  alms  from  travellers 
and  caravans.  The  prison-gates  present  a  curious 
siorht  of  an  evenino-  half  an  hour  before  the  arrival 
of  a  convoy.  It  is  a  miniature  market,  where 
huge  baskets  of  berries,  jam,  kalachi  or  rolls, 
quass,  new  milk,  are  spread  out  in  tempting 
array  on  snow-white  tablecloths,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  fortunate  ones  who  have  succeeded  in 
obtaining  a  few  kopeks  from  compassionate  travel- 
lers. 

Imagine  a  convict  travelling  from  Portland 
to  Dartmoor  being  allowed  to  beg  at  the  rail- 
way stations !  Every  village  prison,  too,  has  its 
recreation-ground,  where  there  are  trapezes,  parallel 


412  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

bars,  and  other  gymnastic  appliances,  for  the 
amusement  of  prisoners  during  the  long  winter 
months. 

On  arrival  at  the  mines,  a  prisoner's  food 
is  increased  to  four  pounds  of  black  bread,  one 
pound  of  meat,  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of  buckwheat, 
and  tea  instead  of  quass.  Convicts  at  the  mines 
do  not  as  a  rule  complain  of  overwork,  but  of  not 
having  enough  to  do  ! 

The  summer  costume  is  a  linen  shirt,  pair  of 
trousers,  coat  of  coarse  grey  camel' s-hair,  and  flat 
peakless  cap.  Yellow  cloth  diamonds  on  the  back 
of  the  coat  indicate,  by  their  number,  the  length  of 
the  wearer's  sentence.  On  his  release  from  the 
mines,  a  plot  of  land  and  a  house  is  given  to  every 
convict  of  good  character.  Many  thus  live  with 
their  wives  and  families,  in  as  great  a  state 
of  freedom  as  any  ordinary  English  labourer, 
excepting  that  they  are  bound  to  do  a  certain 
amount  of  work  per  day  (for  which  they  are 
paid),  and  to  be  indoors  by  a  certain  hour  at 
night. 

The  punishments  inflicted  are  far  less  severe 
than  they  used  to  be.  The  "knout"  has  been 
abolished    for    some   years,    and    also    in   a    great 


lUKODTSK.  413 

measure  has  flogging,  which  is  still  practised  oc- 
casionally, but  with  rods.  It  is  only  at  Kara 
and  Sakhalien  that  the  "  plete,"  an  instrument 
nearly  as  severe  as  the  knout,  is  ever  used.  The 
former — a  lash  of  twisted  hide  about  two  feet  long, 
terminating  in  thin  lashes  a  foot  long  with 
small  leaden  balls  at  the  end — is  a  terrible  in- 
strument, and  one  which,  if  severely  wielded,  often 
results  in  the  death  of  a  prisoner.  From  twenty- 
five  to  fifty  strokes  are  usually  given,  but  if  the 
prisoner  have  friends,  they  usually  bribe  the 
executioner  to  make  the  first  blow  a  severe  one. 
A  skilful  flogger,  and  one  who  wishes  to  make  the 
convict  suffer,  draws  no  blood,  for  this  has 
the  eifect  of  relieving  pain.  Commencing  very 
gently,  he  gradually  increases  the  force  of  the 
blows  till  the  whole  of  the  back  is  covered  with 
long  swollen  wales.  In  this  case  mortification 
often  sets  in,  and  the  victim  dies.  The  plete 
is  only  used  at  Kara,  Nicolaiefsk,  and  Sakhalien, 
and  then  only  very  rarely,  and  on  the  most 
desperate  criminals. 

We  found  living  in  Irkoutsk  fairly  cheap,  with  the 
exception  of  wine  and  beer.  Light  claret  (called 
Lafitte)    is    sold    at    nine    roubles    a    bottle,  while 


414  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

English  beer  was  still  dearer.  Champagne  is  drunk 
in  enormous  quantities  by  Siberians,  but  it  is  sweet, 
mawkish  stuff.  It  was  half  as  cheap  again  as  the 
claret,  and  bore  the  most  extraordinary  brand  I  have 
ever  seen — the  English  and  American  flags  crossed 
over  a  horse  and  jockey  !  How^ever,  it  suited  the 
consumers,  who,  like  Russians,  dislike  dry  cham- 
pagne. Poultry,  fish,  and  eggs  are  absurdly 
cheap.  Two  hundred  of  the  latter  can  be  bought 
for  one  rouble.  The  Siberian  has  tastes  some- 
what akin  to  the  Chinese  in  the  matter  of 
eggs.  I  was  frequently  asked  at  post-houses 
whether  I  would  like  mine  old,  straw  flavoured, 
or  fresh  ! 

There  was  no  lack  of  amusement  in  the 
evening.  Two  theatres  (French  and  Russian), 
a  circus,  and  several  open-air  concerts  were 
always  open  to  us.  I  witnessed  one  evening  a 
performance  of  the  "  Cloches  de  Corneville," 
most  creditable  both  as  regards  artistes  and 
orchestra.  Opera  bouffe  at  Irkoutsk  !  Had  I 
been  told  a  year  before  that  it  existed  there,  I 
should  have  set  down  my  informant  as  a  lunatic. 
The  streets  were  far  from  safe  at  night,  and  two 
men   were   stabbed  during:  the  short  time  we  were 


IRKOUTSK. 


415 


there.  Being  unlit,  they  present  great  facihties 
for  the  exercise  of  their  profession  to  the  gentlemen 
who  take  up  their  residence  in  the  lower  quarters 
of  the  town  after  a  sojourn  at  Kara  or  Nert- 
chinsk.  No  one  in  Irkoutsk  ever  walks  abroad 
after  dark  unarmed. 

There  was  little  to  do  in  the  daytime  but  flatten 
one's  nose  against  the  hotel  windows  and  look  out 
on  to  the  dreary  market-place  opposite,  watching 
the  busy  crowds  of  buyers  and  sellers.  It  was 
the  only  market-place  in  Siberia  where  I  ever 
saw  flowers  exposed  for  sale,  but  they  were 
faded,  scentless  things.  It  always  struck  me 
as  curious  that,  although  wild  flowers  are  so 
plentiful  in  Siberia,  it  is  hopeless  to  try  and 
grow  roses  or  garden  flou^ers.  The  market 
was  the  only  place  in  Irkoutsk  which  showed  any 
signs  of  life  or  animation.  Even  at  mid-day  the 
place  looked  as  if  everybody  was  either  dead  or 
asleep.  The  only  signs  of  life  visible  were  when 
a  squad  of  soldiers,  returning  from  drill,  marched 
past  with  a  cracked  trumpet  at  their  head,  or  a 
tea-caravan  rattled  and  jingled  across  the  square. 
Our  sole  amusement  consisted  in  watching  the 
cab-stand   opposite   the    hotel,  and  speculating  as 


416  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

to  whether  the  dozen  drivers  asleep  on  their 
boxes  would  ever  get  a  fare.  We  were  there  a 
week,  and  indoors  the  greater  part  of  the  day, — 
and  when  indoors  looking  out  of  window,  for 
we  had  no  books  to  read, — but  never  saw  one 
hired. 

The  "droshki"  or  cab  of  Irkoutsk  cannot  be  called 
a  comfortable  vehicle.  It  is  springless,  and  only 
built  to  hold  one  person  besides  the  driver.  In 
shape  it  is  not  unlike  a  bath-chair  without  the  hood. 
There  is  no  guard-rail  to  hold  on  by,  or  anything 
to  prevent  one  being  hurled  out  as  it  bumps 
and  bounds  along  the  rough,  uneven  streets. 
As  the  drivers  always  went  at  full  gallop,  it 
was  sometimes  no  easy  matter  to  keep  one's 
seat. 

On  a  fine  day  one  saw  many  smart  turn-outs 
at  Irkoutsk,  though  the  carriages  with  springs, 
were,  I  was  told,  in  a  constant  state  of  repair. 
The  chief  object  of  the  drivers  seemed  to  be  to 
tear  along  the  streets  as  fast  as  they  could 
without  breaking  down.  Many  of  the  horses  had  the 
near  fore-legs  fastened  to  the  hind  for  this  purpose, 
a  method  peculiar,  I  imagine,  to  Siberia. 

There  was  but  one  pleasant  walk  in  Irkoutsk, 


TRKOUTSK.  417 

a  kind  of  boulevard  situated  on  tlie  banks  of  the 
Angara.  It  was  a  relief  to  find  one's  way  down 
here  on  a  sunny  afternoon.  The  sight  of  a  bit  of 
green  foliage  was  refreshing,  though  the  trees  were 
withered,  scrubby-looking  things  at  best.  There 
was,  at  any  rate,  a  certain  amount  of  life  and 
animation  in  the  broad  and  rapid  river,  alive  with 
merchandise  craft  plying  to  and  from  Lake  Baikal, 
and  ferry-boats  carrying  passengers  to  public  tea- 
gardens  on  the  opposite  bank.  On  fine  afternoons 
the  boulevard  was  the  favourite  haunt  of  nurses  and 
children,  and  as  a  natural  consequence  soldiers,  and 
reminded  one  (with  a  stretch  of  the  imagination)  of 
bits  of  the  Champs  Ely  sees  or  Tuileries  Gardens  in 
far-away  Paris,  an  illusion  very  soon  dispelled  on 
looking  back  at  the  black  roads  and  dismal-looking, 
unfinished  city.  From  here  we  walked  homewards, 
as  a  rule,  past  the  Porte  de  Moscou,  a  whitewashed 
brick  building  on  the  banks  of  the  Angara,  con- 
taining two  small  rooms  with  barred  windows  on 
either  side.  This  arch  was  built  in  1817,  and  was 
destined  by  the  Russians  to  become  the  permanent 
prison  of  Napoleon  I.  when  they  should  take 
him  prisoner !  Although  he  was  in  those  days  such 
an   enemy   of  their   country,    Russians,    and  espe- 

E  e 


418  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

cially  Siberians,  now  have  the  greatest  respect 
for  the  memory  of  "  Le  Petit  Caporal."  It  may 
indeed  be  called  adoration,  for  there  is  a  sect  at 
present  existing  in  Siberia,  which  actually  worships 
the  spirit  of  the  Great  Emperor.  They  are  called 
"  Napoleonists,"  and  look  upon  the  Czar  and 
Greek  Church  with  contempt,  worshipping  only 
the  bust  of  their  divinity,  which  is  done  with 
closed  doors,  and  in  strict  secrecy.  The  sup- 
porters of  this  strange  doctrine  maintain  that  the 
Emperor  still  lives,  that  he  escaped  from  St. 
Helena  after  his  death,  and  crossed  the  seas  in  spirit 
to  the  shores  of  Lake  Baikal,  where  he  resumed  his 
mortahty,  and  now  lives  in  the  flesh.  In  time 
Napoleon  will  again  raise  a  huge  army,  put  the  Czar 
and  his  Government  to  flight,  and  himself  reign  over 
Eussia,  after  which  the  world  is  to  be  subjected  to 
the  Muscovite  yoke ! 

The  "  Skopti,"  or  "  AVhite  Doves,"  is  the  secret 
sect  said  to  be  the  most  powerful  in  Irkoutsk. 
These  look  upon  Peter  III.,  of  Russia,  as  their 
divinity,  and  believe  him  to  be  still  living,  touch  no 
meat,  wine,  or  spirits,  but  subsist  entirely  on  milk 
and  bread.  All  are  eunuchs,  and  though  they  pos- 
sess no  temples  or   churches,  are  easily  known  by 


IRKOUTSK.  419 

their  pale  faces  and  effeminate  ways.  Their  object 
is  to  lead  a  life  of  absolute  purity,  and  they  worship 
a  living  virgin  and  Christ  appointed  by  the  elders. 

The  "Skopti"  is  perhaps  the  richest  sect  that 
exists  in  Russia,  and  many  of  the  wealthiest  men 
in  Siberia  belong  to  it.  The  creed  is  that  as  soon  as 
400,000  converts  shall  have  been  gathered  into  His 
fold,  God  will  come  to  reign  over  them  alone.  All 
other  religions  and  faiths  shall  be  destroyed. 

There  exist  also  in  Siberia  the  "Flagel- 
lants," and  "Molokani,"  or  milk-drinkers,  but 
both  are  inferior  in  number  to  the  "Skopti." 
The  Molokani  came  originally  from  the  south,  of 
Russia.  They  believe  in  Christ,  but  do  not  acknow- 
ledge His  divinity.  The  Emperor  Nicholas  so 
persecuted  this  sect,  that  he  drove  20,000  of  them 
out  of  Russia  and  into  the  Caucasus.  From  here 
many  crossed  the  Black  Sea  into  Turkey,  where  the 
Sultan  gave  them  a  village,  and  where  they  flourish 
up  to  the  present  day  undisturbed  by  Turkish 
rule. 

The  "  Klysti  "  or  Flagellants  date  from  the  13th 
century.  These  originally  sprang  from  one  Philipitch , 
a  peasant  who,  deserting  from  the  Russian  arm}'-, 
declared   himself  to   be   the  Supreme  Being,    and 

E  e  2 


420  FROM    PEKIN    TO   CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

travelled  over  the  country  far  and  wide,  preaching 
and  making  converts.  Philipitch's  creed  was  simple 
enough,  certainly,  and  suited  to  the  understanding 
of  the  meanest  capacity.  It  had  but  three  command- 
ments :  (1)  Drink  no  wine  ;  (2)  Remain  where  you 
are  and  what  you  are  ;  (3)  Never  marry.  Daring 
the  performance  of  their  rites  the  Klysti  beat  and 
flog  each  other  unmercifully ;  but  I  do  not  fancy 
that  many  Flagellants  now  exist  either  in  Russia 
or  Siberia.  It  is  certainly  not  a  romantic  or  fasci- 
nating faith. 

The  time  at  Irkoutsk  hung  so  heavily  on  our  hands 
after  the  first  three  days,  that  we  resolved  to  cut 
down  the  fortnight's  rest  we  had  originally  intended 
taking  to  one  of  a  week.  There  was  literally  nothing 
of  interest  to  see  or  do  after  the  first  twenty-four 
hours,  and  we  had  no  incentive  to  prolong  our  stay. 
One  fine  morning,  however,  an  apparition  made  its 
appearance  on  the  balcony,  where  we  were  wont  to 
smoke  our  morning  cigar,  that  of  a  young  and 
extremely  pretty  woman,  distinctly  not  an  Irkout- 
skian,  but  who  looked,  with  her  neat  figure  and 
tailor-made  gown,  as  if  she  had  just  walked  out  of 
Bond  Street.  The  meeting  with  a  countrywoman, 
as  we  imagined  her  to  be,  lightened  considerably  the 


IRKODTSK.  421 

prospect  of  the  four  long  weary  days  that  must 
elapse  before  we  pushed  on  to  Tomsk.  Madame  R., 
liowever,  was  not  an  Englishwoman,  as  we  had 
surmised,  but  a  Dane,  who  had  pluckily  braved  the 
danger  and  discomfort  of  the  roads  to  accompany 
her  husband  (a  telegraphic  engineer)  to  Eastern 
Siberia.  Our  introduction  to  the  lady  was  followed 
by  one  to  Mr.  E.,  and  the  cheery  dejeuner  a  quatre 
that  followed  it,  soon  made  us  forget  Irkoutsk 
and  its  depressing  monotony ;  indeed  to  Mr.  and 
Madame  R.  are  due  all  the  pleasing  recollections 
T  have  retained  of  that  gloomy  city. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

IRKOUTSK  (^continued). 

The  shock-headed  youth  who  fulfilled  the  duties  of 
chambermaid  awoke  me  one  morning  at  the  Mos- 
kovskaya  with  the  news  that  that  day  (the  19th  of 
August)  was  to  witness  in  Siberia  a  total  ecUpse 
of  the  sun.  I  did  not  learn  till  afterwards  that 
scientific  men  had  been  sent  from  London,  Paris, 
Berlin,  and  Petersburg,  to  Krasnoiarsk,  a  town  about 
six  hundred  versts  west  of  Irkoutsk,  to  witness 
and  report  on  the  eclipse,  but  the  expedition  was  a 
failure,  the  weather  at  these  places  being  dull  and 
overcast.  At  Irkoutsk,  however,  a  bright  sun 
and  cloudless  sky  ushered  in  the  eventful  morn- 
ing. The  eclipse  was  to  take  place  at  11.30, 
but  for  quite  half  an  hour  previously  a  perceptible 
change  took  place  in  the  temperature,  which,  though 
it  had  been  close  and  sultry  up  till  eleven  o'clock, 
now  became  quite  cool,  while  the  light  breeze  that 
had  been  blowing  dropped  as  if  by  magic.     About 


IRKOUTSK.  423 

eleven  the  bright  sunshine  became  obscured  by  a 
mist  something  like  the  lurid  glare  that  precedes 
a  thunderstorm  on  a  summer's  day  in  England. 
Up  till  now  nothing  was  observable  on  the  sun's 
surface  as  it  shone  out,  like  a  ball  of  fire,  from  the 
woolly  sky,  but  at  11.20  one  could  discern,  by  the 
aid  of  an  opera-glass,  a  thin  black  line  creeping 
from  right  to  left  over  the  great  fiery  disc,  in- 
creasing in  size  to  a  semicircular  blotch,  till,  at  a 
quarter  to  twelve,  the  sun  presented  the  appearance 
of  an  apple  with  a  large  piece  bitten  out.  Ten 
minutes  more,  and  nothing  was  visible  but  a  thin 
streak  of  brilliant  light  surrounding  a  circular  patch 
of  black,  while  darkness  crept  over  the  city,  and  the 
stars,  one  by  one,  appeared  in  the  heavens. 

One  could  see,  in  the  square  below  the  hotel,  a 
crowd  of  eager,  upturned  faces,  many  of  whom  had 
never  even  heard  that  the  eclipse  was  expected,  and 
were  much  disconcerted  in  consequence.  Droshki 
drivers  pulled  up  their  horses  and  stared  open- 
mouthed  ;  market-women  left  their  stalls,  to  kneel 
and  cross  themselves  ;  every  one's  face  wore  an 
anxious,  concerned  look,  which  added  not  a  little  to 
the  weirdness  of  the  scene.  The  effect  produced  on 
the   animal    creation    was    extraordinary.       Horses 


424  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS  BY    LAND. 

neiglied,  dogs  howled,  while  birds  in  great  flocks  flew 
silently  across  the  starlit  sky,  apparently  bewildered 
and  alarmed  at  the  sudden  fall  of  night.  About 
ten  minutes  past  twelve  the  black  veil  over  the  sun 
diminished  in  size,  and  the  darkness  commenced  to 
clear  away,  as,  almost  imperceptibly,  the  light  of  day 
once  more  crept  slowly  over  the  earth,  while  one  by 
one  the  stars  faded  in  the  brightening  heavens. 
The  air,  too,  grew  gradually  warmer,  till,  at  half- 
past  twelve  not  a  trace  of  the  phenomenon  was 
visible,  except  in  the  dense,  excited  crowds  dis- 
cussing it  in  the  market-place.  The  fall  of  the 
temperature  during  the  eclipse  was  twelve 
degrees. 

Rain  fell  in  torrents,  shortly  after.  This  did 
not,  however,  prevent  us  from  walking  out  with 
E.  to  the  drill-plain,  and  witnessing  a  review  of 
the  troops.  Walking  in  Irkoutsk  on  a  rainy  day 
is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  unpleasant.  The  streets 
are  undrained.  Great  pools  of  water  lie  in  the 
roadway,  rendering  it  almost  impassable,  while  the 
thick  dust  converts  the  streets  into  morasses  of 
deep  black  mud.  We  had  to  wade  knee-deep  more 
than  once  before  reaching  the  parade-ground. 
The   garrison   of  Irkoutsk  is  composed  mainly  of 


IRKOUTSK.  425 

Cossacks,  in  number  about  10,000.  They  were 
not  taking  to  look  at,  their  dingy  drab  uniforms 
and  dirty  white  linen  caps  rendering  them  far  from 
smart  in  appearance,  though  in  drill  and  steadiness 
they  were  perfect.  All  were  armed  with  the 
"Berdan"  rifle. 

I  strolled  into  a  barber's  on  the  way  home,  to 
have  my  hair  cut,  a  somewhat  necessary  operation, 
for  it  had  remained  untouched  since  Shang- 
hai, and  was  falling  about  my  shoulders  in  un- 
comfortable luxuriance.  The  art  of  hair-cutting  is 
evidently  learnt  early  at  Irkoutsk.  On  inquiring 
of  a  small  boy  of  about  eight  years  old,  whether  any 
one  was  in,  he  dragged  me  to  a  chair,  and  arming 
himself  with  a  huge  pair  of  shears,  commenced, 
although  he  had  to  mount  on  a  stool  to  do  so, 
to  operate  upon  me  himself.  I  expected  every 
moment  to  find  myself  minus  an  ear,  and  was 
relieved  when  he  had  finished,  and  not  a  little  sur- 
prised to  find  that  he  had  done  it  extremely  well. 
J  felt  constrained  to  buy  a  bottle  of  Atkinson's  White 
Rose  in  consequence,  as  an  encouragement  to  the 
youthful  disciple  of  Figaro. 

The  museum  at  Irkoutsk  is  well  worth  a  visit,  and 
is    a    handsome    stone    building,    erected   at    con- 


426  FROM    I'EKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

siderable  cost  by  one  of  the  millionaires.  We  spent 
a  long  morning  there,  inspecting  the  trophies 
collected  from  all  parts  of  Siberia  by  M.  Bogda- 
novitch,  a  Russianized  Frenchman,  who  spends 
most  of  his  spare  time  among  the  Yakoutz, 
Tungouses,  and  other  aboriginal  Siberian  tribes. 
A  word  here  may  not  be  amiss  as  to  the  natives  of 
the  vast  country  through  which  we  are  about  to 
take  the  reader,  for  the  term  "  Siberian "  is  a 
very  vague  one,  comprising  as  it  does  the  skin- 
clad  aborigines  of  the  shores  of  the  Frozen  Ocean 
to  the  semi-Chinese  "  Bouriat,"  the  wild  and 
primitive  Kamchatdale  to  the  civilized  citizens  of 
Tobolsk, or  Irkoutsk. 

We  will  work  from  east  to  west,  and  commence 
with  the  Kamchatdale.  I  imagine  there  are  few 
places  in  the  world  so  little  known  as  this  desolate 
peninsula,  which  most  people  look  upon  as  the 
uttermost  end  of  the  earth  when  they  say,  to  con- 
vey an  idea  of  unlimited  distance,  "  Oh  !  so-and-so's 
gone  to  Kamchatka  or  some  other  outlandish  place." 
I  have  met  one  of  the  few  Englishmen  who  have 
ever  visited  this  dreary  peninsula,  and  can  give  the 
reader  the  benefit  of  his  experience  and  observa- 
tions. 


IRKOCTSK.  427 

The  peninsula  of  Kamchatka  is  about  eight 
hundred  miles  long,  by  one  hundred  and  thirty 
miles  wide,  and  is  situated  in  the  Sea  of  Okhotsk. 
Flat  and  marshy  at  Cape  Lopatka,  its  southern 
extremity,  the  country  to  the  northward  becomes 
mountainous,  rocky,  and  barren,  stunted  birch 
and  willow  trees  forming,  in  most  parts,  the  sole 
vegetation,  save  in  the  valley  watered  by  the 
Kamchatka  River.  Here  the  soil  is  good  and  grass 
abundant,  the  latter  sometimes  growing  six  feet  high. 
Poplar,  willow,  and  cedar  of  large  size  are  met  with, 
while  cabbages,  potatoes,  and  carrots  also  grow  in 
this  oasis,  which  is  situated  in  the  centre  of  the 
peninsula.  The  wild  raspberry,  currant,  and  cran- 
berry also  abound,  and  in  the  springtime  many 
wild  and  beautiful  flowers.  But  the  greater  part 
of  Kamchatka  is  rocky  and  sterile.  A  chain  of 
mountains  to  the  east  of  the  peninsula  has  many 
volcanoes.  The  highest  and  most  active,  Mount 
Kluchevski,  a  peak  of  greater  altitude  than  Mont 
Blanc,  is  near  the  coast,  and  visible  for  many 
miles  out  at  sea,  the  base  of  the  mountain  having  a 
circumference  of  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles. 
Kamchatka  is  subject  to  severe  shocks  of  earthquake, 
as  many  as  ten  (on  an  average)  occurring  annually  at 


428  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

Petropaulosk,  the  chief  town  or  settlement.  The 
climate  of  Kamchatka,  though  severe,  is  not  so 
trying  to  a  European  constitution  as  that  of  the 
mainland  of  Eastern  Siberia.  Frost  sets  in  about 
the  end  of  October,  but  up  to  January  the  tem- 
perature rarely  falls  to  more  than  10'  below  freezing 
point  (Fahr.).  February  to  March  are  the  most 
trying  times,  when  "  Poorgas,"  or  snow-storms,  ac- 
companied by  tempestuous  winds,  sweep  over  the 
bleak,  rocky  coast  and  valleys,  occasioning  great 
loss  of  life  and  sometimes  burying  whole  villages 
under  the  snow. 

The  population  of  Kamchatka  is  roughly  estimated 
at  four  thousand  souls,  about  five  hundred  of  whom 
reside  at  the  capital,  Petropaulosk,  on  the  eastern 
coast,  which  is  said  to  possess  the  finest  harbour  in 
the  world,  and  where  the  allied  French  and  English 
fleets  were  repulsed  by  the  Russians  during  the 
^T»iniean  war.     The  aboriginal  tribes,  however,  are 

jldom  met  with  in  or  near  the  capital,  where  society 
consists  almost  entirely  of  Grovernment  oflBcers  and 
Cossacks,  stationed  here  to  preserve  law  and  order 
among  those  remote  subjects  of  the  Czar,  who,  how- 
ever, give  them    little   or  no   trouble.      The   chief 

omplainfc  among  military  men  at  this  dreary  out- 


IRKODTSK.  429 

post  is  that  they  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  way  of 
fighting  to  keep  their  hands  in. 

The  aboriofinal  inhabitants  of  Kamchatka  are 
divided  into  three  distinct  races :  the  Koriaks,  in 
the  north,  the  Kamchatdales,  in  the  south,  and 
the  Kuriles,  a  tribe  inhabiting  the  islands  of 
that  name,  which,  lying  to  the  southward  of 
Kamchatka,  were  lately  ceded  by  Eussia  to  Japan 
in  exchange  for  the  island  of  Sakh alien.  Of  these 
three  the  Kamchatdales  are  the  most  civilized  and 
friendly,  probably  on  account  of  their  more  frequent 
intercourse  with  Europeans  from  Petropaulosk  and 
other  settlements.  They  are  of  a  copper  colour, 
with  narrow  black  eyes,  thick  lips,  and  flat  noses, 
and  long,  streaming  hair,  which  they  take  great 
delight  in  plastering  over  with  seal  oil,  blubber,  and 
other  fishy  abominations. 

A  Kamchatdale  may  be  smelt  a  mile  off,  their 
bodies  exuding  a  strong  smell  of  fish,  on  which 
they  subsist,  eaten  raw ;  but  they  are  friendly, 
hospitable  fellows,  and,  unlike  the  fierce  and 
savage  Koriaks,  always  glad  to  welcome  or  help  a 
stranger.  Up  till  some  years  since  many  of  the 
Kamchatdales  were  Chamans,  but  this  religion  has 
died  out  a  good  deal  since  the  advent  of  Russian 


430  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

traders,  who  have  replaced  it  by  introducing  vodka 
and  debauchery.  The  Kamchatdales  have,  curiously 
enough,  a  practice  identical  with  one  among  the 
Dyaks  of  Borneo  :  that  of  kindling  a  light  by 
rapidly  turning  in  the  hauds  a  dry  stick  in  a  hole 
made  in  a  plank  of  wood,  and  using  a  piece  of  dry 
grass  as  fuel.  They  are  also,  like  the  Dyaks,  capital 
dancers  and  mimics,  imitating  in  their  dances  the 
movements  of  animals  and  birds  with  surprising 
grace  and  accuracy. 

The  Koriaks,  on  the  other  hand,  are  said  to  be 
the  most  treacherous  and  degraded  race  in  Siberia. 
Many  are  nomad,  and  have  no  fixed  abode,  the 
stationary  ones  being  much  finer  in  physique 
and  less  wild  than  their  wandering  brothers. 
Strangely  enough,  however,  they  allow  the  latter 
to  treat  them  as  slaves,  and  obey  them  without  a 
murmur.  While  the  nomads  are  savage,  cruel,  and 
treacherous,  the  settled  Koriak  is  a  contented,  cheer- 
ful being,  always  glad  to  see  strangers,  and,  though 
not  so  civilized,  as  hospitable  in  his  way  as  the 
Kamchatdale.  The  settled  Koriaks,  like  the  latter, 
gain  their  livelihood  by  fishing,  while  the  nomad's 
life  is  occupied  with  hunting  and  his  flocks  of 
reindeer.     The   dwelling  of   the  settled  Koriak   is 


IRKODTSK.  431 

comfortable  enougli,  and  is  built  of  wood  in  the 
shape  of  an  X,  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  high.  The 
entry  is  by  clambering  up  a  pole  on  the  outside  and 
dropping  through  a  hole  in  the  top  (in  the  centre 
of  the  X)j  which  serves  for  door,  window,  and 
chimney,  there  being  no  other  egress.  The  tents 
of  the  nomad  Koriaks  are  of  reindeer  skin,  and 
much  smaller,  but  in  neither  can  a  European  stay 
more  than  a  few  moments,  the  smoke  and  stench 
being  intolerable  to  any  but  a  Koriak's  eyes 
and  stomach.  Drunkenness  among  the  Koriaks  is 
rarer  than  among  the  Kamchatdales,  for  the  good 
reason  that  they  cannot  get  drink.  A  mush- 
room or  fungus,  however,  found  in  the  north-east 
portion  of  their  territory,  makes  an  admirable 
substitute.  Happily,  it  is  rare,  for  a  mouthful  of 
it  produces  intoxication  for  three  or  four  days. 
Although  the  wandering  Koriaks  treat  their 
animals  with  kindness,  their  cruelty  to  women  is 
proverbial.  Unlike  the  Kamchatdales  and  their 
nearer  neighbours,  they  are  extremely  jealous,  and 
very  often  kill  their  wives  on  a  mere  suspicion  of 
infidelity,  the  more  often  that  they  have  a  right 
to  slay  them  if  really  guilty.  No  Koriak's  wife 
is  ever  permitted  by  her  lord  to  beautify   herself. 


432  FRO.\r    FEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

or  even  vrasli,  for  fear  of  attracting  the  notice 
of  others.  To  make  assurance  doubly  sure  these 
northern  Othellos,  from  time  to  time,  compel  their 
wretched  women  to  cover  their  entire  bodies  with  a 
thick  coating  of  rancid  oil,  which  effectually  keeps 
even  the  most  amorous  lover  at  a  safe  distance. 
When  the  Koriaks,  male  or  female,  become  old  and 
unfit  for  work,  they  are  killed  by  their  family,  being 
allowed  the  privilege  of  choosing  whether  they  shall 
be  stoned  to  death,  or  have  their  throats  cut.  Part 
of  a  Koriak  youth's  education  is  learning  to  give  the 
coup  de  grace  as  painlessly  as  possible. 

The  Kuriles,  as  I  have  said,  inhabit  the  small  islands 
of  that  name  south  of  Cape  Lopatka.  They  are 
essentially  fishermen,  their  clothes,  tents,  and  even 
boots  being  made  of  fish-skin.  I  saw,  in  the  museum 
at  Irkoutsk,  a  long  cloak  made  by  them  of  this 
material  as  light  and  thin  as  goldbeater' s-skin,  and 
absolutely  waterproof.  The  framework  of  their 
canoes  is  of  wood,  with  this  fabric  four  or  five  thick- 
nesses tightly  stretched  across  it,  and  these  appa- 
rently fragile  craft  will  live  in  the  roughest  sea,  the 
crew  looking,  a  short  distance  off,  as  if  they  were 
sitting  on  the  water,  so  low  is  the  gunwale.  The 
Kuriles  have  become  more  civilized  since  the  ceding 


IRKOUTSK.  433 

of  their  islands  to  Japan,  though  they  still  pre- 
serve queer  customs  with  regard  to  their  women. 
When  a  Kurile  has  proved  his  wife  faithless,  he 
does  not,  like  the  Koriak,  visit  it  on  her,  but  on 
the  seducer,  whom  he  is  bound  to  challenge  to 
mortal  combat.  The  weapons  are  thick  cudgels, 
the  challenger  first  receiving  three  blows  on  the 
head  or  bare  back  from  his  opponent.  It  is  then 
the  turn  of  the  latter,  and  so  they  go  on  till  one  of 
the  combatants  dies  of  his  injuries,  the  duels 
sometimes  lasting  an  hour.  When  a  Kurile  woman 
gives  birth  to  twins,  one  is  slain  by  the  father  as 
a  sacrifice  to  the  spirits. 

There  is  plenty  of  wild  fowl  in  Kamchatka,  and 
the  country  abounds  with  geese,  duck,  and  snipe  at 
the  proper  seasons.  It  is  probably  the  only  country 
in  the  world  where  the  real  wild  dog  exists.  These 
are  found  on  the  mountains,  are  of  a  buff  or  grey 
colour,  the  size  of  a  huge  mastiff*,  and  very  fierce, 
so  much  so  that  natives  have  been  killed  when 
attempting  to  capture  them  for  purposes  of  sleigh- 
ing. They  are  fed  (in  their  civilized  state)  on 
fish,  and,  the  rivers  of  Kamchatka  teeming  with 
salmon,  do  not  have  any  difficulty  in  procurino- 
a    meal    whenever    they    want   it,  merely   walking 

F  f 


434  PROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

into  tlie  stream,  and   seizing  their  prey  with  their 
teeth. 

To  the  north  of  Kamchatka  is  the  Chukchee  coast, 
which  extends  from  Chanskaia  Bay  round  Behring's 
Peninsula  to  the  river  Anadyr.  This  region  is  in- 
habited by  the  Chukchee  tribe — a  race  of  men  very 
similar  to  the  wandering  Koriaks — who  live  a  no- 
madic life  in  tents  made  of  reindeer  skins,  for 
here  the  reindeer  roam  about  in  thousands.  This 
part  of  Siberia  also  swarms  with  lemmings,  a 
species  of  large  rat.  At  times  these  loathsome 
creatures  migrate  in  myriads,  and  woe  to  the 
luckless  traveller  that  meets  a  swarm,  for  nothing 
w'ill  turn  them  aside.  Rivers  and  lakes  are  crossed, 
even  arms  of  the  sea,  and  should  they  meet  a  native 
in  the  open  country,  they  will  not  deviate  an  inch 
from  their  line,  swarming  up  his  legs  and  body 
one  side  to  clamber  down  his  back  on  the  other. 
If  not  attacked,  they  are  harmless  enough, 
though  it  must  be  a  severe  strain  on  the  patience 
to  have  to  wait  till  an  army  of  the  brutes  has 
passed  over  one,  an  operation  which  sometimes 
lasts  a  couple  of  hours !  The  white  Polar  bear 
is  also  found  in  the  Chukchee  country.  The 
language     of    the     Kamchatdales,    Koriaks,     and 


lEKOUTSK.  435 

Chukcliees  is  a  harsh,  guttural  one,  and  almost 
synonymous. 

"We  now  come  to  the  Yakouts,  or  aborigines  of 
Yakoutsk — the  largest  province  in  Siberia,  which 
extends  from  south  of  the  town  of  Yakoutsk  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Lena  River  in  the  Frozen  Ocean,  and 
is  nearly  the  size  of  the  whole  of  Europe — Russia 
excepted.  The  total  population  of  this  huge  pro- 
vince is  under  two  hundred  and  thirty  thousand, 
consisting  of  Russians,  Tungouses,  Yukagirs,  and 
Yakouts. 

Perhaps  with  the  exception  of  Yakoutsk  and  Sak- 
halien,  the  town  or  village  of  Okhotsk,  situated  on 
the  sea  of  that  name,  is  the  most  utterly  desolate 
place  in  the  whole  of  Siberia.  Its  population  in  1810 
numbered  only  one  hundred  and  fifty,  and  these 
existed  solely  by  trading  in  furs  and  fish  with  the 
nearest  settlements.  Okhotsk  may  literally  be  called 
the  end  of  the  world.  'Not  a  tree  or  blade  of  grass  is 
visible  within  miles  of  the  wretched  huts  and  two  or 
three  wooden  officials' -houses  that  constitute  the 
colony.  The  summer  at  Okhotsk  consists  of  three 
months  of  damp  and  chilly  weather,  which  is  succeeded 
by  nine  months  of  cold  as  raw  as  it  is  intense.  The 
food  of  the  inhabitants  is  fish,  nothing  but  fish,  of 

r  f  2 


436  FROM   PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

wbicli  tliey  certainly  have  a  large  and  varied  choice, 
for  there  are  at  least  fourteen  varieties  of  salmon 
found  here.  From  the  absence  of  fresh  vegetables, 
however,  scurvy  rages  in  winter.  To  the  south  of 
Okhotzk  lies  the  island  of  Sakhalien.  The  climate 
is  even  worse  here  than  at  Okhotzk.  In  July,  the 
hottest  month  of  the  year,  the  thermometer  seldom  if 
ever  rises  above  60°  F.,  while  in  January  it  never 
exceeds  1-4°  F.  Scarcely  two  days  together  ever 
pass  without  rain,  followed  by  dense  fogs.  The  sun 
is  seldom  seen,  and  never  felt.  It  will  be  a  bad  day 
for  prisoners  when  exile  to  Siberia  is  abolished,  and 
all  convicts  are  sent  direct  to  Sakhalien  by  sea. 

The  town  of  Yakoutsk  has  a  population  of  under 
five  thousand,  many  of  whom  are  political  exiles,  and, 
saving  Kara  and  Sakhalien,  there  are  few  places 
more  dreaded  by  prisoners  throughout  Siberia  than 
this  desolate  city,  which  is  over  five  thousand  miles 
from  Petersburg  !  It  has,  too,  the  unenviable  noto- 
riety of  being  the  hottest  place  in  summer,  and  the 
coldest  in  winter  in  the  world,  while  in  the  former 
season  people  have  been  known  to  die  from  the  effects 
of  mosquito  bites,  from  dense  swarms  of  which  the 
inhabitants  are  never  free  in  summer  for  a  moment, 
night  or  day.     Most  of  the  buildings  in  Yakoutsk  are 


IRKOUTSK.  437 

of  wood,  though  there  is  a  handsome  stone  cathedral, 
and  the  Governor's  house  is  of  the  same  material. 
The  town  presents  a  queer  patchwork  appearance, 
the  more  solidly  built  mission-houses  being  mixed  up 
pell-mell  with  the  winter  dwellings  of  the  Yakouts, 
who  mix  freely  with  the  European  population.  It 
is  rare  to  meet  a  Yakout  out  of  his  own  pro- 
vince, though  I  came  across  two  or  three  as  far  south 
as  Ziminskaia,  near  Irkoutsk.  They  are  smallish 
men,  of  light  copper  colour,  with  black,  close-cropped 
hair,  and  are  a  genial,  hospitable  race.  Although 
robust  and  capable  of  going  through  great  fatigue 
and  privation,  the  majority  are  timid,  not  to  say 
cowardly,  in  disposition,  though  as  hunters  they  are 
unsurpassed,  and  from  Yakoutsk  are  exported  the 
most  valuable  furs  in  Siberia.  A  great  number  of 
the  latter  are  sent  to  China,  but  the  majority  find 
their  way  to  Moscow  and  Petersburg. 

Life  must  be  dreary  indeed  to  the  wretched  exiles 
sent  to  Yakoutsk,  where  in  winter  there  is  only 
daylight  for  four  hours  out  of  the  twenty-four ! 
The  winter  dwellings  of  the  Yakouts  are  made  of 
logs  protected  by  banks  of  earth,  which  reach  to 
the  windows — which  latter  are  made  of  blocks  of 
solid  ice  ;  and  an  idea  of  the  temperature  may  be 


488       FEOM  PEKIN"  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

formed  by  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  the  heat 
inside  the  building,  these  seldom  melt  till  the  retm-n 
of  spring.  Human  beings,  cows,  calves,  and  even 
reindeer,  all  live  together  inside  these  tents  for  the 
sake  of  warmth.  In  summer  the  tents  are  of  birch 
bark  and  reindeer  skin,  of  the  same  shape,  but 
naturally  mucli  cooler  than  the  winter  quarters. 

The  Yakouts,  unlike  most  of  the  aboriginal 
Siberian  tribes,  are  cleanly  enough  in  their  habits. 
They  may  be  said  to  live  literally  on  reindeer,  for 
the  latter  is  their  beast  of  burthen,  and  provides 
them  with  food,  covering,  and  drink.  A  species  of 
fermented  liquor  which  they  concoct  from  its  milk 
is  even  more  intoxicating  than  the"airak"  of  the 
Mongols.  Reindeer  flesh  is,  however,  only  eaten 
among  them  on  great  occasions,  or  when  an  animal 
dies  from  natural  causes,  the  staple  food  being  a  sort 
of  cake  made  of  fir-tree  bark  powdered  very  fine, 
and  reindeer  milk.  I  saw  one  at  the  Irkoutsk 
museum,  which,  though  four  or  five  years  old,  still 
reeked  of  turpentine,  and  must,  when  fresh  from 
the  oven,  have  been  somewhat  trying  even  to  the 
gastric  juices  of  a  Yakout. 

Though  a  Yakout  has  few  vices  but  gluttony,  he 
is,  like  all  Siberian  races,  a  sad  drunkard  when  he 


IRKOUTSK.  439 

gets  the  chance.  They  are,  however,  as  a  rule, 
a  clever,  intelligent  race.  A  Russian  "we  met 
at  Tomsk,  had  spent  many  years  among  them  in 
exile.  Being  in  want  of  a  fork,  he  commissioned 
some  Yakouts  to  make  him  one  of  wood,  at  the 
same  time  Sfivinof  them  a  silver  one  as  a  model. 
What  was  his  surprise  when,  a  fortnight  later, 
they  brought  him  a  perfect  copy  of  his  own 
model  made  of  iron,  with  one  exception ;  the 
handle  of  the  model  was  of  ebony.  To  get  over 
this  difficulty,  they  held  the  handle  of  the  iron 
fork  in  wood- smoke  till  it  had  attained  a  dirty 
grey  colour  ! 

With  the  exception  of  small-pox,  epidemics 
are  rare  in  Yakoutsk,  though  the  former  disease 
sometimes  lays  whole  settlements  waste.  It  is  a 
common  thing  for  Russian  fur-traders  to  come 
upon  a  Yakout  village  deserted  by  every  living 
being  but  dogs  and  reindeer,  while  the  corpses  of 
those  who  have  succumbed  to  this  loathsome  disease 
lie  rotting  above  ground.  When  a  Yakout  is  at- 
tacked, his  companions  desert  him,  leaving  a  cup  of 
water  and  a  bundle  of  firewood  within  his  reach  ; 
and  this,  curiously  enough,  is  the  practice  of  many  of 
the  inland  tribes  in  Borneo.     Indeed,  in  appearance 


440  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and  customs  tlie  Yakout  strikingly  resembles  the 
Dyak. 

The  Chaman  religion,  though  dying  out  among 
the  more  civilized  Bouriattes,  is  still  practised  to  a 
large  extent  among  the  Yakouts.  But  very  few 
Europeans  have  ever  beheld  the  strange,  weird 
ceremonies  performed  by  these  Chamans,  who 
worship  a  deity  supposed  to  inhabit  the  sun. 
Their  rites  are  held  in  secret  either  in  the  depths 
of  the  forest,  or  the  solitude  of  the  "  Toundras," 
vast  desert  marshes ;  for  none  but  the  true  Christian 
religion  is  recognized  by  the  Czar's  government. 
A  Kussian  fur-trader  who  witnessed,  in  hiding,  one 
of  their  ceremonies  a  few  years  ago,  thus  describes 
the  scene : — 

"  The  officiating  priest  appears  as  soon  as  a 
select  body  of  worshippers  is  ready,  and  enters  a 
circle  of  flamino-  loo;s  which  has  been  kindled  in 
readiness.  He  is  clad  entirely  in  white.  Round 
his  neck  is  slung  a  large  circular  brass  plate,  signi- 
fying the  sun,  while  from  his  shoulders,  sides,  and 
thighs  hang:  innumerable  bells  and  the  stuffed  bodies 
of  stoats,  weasels,  seals,  and  other  wild  animals. 
Fitting  closely  to  him  is  a  kind  of  light  framework 
typifying  the  human  body  (I  saw  one  of  these  at 


IRKOUTSK.  441 

Irkoutsk),a  perfect  irou  skeleton,  sliowing  the  ribs, 
breast-bone,  thighs,  legs,  &c.  Sacrifices  of  reindeer 
and  calves'  flesh,  fish,  airak,  sable  furs,  &c.,  are  then 
cast  into  the  flames  while  he  turns  slowly  round  and 
round  inside  the  ring  of  fire,  till,  like  a  Cairo 
dervish,  he  has  worked  himself  into  a  kind  of  mad 
frenzy.  He  then  falls  helpless  in  a  fit  of  exhaustion, 
brought  on  by  excitement  and  exertion."  This  ends 
the  ceremon}^,  which  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in 
getting  at  the  meaning  of. 

The  "  Tungouses  "  inhabiting  the  region  to  the 
'north  and  east  of  Yakoutsk,  are  perhaps  the  wild- 
est, as  they  are  the  filthiest,  of  any  Siberian  tribe. 
They  are  comparatively  few  (at  most  some 
four  thousand),  and  are  yearly  diminishing  in 
number.  They  profess  no  religion,  are  nomads, 
and  gain  a  living  by  fishing  and  selling  furs  to 
Russian  traders,  who,  by  the  aid  of  vodka  and 
debauchery,  are  slowly  but  surely  decimating 
them.  The  dwellings  of  the  Tungouses  are  the 
same  summer  and  winter,  and  are  made  of  rein- 
deer skins  stretched  tightly  over  a  light  wooden 
framework.  It  is  somewhat  curious  to  note  that 
the  tents  of  all  these  tribes  are  of  different  shapes, 
that  of  the  Yakouts  being  square,  the  Bouriattes 


442  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

round,  and  the  Koriaks  and  Kamchatdales  trian- 
gular, and  the  Tungouses  conical.  The  latter, 
though  the  dirtiest,  are  the  most  picturesquely 
dressed  of  any;  some  of  their  costumes  of  fur 
and  birdskins  being  especially  graceful  and  hand- 
some. 

The  Yurakis,  Samoyedes,  and  Ostiaks  are  so 
analogous  to  the  two  last-mentioned  races  as  to 
need  no  description,  though  the  latter  are  the  race 
of  which,  on  the  Great  Obi  River,  we  saw  the  most. 
I  have  touched  upon  the  least  civilized  races  of 
Siberia,  and  will  now  conclude  with  a  few  remarks 
on  the  link  between  the  civilized  Siberian  and  the 
aborigines  of  this  great  country — the  Bouriattes. 

The  Bouriattes  may  be  said  to  form  the  greater 
part  of  the  population  of  Irkoutsk,  and  are  treated 
almost  as  equals  by  the  Russian  Siberian  (the  off- 
spring of  the  convict  population),  who  are  gradually 
colonizing  this  part  of  Asia.  Though  as  wild  and 
uncivilized  as  the  Yakouts  one  hundred  years  ago, 
the  Bouriatte  is  now  Russianized,  has  given  up  his 
old  religion  of  "  Chamanism,"  dresses  in  European 
costume,  and  performs  the  duties  of  yemstchik, 
post-house  clerk,  policeman,  and  other  Grovern- 
ment  officials  so  efficiently,   that  he   is   preferred 


IRKOUTSK.  443 

by  some,  in  these  menial  capacities,  to  the 
European  Russian.  The  Bouriattes  originally 
came  from  the  reo-ion  north  of  the  Trans-Baikal 
region,  known  as  Trans-Baikalia,  on  the  eastern 
shores  of  Lake  Baikal.  They  are  now,  however,  to 
be  found  in  almost  any  part  of  Siberia  on  the  great 
post-road  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk.  Many,  too, 
have  amassed  large  fortunes  as  gold-diggers.  This 
race  differs  but  little  in  physiognomy  from  the 
Mongol  Tartar.  They  are  thrifty,  industrious 
people,  and  ordinarily  of  an  honest,  hospitable 
disposition,  though  civilization  has  already 
begun  to  do  its  work,  and  they  are  becoming 
somewhat  unscrupulous  in  their  love  of  filthy 
lucre. 

The  Bouriattes  number  some  two  hundred  and 
seventy  thousand,  and  are  the  most  populous 
aboris^inal  tribe  that  exists  in  Eastern  Siberia. 
Their  language  is  a  kind  of  patois,  composed  of 
Mongol  and  Chinese,  in  which,  oddly  enough, 
a  few  Turkish  words  occasionally  crop  up.  How 
the  latter  language  ever  drifted  here  is  a  mystery, 
but  some  of  the  words  are  precisely  similar  in 
meaning  and  expression.  Like  their  neighbours, 
the    Mongols,   the    Bouriattes    are   Buddhists,    al- 


444  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND, 

thoiif]fli  some  very  few  have  remained  Cliamans 
(their  old  and  primitive  rehgion),  and  fewer 
still  are  Christians.  European  missionaries  find 
the  conversion  of  Chaman  Bouriattes  tolerably 
easy,  that  of  Buddhists  impossible.  About  every 
fourth  Bouriatte  becomes  a  Lama,  and  takes 
vows  of  celibacy.  One  of  the  Buddhist  laws  pre- 
cludes a  Lama  from  killing  anything,  be  it  only  a 
flea  ;  and  I  have  seen  the  poor  fellows  writhing 
under  the  torture  inflicted  by  vermin,  but 
suffering  in  silence,  till  some  friend  in  need  has 
come  up  and  annihilated  their  tormentors. 

Such  is  a  brief  sketch  of  the  aboriginal  tribes 
of  Siberia,  a  people  I  have  passed  over  lightly,  as  we 
saw  little  or  nothing  of  them  during  our  transit 
through  Siberia,  and  I  wish  to  present  that  coun- 
try to  the  reader  exactly  as  I  saw  it.  Siberia  is 
now  almost  as  much  the  "  land  of  the  stranger  "  as 
Australia,  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  less 
than  a  century  hence,  the  aboriginal  tribes  of 
Eastern  Siberia  will,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Russianized  Bouriatte,  have  disappeared  altogether 
from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

We  now  set  about  making  preparations  for  the 
journey    to    Tomsk.      Our     tarantass    was   again 


IRKOUTSK.  445 

overhauled,  a  very  necessary  proceeding  after 
our  rough  journey  through  Trans-Baikalia,  or 
what  we  then  thought  rough.  It  was  a  mere 
trifle  to  what  was  in  store  for  us.  Embarking 
on  a  journey  in  Siberia  means  a  preparation  of 
at  least  three  days.  One  cannot,  as  in  England, 
pack  up  a  portmanteau  and  be  off  at  a  few  hours' 
notice.  There  is  firstly  the  permission  of  the 
police  required  to  enable  one  to  leave  a  town  or 
city  at  all,  secondly  that  most  important  item  in 
Siberian  travel,  horses,  and  thirdly  a  document 
authorizing  the  holder  to  procure  them.  Tliis  is 
called  the  "  Podarojna,"  and  is  of  two  kinds. 

The  "  Kasiomne  "  or  Imperial  Podarojna  is  used 
only  by  Government  officials  of  all  classes,  who, 
though  they  pay  nothing  for  horses,  are  always 
served  first  at  a  post-station,  even  though  the  luck- 
less holder  of  a  privatne  or  second-class  podarojna, 
may  have  been  waiting  for  his  two  or  three  days. 
We  found  this  to  our  cost  on  several  occasions, 
notably  on  one,  where,  though  our  horses  were 
already  harnessed,  and  we  were  about  to  start,  a 
Government  engineer  dashed  up,  and  producing  his 
kasiomne,  had  them  taken  away  from  us  and  pro- 
ceeded calmly  on  his  way,  leaving  us  to  curse  him 


44G  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

and  our  fate,  and  wait  another  twenty-four  hours . 
In  urgent  cases,  such  as  an  imperial  messenger 
with  despatches  from  Moscow  or  Petersburg,  the 
kasiomne  is  written  in  red  ink,  and  marked 
*'  Courier,"  when,  though  there  may  be  no  horses 
available  in  the  station,  the  inhabitants  of  the  village 
are  bound  to  provide  them. 

The  ordinary  podarojna  is  called  the  "  Privatne," 
and  costs  twenty-five  roubles.  This  entitles  the 
holder  to  horses  at  any  station  where  they  may 
be  available,  but  they  must  always  be  taken  out  and 
handed  over  to  the  fortunate  possessor  of  a  first-class 
podarojna,  should  the  latter  make  his  appearance 
before  the  tarantass  has  actually  started.  To  ob- 
viate this  difficulty  a  private  company  has  lately 
been  started  at  all  the  stations  on  the  Great  Post- 
Road,  to  provide  the  holders  of  second-class  poda- 
rojnas  with  horses.  They  charge  exorbitant  fares, 
however,  and  we  always  preferred  to  wait  even  two 
or  three  days  for  the  regular  Government  horses. 
In  some  cases  we  found  that  the  Government  post- 
master and  manager  of  the  private  company  were  in 
leaQ:ue  to  rob  travellers. 

Provisions  also  had  to  be  thought  of,  and  those  of 
the  most  portable  kind — sardines,  Liebig's  Extract,  a 


ir.KouTSK.  44:7 

small  cliest  of  tea,  sugar,  and  half  a  dozen  pots  of 
jam  constituted  our  commissariat  department, 
together  with  two  bottles  of  cognac,  and  half  a 
dozen  flasks  of  vodka,  for  with  the  exception  of 
milk,  black  bread,  and  eggs,  nothing  is  to  be 
got  as  a  rule  at  the  post-stations.  We  invariably 
found  a  menu  with  prices  affixed  on  the  walls  of 
every  waiting-room,  even  in  the  smallest  villages, 
but  on  inquiry,  the  tempting  list  of  cutlets,  beef- 
steak, &c.,  &c.,  usually  dwindled  down  to  the  homely 
but  unappetizing  egg  and  black  bread  !  Indeed, 
with  the  exception  of  Krasnoiarsk,  Nijni-Udinsk, 
and  Kansk,  this  constituted  our  sole  fare  from 
Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk,  with  one  exception,  where, 
delayed  for  a  couple  of  days  at  Sonkovskaya,  we 
were  res:aled  with  a  basin  of  broth  at  the  villao-e 
ostrog,  or  prison.  I  think  that  plate  of  soup  did 
more  towards  dispelling  any  wild  notions  I  may 
have  had  anent  the  ill-treatment  of  Siberian  exiles 
than  pages  of  writing  !  Many  a  time,  when  delayed 
on  the  road,  have  I  smelt  the  savoury  fumes  from 
the  ostrog  cook-house  with  envy,  as  I  slunk  back 
disgusted  to  my  stale  egg  and  black  bread  at  the 
post-house.  Sad  though  their  lot  undoubtedly  is,  the 
Siberian  convicts  are   not  only  well  clad,  but  con- 


448  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

siderably  better  fed  than  our  own  criminals  in 
England.  Be  it  understood  tliat  I  speak  of  criminals, 
and  not  political  prisoners  or  nihilists,  to  whom, 
notwithstanding  all  that  ardent  Russophiles  may 
sa}^,  Siberia  is  a  veritable  hell  upon  earth.  The 
Russian  "criminal"  is  exiled  to  colonize,  the 
Russian  "  nihilist  "  (in  most  cases)  to  die. 

Personally,  I  would  very  much  sooner  undergo  a 
term  of  imprisonment  for  a  criminal  offence  in 
Siberia  than  in  England.  The  work  in  summer  is 
undoubtedly  harder,  but  during  the  winter  months, 
when  mining  is  suspended,  convicts  at  Irkoutsk  are 
employed  for  the  most  part  in  cigarette-making,  or 
work  of  a  similar  light  nature,  while  they  are  treated 
with,  more  laxity,  and  enjoy  far  more  liberty,  than  in 
our  convict-prisons  at  home.  Smoking  is  not  for- 
bidden, card-playing  and  other  games  allowed,  and 
free  conversation,  for  in  Siberia  solitary  confinement 
among  criminals  is  unknown,  while,  as  a  rule,  their 
friends,  if  they  have  any  in  the  neighbourhood,  are 
permitted  to  see  them  once  a  month,  and  on  these 
occasions  are  allowed  to  bring  the  prisoner  tobacco, 
food,  and  any  other  luxuries,  excepting  alcoholic 
liquors.  Even  in  this  respect,  however,  the  rules 
are  by  no  means  stringent. 


A   SIEKPJAX   CPaMINAL   CONVICT. 


Page  44S 


IKKOUTSK.  449 

I  am  now  writing  of  what  came  under  my  own 
personal  observation  at  Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk,  for 
save  on  one  or  two  occasions  we  were  never  allowed 
to  enter  a  village  ostrog,  nor  at  any  time  to  exchange 
words  with  political  prisoners  while  in  confine- 
ment. As,  however,  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
population  at  Irkoutsk  consisted  of  political  exiles 
living  under  police  surveillance,  I  was  able  to  gather 
some  interesting;  details  from  this  class  relative  to 
their  life  while  in  prison  and  at  the  mines,  which 
soon  convinced  me  that  even  a  murderer  is  better  off 
in  Siberia  than  the  writer  of  a  so-called  offensive 
political  article,  in  a  Petersburg  or  Moscow  journal, 
or  the  enthusiastic  student  who  has  too  openly  ex- 
pressed his  views  on  the  great  social  question.  Where 
the  criminal  is  allowed  to  mix  freely  with  his  fellows 
and  receive  his  friends,  the  "  political  "  is  kept  in 
solitary  confinement,  forbidden  not  only  to  address 
his  warders,  but  also,  which  is  a  far  greater  punish- 
ment, deprived  of  the  use  of  books,  pens,  ink,  and 
paper.  Smoking  is  also  in  his  case  strictly  tabooed, 
and  any  food  but  that  specially  laid  down  by  prison 
rules.  And  if  the  men  are  harshly  treated,  let  the 
reader  imagfine  the  torture  it  must  mean  to  women 
of    refinement  and    education   who   have   been    ac- 


450  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS   BY    LAND. 

customed  to  the  comforts  of  civilized  life,  to  be 
suddenly  thrust  into  the  midst,  if  not  the  company, 
of  a  gang  of  murderers,  thieves,  and  vagabonds.  I 
met,  while  at  Trkoutsk,  one  of  the  female  political 
exiles  whose  portrait  appears  in  these  pages  (but 
whose  name  I  suppress  for  obvious  reasons),  and 
heard  from  her  own  lips  the  outrages  and  indig- 
nities which  she  had  been  subjected  to  by  her 
guards  on  the  long  ten  months'  march  from  Tomsk 
to  Nertchinsk.  Her  life,  she  said,  had  indeed  been  a 
hell.  It  was  only  on  arrival  at  the  mines  that  she 
got  comparative  rest,  for  though  the  work  was 
harder,  it  was  preferable  to  the  society  of  the  brutes 
who  had  persecuted  her  during  the  long,  lazy  summer 
marches.  She  is  now  at  Irkoutsk  for  life,  and  with 
the  exception  of  daily  reporting  herself  at  the  police 
registry,  is  a  free  woman,  so  long  as  she  keeps  to 
a  radius  of  ten  miles  of  that  city.  But  although 
barely  five  and  twenty,  the  march  and  two  years  at 
the  mines  have  turned  her  once  auburn  hair  snow 
white. 

There  are,  no  doubt,  those  who  richly  merit 
their  fate.  Vera  Anitchkoff,  for  instance,  who 
will  never  leave  the  mines  again.  The  prisoner 
depicted  in  prison  dress   is  Count ,  a  Polish 


IRKOUTSK.  451 

nobleman,  who  not  ten  years  ago  had  a  hotel  in 
Paris,  a  villa  at  Cannes,  and  who,  stoic  and 
brave  fellow  as  he  is,  remarked  that  he  would 
not  mind  so  much  had  they  not  given  him  "  cefte 
coiffure  ridicule  !  "  The  French  journalist,  M.D.,was 
one  of  the  most  prominent  members  of  the  Paris 
commune,  and  is  certainly  well  out  of  the  way,  for 
a  more  desperate  and  dangerous  character  never 
harangued  a  mob  from  the  barricades.  There  are  at 
least  a  dozen  communists  in  various  parts  of  Siberia, 
who,  escaping  from  France  in  1S70,  have  made  their 
way  to  Petersburg  and  other  Russian  cities,  only 
to  get  into  fresh  trouble  and  receive  their  quietus 
in  the  gold-mines  of  Trans-Baikal  and  forests  of 
Sakhalin.  TTe,  however,  saw  but  two,  M.D.  and 
our  friend  the  Pole,  on  the  shores  of  Baikal.  The 
other  two  portraits  represented  are  criminal  types, 
one  that  of  a  man,  a  native  of  Nijni  Novgorod,  who 
had  murdered  bis  mother  and  two  sisters.  On  being 
asked  wby  he  had  committed  the  murders,  he  replied, 
"  Oh,  I  was  sick  of  my  family,  and  wanted  to  go  to 
Siberia.  There  is  money  to  be  made  there,  and  I 
could  not  afford  to  go  at  my  own  expense  !  "  And 
such  men  as  this  are  to  be  the  pioneers  and  colonizers 
of  Asiatic  Russia  !  for  no  criminal,  however  bad,  ever 

G  g  2 


452  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

goes  to  Siberia  without  a  notion  tliat  one  day,  sooner 
or  later,  he  will  obtain  his  ticket  of  leave,  and  with  it  a 
house,  a  piece  of  ground,  and  a  sum  of  money  to  start 
him  in  life.  No  wonder  that  most  of  the  gangs  we 
met  on  the  road  were  composed  of  cheery,  happy-go- 
lucky  fellows,  chafiing  tlieir  guards,  singing,  smoking, 
and  laughing,  a  striking  contrast  to  the  dozen 
or  so  of  wretched  men  and  women  in  plain  clothes 
jolting  along  the  rough  road  in  tumbrils  behind 
them,  some  of  the  women  pale,  delicate-looking 
creatures  with  a  baby  at  the  breast,  who  looked  as  if 
death,  and  not  the  gloomy  prison-gates  of  Irkoutsk 
or  Kara,  would  end  their  journey. 

It  is  not,  I  imagine,  generally  known  that  a 
political  exile  is  divorced  from  wife  or  husband  the 
day  that  the  Ourals  are  crossed  from  Europe  into 
Asia.  This  is  voluntary  on  the  part  of  the  man 
or  woman  ;  but,  as  may  be  imagined,  the  law 
is  fre(|uently  abused.  "  My  wife  is  guilty  of  con- 
spiring  against  the  Government,"  says  the  hen- 
pecked husband,  or,  "  My  husband  has  compromising 
papers  in  his  possession  :  search  the  house,"  says 
the  wife,  who  is  jealous  or  has  transferred  her 
affections,  and  the  thing  is  done.  There  is  no  delay 
in  such  cases.     A  couple  of  hours  settles  the  matter 


lEKOUTSK.  453 

one  way  or  an  other.  The  accused  is  not  tried 
publicly,  nor  is  he  allowed  to  plead  or  call  witnesses 
for  the  defence.  This  is  called  in  Russia,  "  Exile 
by  administrative  process."  "Within  a  week  of 
the  denunciation  the  victim  is  over  the  border, 
the  marriage  dissolved.  Such  cases  are,  however, 
rare.  Russian  ladies,  to  their  honour  be  it  said, 
accompany  as  a  rule  their  husbands  into  exile,  little 
knowing,  however,  the  hardships  and  dangers 
before  them  ;  little  dreaming  of  the  insults  which, 
though  free,  they  will  have  to  put  up  with  en 
route,  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  husband  power- 
less to  help  them.  As  for  the  unmarried  women 
(politicals)  that  are  sent  to  the  mines  alone,  their  end 
is  pretty  much  the  same  as  a  rule.  Their  two  or  five 
5'ears  of  prison  over,  they  are  allowed  to  settle  down 
in  Tomsk  or  Irkoutsk.  If  possessed  of  private  means 
(as  many  are),  iliey  are  allowed  to  enjoy  their  in- 
come. Is  it  not  for  the  benefit  of  Siberia  ?  Many 
take  to  trade,  become  dressmakers,  confectioners, 
milliners,  &c.,  &c.  ;  but  the  majority,  if  young  and 
pretty,  take  up  a  more  lucrative  though  less  respect- 
able profession.  Some  of  the  latter  class  almost 
vie  with  the  "  Demi-Mondaines  "  of  Paris  or  Vienna 
in  their  extravagance  and  the   splendour  of  their 


454  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

houses,  carriages,  and  diamonds.  Every  liberty- 
is  allowed  them,  save,  as  I  have  said,  the  trifling  in- 
convenience of  the  registry  of  their  names  every 
morning  at  eleven  at  the  police  office,  and  the 
somewhat  uncomfortable  feeling  of  not  being  able  to 
drive  or  ride  more  than  ten  miles  out  of  Irkoutsk, 
or  whatever  town  they  may  be  located  in.  I 
dined  on  one  occasion  with  one  of  these  ladies,  and 
one  could  scarcely  realize  that  the  clever  and  pretty 
hostess  who  entertained  us,  dressed  in  the  height  of 
Parisian  fashion,  and  who,  after  dinner,  charmed  us 
with  her  rendering  of  Beethoven  and  Mendels- 
sohn, had,  but  six  short  months  before,  been  sifting 
gold  and  washing  prisoners'  clothes  at  the  gold- 
mines of  Nertchinsk! 

One  hears  little  of  Nihilism  in  Irkoutsk.  It  is  a 
sealed  subject,  and,  except  on  rare  occasions,  never 
broached.  Here,  as  throughout  Siberia,  however, 
we  took  care  not  to  mix  in  any  political  discussions, 
a  piece  of  advice  I  would  tender  to  any  one  intend- 
ing to  make  this  journey.  Russians,  and  especially 
Siberians,  are  quick  to  take  offence,  and  on  one 
occasion  we  were  nearly  being  embroiled,  though 
quite  innocently,  in  a  serious  "  Fracas." 

It  was   in  a  cafe  on  the  outskirts    of  the  town. 


IRKOUTSK.  455 

In  ever}^  public  room,  be  it  post-house,  hotel, 
restaurant,  or  government  office,  there  is  a  por- 
trait of  His  Majesty  the  Czar,  flanked  in  a 
corner  by  the  "  Ikona,"  or  Sacred  Image. 
Ignorant  of  the  custom  of  the  country,  Lancaster 
and  I  one  evening  entered  one  of  these  places 
without  removing  our  hats.  The  room  was 
crowded,  for  it  was  a  jDublic  holiday,  and 
all  were  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of 
copious  libations  of  vodka  and  other  drinks 
they  had  imbibed  during  the  day.  Seating 
ourselves  at  a  small  table  in  their  midst,  I  was 
not  a  little  surprised  to  feel,  the  moment  after,  a 
violent  blow  at  the  back  of  my  head,  and  at  the 
same  moment  to  see  my  hat  whizzing  through 
the  air  to  the  other  side  of  the  "  Salle." 
We  were  both  armed,  but  luckily  for  ourselves 
had  the  presence  of  mind  to  keep  our  revolvers 
in  our  pockets.  Had  they  been  produced,  I  doubt 
if  either  of  us  would  have  left  the  place  alive. 
Fortunately  the  owner  of  the  cafe  spoke  French, 
and  apologizing  for  the  conduct  of  his  guests, 
explained  that  the  sole  cause  of  their  annoy- 
ance was  that  we  had  omitted  to  doff  our  hats  to 
the    Czar's    picture.     The  affair  was  soon  settled, 


456  FKOM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

for  the  gentleman  who  had  assaulted  us  came  up 
and  profusely  apologized  for  his  conduct  in  not 
knowing  that  we  were  unacquainted  with  the 
customs  of  the  country  !  There  must  have  been 
fifty  or  sixty  Siberians  (all  more  or  less  drunk)  in 
the  place.  Had  there  been  a  tliird  that  number,  or 
even  half,  I  should  have  felt  sorely  tempted  to  go 
for  the  swaggering  bully,  who  w^as  meek  enough 
when,  peace  being  restored,  we  showed  him  our 
newest  patent  in  American  "  six-shooters." 

The  Irkoutsk  police  is  utterly  inadequate  to 
the  size  of  the  city.  Any  one  creating  a  disturb- 
ance at  night  is  not,  as  in  London  and  other 
European  cities,  incarcerated  for  the  night  and 
brought  before  the  magistrate  in  the  morning. 
That  worthy,  in  Irkoutsk,  sits  up  all  night,  and  dis- 
poses of  cases  summarily  by  fine  or  imprison- 
ment as  may  be  necessary.  A  somewhat  amusing 
incident  happened  while  we  were  there,  showing 
the  manner  in  which  these  gentlemen  administer 
justice.  Half  a  dozen  young  men,  who  had 
dined  not  wisely  but  too  well,  were  returning 
homewards,  when  they  encountered  a  decrepit  old 
man,  whom,  by  way  of  a  joke,  they  fell  upon,  and 
nearly  beat  to  death.     The  police  patrol  happening 


llilvOUTSK.  457 

to  pass  nt  the  moment,  two  of  tliese  spirited  youths 
were  taken  into  custody,  the  remainder  managed 
to  escape.  On  arrival  at  the  pohce  station,  one 
of  the  offenders  discovered  an  old  acquaintance 
in  the  inspector,  who,  however,  declined  to 
allow  the  bond  of  friendship  to  interfere  with  his 
stern  sense  of  duty.  "  I  must  fine  you  Rs.  50 
each,"  said  the  Siberian  Nupkins,  "  but  as  we  are 
old  friends,  you  shall  pay  it  to  me,  and  we  will  drink 
it  in  champagne.  How  we  shall  get  the  laugh  over 
those  idiots  who  ran  away  ! "  History  does  not 
state  whether  the  old  man  died.  He  was  still  in 
hospital  when  we  left.  Such  is  magisterial  justice 
in  Siberia  ! 

The  morality  of  Irkoutsk  is,  as  I  have  said, 
at  an  exceedingly  low  ebb.  Our  Danish  friend 
Madame  R.,  was  on  her  arrival  called  upon  by  a 
young  and  handsome  woman,  beautifully  dressed, 
with  whom  in  less  than  a  week  she  had  struck 
up  a  violent  friendship,  for  both  had  tastes  in 
common,  and  were  fond  of  music  and  art.  A  few 
days  afterwards,  Madame  R.,  to  her  great  delight, 
found  another  friend,  the  Baroness  Podorski,  who 
had  spent  many  months  at  Copenhagen.  But  it  was 
somewhat  disappointing,  said  Madame  R.,  to  find 


458  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

soon  after,  that  the  baroness  had  done  five  years  at 
the  mines  for  murdering  her  niece,  a  rich  heiress, 
by  slow  poison  at  Moscow,  and  was  now  Hving 
on  the  proceeds  as  a  queen  of  society  at  Irkoutsk. 
CaUing  to  see  her  other  friend  one  afternoon, 
Madame  R.  found  her  gone.  "  It  is  sad,"  said  her 
host,  "  but  we  have  quarrelled,  and  she  has  gone  to 

live   with  B ■,  of  the  Cossacks.     You  know  we 

were  not  married."  The  state  of  things  in  the 
country  is  little  better.  When  a  peasant  is  about 
to  be  married,  he  lives  in  a  state  of  single  blessedness 
with  his  fiancee  for  six  months.  If  at  the  end  of 
that  period  she  is  found  to  be  enceinte,  the  wedding 
takes  place,  if  not,  they  separate  and  form  new 
liaisons.  But  this  custom  exists  only  in  Siberia, 
and  even  there  is  gradually  dying  out  in  the  more 
civilized  districts. 

One  morning,  about  five  days  before  our 
departure,  we  were  seated  at  breakfast,  when 
a  stout  and  portly  old  gentleman  was  shown 
in.  The  stranger  must  have  weighed  at  least 
sixteen  stone,  and  was  broad  in  proportion. 
After  a  deal  of  palaver,  we  elicited  that  this  good 
gentleman  desired  to  become  our  fellow-traveller 
as  far  as  Tomsk,  proposed  in  other  words  to  use 


lEKOUTSK.  459 

our  tarantass,  eat  our  provisions,  and  do  the 
journey  for  exactly  a  third  the  amount  it  wouhi 
otherwise  have  cost  him.  In  vain  we  pointed  out 
that  our  vehicle  was  already  full,  that  there  was  no 
room  for  a  third.  "  No  matter,"  he  said,  smiling 
blandly,  "I  will  lie  between  you."  The  pros- 
pect of  arriving  at  Tomsk  as  flat  as  a  pancake,  to 
say  nothing  of  being  asphyxiated  by  the  fumes  of 
garlic  and  tobacco,  were  too  much,  and  we  there- 
fore intimated  to  our  visitor  politely  but  firmly  that 
we  declined  his  company.  He,  however,  as  firmly 
declined  to  take  a  refusal  or  leave  our  room  till 
about  5  p.m.,  having  sat  in  a  chair  and  watched 
our  every  movement  for  three  mortal  hours  without 
uttering  a  syllable.  We  had  at  last  to  ring  the  bell 
and  insist  on  his  being  shown  out.  "  Then  you 
will  not  take  me  ?  "  he  said  with  a  sigh.  "  Ah  !  you 
are  wrong.  Read  that.  I  will  call  again  to- 
morrow," and  leaving  a  slip  of  paper  on  the  table, 
he  slowly  left  the  room. 

Translation  from  the  Irlcoutsh  Gazette  of  July  7th, 
1887  :— 

"The  roads  between  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk  are 
infested  with  runaway  convicts,  so  that  travelling 
in   this   region,   especially    at   night,    is    extremely 


460  FROM    PEKIN   TO   CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

dangerous.  Lately,  a  wliole  family  was  murdered 
at  the  distance  of  a  few  versts  from  Irkoutsk,  and 
we  hear  of  such  cases  frequently  enough." 

So  ran  the  paper.  I  did  not  at  first  pay  much 
heed  to  what  I  imagined  was  a  scheme  of  our  fat 
friend  to  make  us  take  him  as  an  additional 
protection.     It  was  not  pleasant  news,  though  ;  so  I 

took  it  to  R ,  who,  good  Russian  scholar,  would 

be  able  to  enlighten  us  as  to  whether  it  ever  had 
appeared  in  the  Irkoutsk  paper.  The  file  was  soon 
found,  and  somewhat  to  my  disappointment,  the 
paragraph  in  black  and  white,  with  an  additional 
piece  of  advice  from  the  Police  Department  not  to 
travel  on  the  Great  Post-Road,  except  in  urgent 
cases,  at  night. 

Our  fat  friend  called  again  next  day,  but  we  were 
obdurate.  "  Ah !  you  will  be  sorry  for  it,  my 
friends,"  he  said.  "  This,"  producing  a  horse 
pistol,  apparently  some  centuries  old,  "  tbis  would 
have  been  no  mean  help  in  a  skirmish.  News 
has  come  to-day  by  telegraph  that  a  party  of  mer- 
chants have  been  attacked  by  escaped  convicts  near 
Krasnoiarsk,  two  killed  and  the  others  severely 
maltreated  and  robbed.  Well,  good-day,  and  may 
you  reach  Tomsk  ahve." 


IKKOUTSK.  461 

We  found  on  inquiry  that  the  roads,  so  far  as 
robbers  were  concerned,  were  in  a  highly  dangerous 
state.  Nor  was  this  the  only  difficulty  with  which 
we  had  to  contend.  Heavy  rains  had  flooded  the 
country  and  made  it  almost  impassable  between  Nijni 
Udinsk,  and  Kansk,  a  couple  of  hundred  versts  from 
Irkoutsk.  Of  this  we  had  practical  proof,  for  the 
last  mail  from  Petersburg  had  been  delayed  five  days. 
We  hoped,  all  being  well,  to  make  Moscow  by  the 
1st  of  October;  but  in  no  country,  as  far  as  travel  is 
concerned,  is  the  old  proverb  so  clearly  demonstrated 
of  "Homme  propose,  et  Dieu  dispose,"  as  in  Siberia. 
If  by  any  chance  we  were  detained  in  Eastern 
Siberia  till  after  the  1st  of  October,  we  should  have 
to  wait  at  Tomsk  for  the  snow  to  set,  and  sleigh 
on  to  Nijni  Novgorod,  not  a  pleasant  prospect. 
We  had  seen  quite  enough  of  a  Siberian  city  to 
know  that  a  residence  therein  of  a  week  or  ton 
days  is  more  than  enough.  Irkoutsk,  the  R.'s  said, 
was  far  pleasanter  in  every  way  than  Tomsk,  a 
circumstance  that  made  us  all  the  more  dread  an 
enforced  residence  of  two,  or  perhaps  three,  mouths 
in  the  latter  city,  in  the  worst  season  of  the  year — 
autumn. 

We  were  luckily  well  armed,  and  took  pains  to 


462  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

show  it  to  the  servants  of  the  hotel,  for  in  nine 
cases  out  of  ten  the  latter  and  the  yemstchiks  (or 
drivers)  are  in  league  with  the  thieves,  who  rarely 
attack  in  the  day-time,  which  was  a  comfort.  Still 
the  prospect  of  a  journey  of  over  a  thousand 
miles  through  a  country  infested  with  bandits 
and  vagabonds  did  not  sound  cheering,  especially 
as,  in  the  case  of  the  murdered  family,  the  robbers 
were  armed  with  revolvers.  On  the  latter  occasion, 
when  a  man,  his  wife,  and  two  children  had  been 
killed,  the  yemstchik  alone  had  escaped,  which 
fact,  significant  as  it  seemed,  did  not  induce 
the  authorities  to  detain  or  even  examine  him. 
The  murders  had  taken  place  at  Tiretskaya,  a 
lonely  village  about  sixty  versts  from  Irkoutsk. 
We  were  furnished  before  starting  with  a  small 
printed  guide  at  the  Irkoutsk  station,  whereon  were 
marked,  by  black  stars,  the  stages  most  infested 
by  foot-pads.  Beyond  Nijni  Udinsk,  or  about  a 
hundred  and  twenty  versts  from  Irkoutsk,  the 
roads  were  practically  safe. 

We  now  had  but  two  things  to  purchase,  literature 
and  furs.  We  commenced  by  ransacking  the  book- 
shops, but,  alas  !  found  nothing  but  the  works  of 
Jules  Verne,  with  an  occasional  book  of  Zola's. 
English  books  there  were   absolutely  none,  but  of 


lliKOUTSK.  463 

German  works,  ancient  and  modern,  there  was  no 
lack.  The  latter,  however,  were  no  use  to  its,  and 
we  were  forced  to  be  content  with  a  copy  of 
Jules  Verne's  "Voyage  dans  la  Lune,"  "Michel 
Strogoff,"  by  the  same  author,  and  Zola's  "  Assom- 
moir."  I  verily  believe  I  could  say  any  of  the  three 
off  by  heart,  for  we  got  no  other  books  till  we 
reached  Nijni  Novgorod.  I  do  not  know  what  I 
should  have  done  without  Reiff's  Russian  Grammar 
and  Dictionary,  with  the  help  of  which  I  managed 
to  scrape  up  a  little  Russian,  which  on  more  than 
one  occasion  stood  me  in  good  stead.  Contrary  to 
general  belief,  a  superficial  knowledge  of  this 
language  is  very  soon  learnt.  In  less  than  a 
month  I  was  able  to  converse  fairly  well,  and  ask 
for  what  I  wanted,  though  I  cannot  vouch  for 
my  grammar. 

Furs  were  the  next  consideration,  and  I  was 
surprised  to  find  how  dear  they  were;  but  the 
fact  that  all,  even  the  commonest,  have  to  be 
sent  to  Moscow  to  be  cured  and  made  up,  ex- 
plained this.  A  pelisse  of  the  cheapest  kind, 
reindeer   skin    outside    and    sea-bear    in,  cost    me 

nearly  221.,  and  then    R told  me  that  I  had 

not  paid  too  dear.     The  same  skins  unmade  would 
have  cost  about  121.     My  friend  the  Polish  barman 


464  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

attempted  to  dissuade  me  from  buying  one  at  all, 
saying  we  should  find  fur  clothes  useless,  the 
weather  would  be  so  hot,  but  I  was  very  glad  of 
my  "  dacha  "  and  seal  cap  on  more  than  one  occa- 
sion before  we  got  to  Tomsk.  The  most  costly  fur 
procurable  in  Siberia  is  the  silver  fox,  or  rather  the 
paws  of  that  animal.  No  comme-il-faid  person 
ever  thinks  of  wearing  any  other  part,  for  the  whole 
skin  is  only  worth  one-tenth  part  of  one  of  the 
tiny,  velvety  paws.  The  next  in  value  is  the  beaver, 
then  the  sable,  the  marten,  and  astrakan,  the  last 
being  bear,  elk,  and  reindeer,  which  latter  are, 
however,  only  worn  by  the  lower  orders. 

A  great  Russian  speculator,  M.  SiberakofP,  ar- 
rived at  the  Moskovskaya  the  evening  before  we 
left.  I  heard  with  regret  that  he  had  left  early 
next  morning  for  Nicolaiefsk,  for  I  was  most 
anxious  to  see  the  individual  who  may  be  called 
the  Eothschild  and  Lesseps  of  Siberia.  No 
enterprise  of  any  magnitude  is  ever  attempted 
without  first  consulting  and,  if  possible,  obtain- 
ing M.  Siberakoff's  name  on  the  board  of  direc- 
tors, and  his  last  venture  may  indeed  be  called  a 
leviathan  one — establishing  a  waterway  between 
Petersburg  and  Irkoutsk.     How  many  million  rou- 


lEKOUTSK.  465 

bles  this  will  cost  I  should  be  afraid  to  say,  but  it 
is  a  private  speculation,  and  undertaken  solely  at 
M.  Siberakoff's  cost.  The  idea  was  first  started  by 
the  difficulty  and  annoyance  created  by  constantly 
changing  goods,  tea,  silk,  &c.,  from  boats  on  to 
caravan  carts  on  the  Great  Post-Road.  A  water- 
way, thought  Siberakoff,  would  obviate  all  this. 
There  was  but  one  way  of  doing  it  :  to  join  the 
Obi  river  with  the  Gulf  of  Archangel,  one 
great  drawback  to  this  being  that  Burroughes 
Straits,  in  the  Frozen  Ocean,  through  which 
vessels  would  have  to  pass,  is  hardly  ever  free 
from  ice.  To  obviate  this  difficulty,  Siberakoff 
cut  a  canal  from,  the  River  Petchora  to  Obdorsk, 
on  the  Obi  river.  The  magnitude  of  the  under- 
taking may  be  estimated  when  I  say  that  this 
had  to  be  cut  through  the  Oural  Mountains.  From 
Obdorsk  Siberakoff's  boats  will  descend  the  Obi  river 
as  far  as  Piatko,  where  they  will  enter  the  Chulim 
river,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Obi.  From  here  another 
canal  has  been  cut  into  the  Yenisei  river.  From 
this  point  they  will  go  north  again  till  the  junction 
of  the  Angara  and  Yenisei  is  reached,  and  thence 
they  will  descend  the  former  stream  to  Irkoutsk. 
The  work  is  now  nearly  completed,  and  we  saw  at 

H  h 


466  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Tiumen  two  of  the  small  steamers  destined  for  tlic 
towing  of  barges.  There  will  thus  be  (in  summer) 
an  unbroken  waterway  between  the  Baltic  and 
Lake  Baikal. 

It   is    certainly  hard   on    the   promoter    of   this 
scheme,   that  since   all  this  has  been  carried   out, 
surveys   for   a    railway   between    Tomsk   and    Ir- 
koutsk   have  been  made  by  the  Russian  Grovern- 
ment,    indeed    the   work   has    already   been   com- 
menced,   and   will  be   completed,  it  is    confidently 
expected,  by   the   end    of    1889.     It   will   then   be 
possible    to   go   from    Petersburg    to  Pekin  over- 
land in  under  two  months,  though  the  Great  Gobi 
Desert  must    always  remain   a  stumbling-block  to 
entirely  connecting  the  capitals  of  Russia  and  China 
by  railway.     This  part  of  the  journey  will   always 
have  to  be  made,  as  at  present,  with- camels  or  horses, 
for  the  very  good  reason  that  two  most  important 
things — fuel    and    water — are   lacking   throughout 
Mongolia.     The    canal,  however,  will   probably  be 
carried  on  as  far   as   Khabarofka,  and   the  voyage 
thence  to  Pekin   be  made  by  aid  of  steamers  now 
running  on  the  River  Amoor  as   far  as  Nicolaiefsk, 
and   thence   by  ocean    steamer   to    Tientsin.     The 
question    of  a   railway   from    Irkoutsk    to    Tomsk 


IRKOUTSK.  467 

has  often  been  mooted  within  the  past  ten  years, 
but  never  till  the  present  time  with  any  practical 
result.  Six  years  since,  an  American  firm  offered  to 
build  one  the  whole  distance,  from  Wladivostok,  on 
the  Sea  of  Japan,  to  Tomsk,  in  Central  Siberia. 
Their  conditioDS  were  a  lease  of  99  years,  and  a  free 
grant  from  Government  of  fifty  versts  on  each  side 
of  the  rail  the  whole  distance.  As  the  line  would 
have  passed  through  districts  teeming  with  gold 
and  platinum,  the  offer  was  declined.  The  line 
will  now  be  a  purely  Government  affair,  is 
being  constructed  almost  entirely  by  soldiers,  and 
engineered  by  the  same  officials  who  lately  super- 
intended the  construction  of  the  Trans-Caspian 
Railway. 

At  length,  on  the  23rd  of  August,  our  final 
preparations  were  completed,  and  we  now  only 
needed  the  permission  of  the  Inspector  of  police  to 
embark  upon  our  journey.  In  this  we  were 
singularly  lucky,  receiving  it  two  days  after  ap- 
plication, though  not  before  a  police  agent  had 
called  and  thoroughly  searched  our  boxes  and 
effects.  "  You  are  taking  no  letters,  I  trust," 
said  the  ofiicial  suspiciously.  "  I  presume  you 
know    the  penalty   of  being   found   in    the    Czar's 

H  h  2 


468  FROil    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

dominions  with  compromising  papers,  no  matter 
what  your  nationality."  I  assured  him  that  no 
being  existed  more  loyal  than  mjself  to  his 
Imperial  master,  mentally  thanking  Providence  at 
the  same  time  that  I  had  not  acceded  to  the  prayer 
of  my  dirty  friend  with  the  letter  for  Greek  Street, 
Soho. 

Our  good  friends  the  R s  insisted  on  enter- 
taining us  to  a  dinner  in  honour  of  our  departure 
the  night  before  we  left,  a  banquet  in  which  the 
chef  of  the  "  Moskovskaya "  excelled  himself,  and 
to  which  we  did  ample  justice.  Poor  little 
Madame  E, alone  cast  a  gloom  over  the  enter- 
tainment by  her  sad  face,  and  indeed  considering 
she  was  doomed  to  two  years'  exile  in  Irkoutsk, 
it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at.  After  dinner  we 
adjourned  to  the  opera,  where  the  poor  little 
woman  forgot  her  troubles  in  the  pretty,  sparkling 
music  of  "  La  Grande  Duchesse  "  and  the  antics  of 
a  wonderfully  well  acted  Fritz.  It  was  difficult  to 
imagine  oneself  in  this  far-away  corner  of  the  earth. 
The  large,  brightly-lit  theatre,  gold  and  crimson 
boxes,  and  stalls,  crowded  with  well-dressed  men 
and  women,  were  different,  indeed,  from  one's 
preconceived    notions    of    the   capital   of    Eastern 


IRKOUTSK.  469 

Siberia,  as  gleaned  from  "  Called  Back,"  and  works 

of  a  similar  nature.     R insisted  on  our  supping 

after  the  plaj,  and  it  was  daylight  ere  we  sought  our 
couch,  the  last  soft  bed  we  were  destined  to  enjoy 
for  many  days  to  come. 

We  found  a  telegram  that  evening  on  our  return 
to  the  hotel,  announcing  the  murder  of  Stanley, 
the  African  explorer,  and  the  whole  of  the  expedi- 
tion under  his  command.  The  report  seemed  to 
cause  as  much  excitement  in  Irkoutsk  as  if  war  had 
broken  out  between  England  and  Eussia,  though 
what  possible  interest  the  Eastern  Siberian  could 
have  in  Central  Africa  puzzled  me.  The  telegram 
coming  from  Petersburg  (and  not  from  England), 
I  strongly  doubted  the  news  being  correct,  though 
it  caused  me  some  uneasiness,  a  great  friend 
forming  part  of  the  expedition.^ 

Considering  the  remote  position  of  Irkoutsk  and 
difficulty  of  obtaining  European  stores,  &c.,  we  were 
agreeably  surprised  at  the  moderate  charges  made  by 
our  host  of  the  "  Moskovskaya."     Our  bill,  including 


'  ^fr.  J,  Jameson,  an  experienced  traveller  and  naturalist, 
whose  sad  death  from  fever,  since  these  pages  were  written,  has 
added  another  honoured  name  to  the  list  of  those  who  have 
fallen  in  the  cause  of  science  and  civilization  in  Central  Africa. 


470  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

everything,  was  only   11/.  a  head,   and  we   by  no 
means  stinted  ourselves. 

All  was  ready  by  eleven  o'clock  the  next  morning 
(24tli  August).  A  httle  crowd  had  assembled 
in  the  market-place  to  witness  the  strange  sight  of 
a  couple  of  Englishmen  about  to  cross  Siberia ! 
Madame  E, witnessed  the  start  from  the  bal- 
cony, and  her  neat  little  grey-clad  figure  and 
pretty  face  is  the  last  fair  vision  of  the  city 
that  I  can  recall,  as  having  seated  ourselves  in 
the  tarantass,  the  yemtschik  cracked  his  whip, 
the  game  little  horses  dashed  into  their  collars, 
and  we  rattled  away  with  a  loud  jangle  of  bells, 
past  the  sunny  deserted  streets  and  into  the  open 
country.  Half  an  hour  later  and  Ti'koutsk,  a 
glittering  speck  on  the  dark  green  horizon,  was 
barely  discernible. 


CHAPTER  X. 

IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK. 

Let  the  reader  picture  the  neighbourhood  of  Alder- 
shot  with  its  undulating  pine-clad  hills  suddenly 
transplanted  into  the  depths  of  the  black  country 
lying  around  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  For  stone 
buildings  let  him  substitute  filthy,  tumble-down 
houses  of  unpainted  wood,  almost  undistinguishable 
at  a  distance  from  the  dark,  greasy  soil  around 
them.  People  these  villages  with  dirty,  wild-look- 
ing men  clad  in  sheepskins  and  gaudy-coloured 
rags,  and  still  dirtier,  half-naked  women.  Conceive 
a  sickly  smell  (peculiar  to  Asiatic  Russia)  of  old 
skins,  wood,  smoke,  turpentine,  and  sewage,  and  a 
Siberian  landscape  is  before  you.  In  fine  weather  a 
fine  grey  dust  that  creeps  into  your  hair,  chokes  up 
eyes  and  nostrils,  and  renders  life  almost  unbearable ; 
on  a  wet  day  thick,  greasy,  black  mud  that  is  every- 
where. In  the  post-house,  in  the  tarantass,  there 
was  no  keeping  it  out.     I  do   not  know  which  was 


472  FROM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

worse — tlie  dust  or  the  mud — perhaps  tlie  latter, 
for  it  smelt  abominably,  and  stained  like  ink. 

We  had  looked  forward  to  fine  scenery  in  Siberia, 
lofty,  picturesque  ranges,  wooded  valleys,  and 
glorious  panoramas  of  forest  and  plain,  but  were 
grievously  disappointed,  for  the  scenery  between 
Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk  is,  with  one  or  two  exceptions, 
intolerably  monotonous  and  depressing.  My  recol- 
lections of  that  weary  journey  are  neither  pleasant 
nor  interesting.  Eastern  Siberia,  as  I  remember 
it,  is  simply  one  long  and  varying  succession  of 
three  colours :  Dark  green,  brown,  and  yellow — 
pines,  mud,  and  occasional  cornfields.  Of  the  fifty 
odd  villages  lying  between  the  capitals  of  Eastern 
and  Western  Siberia,  not  more  than  a  dozen  con- 
tained over  400  inhabitants.  Save  in  these  villages 
we  saw  no  signs  of  life  but  occasional  gangs  of 
prisoners,  or  a  stray  tarantass  or  telega.  The 
poet's  lines — 

"  Miles,  on  miles,  on  miles,  of  desolation, 
Leagues,  on  leagues,  on  leagues,  without  a  change,'' 

fitly    describe     the     country    through    which    we 
travelled  for  three  weeks  after  leaving  Irkoutsk. 

A  description  of  one  Siberian  village  will  sufiBce 
for  all.     The  houses,  for  the  most  part  of  rough  un- 


IKKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  473 

painted  wood,  Lave  an  untid}-,  unfinislied  appear- 
ance, tlie  majority  of  them  being  dangerously  out 
of  the  perpendicular.  The  effect  produced  by 
their  appearance  was  exactly  like  that  of  ships 
rolling  and  tumbling  about  in  a  high  sea,  some  with 
their  sterns  high  up  out  of  the  water,  others  with 
their  bows  buried  in  the  waves.  This  phenomenon  is 
caused  by  the  depression  of  the  ground  in  spring, 
when  the  snow  melts,  and  when  their  foundations 
being  very  insecure,  the  houses  fall  about  in  all 
directions.  I  saw  one  at  Kloutchefskaya,  near 
Kansk,  that  had  sunk  to  such  a  degree  that 
the  inmates  had  to  enter  it  on  all  fours.  The 
entire  absence  of  colour  in  these  villages  was  fear- 
fully depressing.  I  do  not  think  I  saw  a  single 
flower-garden  throughout  the  whole  journey.  In 
some  of  the  larger  villages  faint  attempts  at  deco- 
ration were  made  by  cutting  down  a  fir-tree  and 
sticking  it  (rootless)  into  the  ground  on  either  side 
of  the  road ;  but  as  this  had  been  done  in  early 
summer,  the  dark  green  of  the  firs  had  usually  faded, 
scorched  by  the  sun  into  a  dirty  drab,  making  the 
surroundings,  if  possible,  more  desolate  and  cheerless 
than  before.  In  every  Siberian  village,  however 
small,  are  three  Government  buildings  ;  the  church, 


474  FROM   PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

prison,  and  post-house ;  also,  situated  at  one  ex- 
tremity of  the  place  a  huge  wooden  barn,  in  which  a 
quantity  of  grain  is  stored  annually  by  the  villagers 
as  a  precaution  against  famine. 

We  found  the  post-houses  (which  are  situated  at 
intervals  of  every  twenty  or  twenty-five  versts) 
vary  considerably  in  comfort  and  cleanliness,  the 
best  being  about  on  a  par  with  a  decently  kept 
labourer's  cottaofe  in  E norland.  All  are  built  on  the 
same  model,  and  of  wood,  two  black  and  white 
pillars  at  the  door,  and  the  Imperial  arms  over 
the  gateway  alone  distinguishing  this  building  from 
the  other  rough  wooden  huts.  T^'o  room's,  or 
partitions,  each  about  twenty  feet  by  eighteen 
feet,  are  set  apart  for  the  use  of  travellers,  a  huge 
brick  stove  in  the  wall  heating  them  equally.  The 
floor  was  invariably  carpetless,  while  the  sole 
furniture  consisted  of  a  small  table  and  two  hard 
wooden  chairs,  sometimes,  but  not  often,  an  equally 
hard  wooden  sofa  ;  and  for  ornament  a  few  wood- 
cuts from  the  newspapers,  or  cheap  tawdrily 
coloured  portraits  of  the  Czar  and  Czarina  were 
pinned  on  the  greasy,  whitewashed  walls.  In  one 
corner  on  a  shelf  is  kept  the  "  Black  Book,"  a  volume 
in  which  travellers  are  invited  to  write  any  com- 


IKKODTSK    TO    TOMSK.  475 

plaints,  immediately  over  this  a  gaudy  brass  "  Ikon," 
or  picture  of  the  Holy  Virgin  or  Saviour,  which  no 
Russian's  room,  from  Czar  to  peasant,  is  ever  with- 
out. There  were  usually  two  windows — double 
ones — kept  hermetically  sealed  even  on  the  hottest 
day.  Washing  appliances  were,  of  course,  nil.  I 
should  hardly  like  to  own  how  often  I  washed  my 
face  and  hands  between  Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk  ! 
Ablutions  were  almost  entirely  dispensed  with  except 
for  a  handkerchief  dipped  into  a  tea-glass  from  the 
"  Samovar,"  and  passed  over  the  face  and  hands. 
With  this  *' lick  and  a  promise,"  one  had  to  be 
satisfied.  The  post-houses  differed  a  good  deal  in 
comfort  and  accommodation,  some  being  as  clean  and 
well  found  as  those  east  of  Lake  Baikal,  others  little 
better  than  human  pig-styes.  Curiously  enough, 
the  dirtiest  were  invariably  situated  near  the  large 
towns,  and  while  we  met  with  nothing  but  civility 
and  kindness  from  officials  in  the  wilder  districts, 
those  within  forty  versts  or  so  of  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk 
were  as  arrogant  and  extortionate  as  only  a  Siberian 
post-master  can  be. 

The  Great  Post-Road  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk, 
would  scarcely  be  called  a  road  in  any  other 
country.     In  wet  weather  it   becomes    a   morass. 


476  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

in  dry  seasons  the  thick  grey  dust  is  up  to  the 
axles,  while  in  early  autumn  the  centre  track  is  often 
so  cut  \\i>  by  caravans  as  to  make  wheel  traffic 
quite  impossible.  The  yemstchiks  then  diverge  to 
the  right  or  left,  where,  though  the  going  is  not 
so  heavy,  the  numerous  tree-stumps,  watercourses, 
felled  logs,  &c.,  render  it  anything  but  safe.  I  often 
wondered  our  tarantass  did  not  come  to  pieces 
altogether  long  before  reaching  Tomsk.  No  Euro- 
pean carriage  would  have  stood  the  work  twenty- 
four  hours.  A  triple  telegraph  wire  runs  the  entire 
length  of  the  road,  and  is  carried  on  eastwards  from 
Irkoutsk  to  Wladivostok,  a  town  of  about  2000  in- 
habitants, and  the  headquarters  of  the  Russian  Naval 
Squadron  in  Siberian  waters.  There  is  no  telegraph, 
direct  to  Pekin.  I  was  surprised,  at  times,  to  miss 
the  wires  altogether  for  twenty  or  thirty  versts  but 
found,  on  inquiry,  that  they  are  sometimes  laid 
under  ground  on  account  of  the  violent  storms  that 
sweep  across  the  steppes,  chiefly  near  Krasnoiarsk 
and  Marinsk.  Telegraphing  in  the  Russian  Em- 
pire is  cheap  enough  in  all  conscience.  A  message 
may  be  sent  from  Petersburg  to  Wladivostok  for 
fifteen  kopeks,  or  about  2^d.  a  word ;  from  the 
capital  to  all  parts  of  European  Russia,  for  a  third 
of  that  sum. 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  477 

"We  dashed  along  gaily  the  first  two  stages  out 
of  Irkoutsk,  passing,  a  few  versts  out,  the  monastery 
of  St.  Innocent,  a  huge  stone  building  erected  at  the 
cost  of  many  million  roubles  by  the  gold-merchants 
of  the  capital.  This  saint  is  supposed  to  protect 
travellers,  and  none  of  the  wealthier  mine-owners 
ever  dream  of  taking  a  journey  without  first 
making  a  substantial  offering  at  his  shrine.  Such 
voyages  are  necessarily  frequent  enough,  and  the  sum 
total  at  the  end  of  the  year  is  considerable.  It  was 
almost  like  a  glimpse  of  Italy  or  Southern  France 
to  peep  in  through  the  open  gateway,  the  priests 
in  their  brown  and  white  robes,  strolling  bare- 
headed about  the  sunny,  vine-clad  gardens,  and 
shady  cloisters.  The  tower  at  the  eastern  side  of 
the  building,  is  lofty,  and  of  graceful  architecture, 
but  the  fine  effect  is  entirely  spoilt  by  a  large 
sham  clock,  just  beneath  the  steeple,  its  painted 
hands  pointing  eternally  to  half-past  twelve. 
The  Siberians  apparently  have  a  mania  for  these, 
for  I  afterwards  noticed  them  on  many  public  and 
Government  buildings  at  Tomsk,  Krasnoiarsk,  and 
Tobolsk. 

We  reached  Bokovskaya,  the  first  post-station  out 
of  Irkoutsk,  a  little  after  two  o'clock,  and  were  lucky 
enough  to  obtain  horses  at  once,  a  circumstance  that 


478  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    CY    LAND. 

did  not  tlien  strike  one  as  out  of  tlie  way,  but  we 
had  as  yet  but  little  experience  of  Siberian  post- 
masters and  tbeir  ways.  It  was  getting  dusk  as  we 
reached  the  little  village  of  Tielminskaya,  where 
our  first  check  occurred.  Though  we  had  covered 
but  little  ground,  bright  sunshine,  a  comfortable 
tarantass,  and  good  horses,  made  our  first  day's 
posting  so  pleasant  that  we  began  to  think  the 
discomforts  of  Siberian  travel  had  been  exagge- 
rated by  our  Danish  friends.  To  be  sure  we  had 
only  come  thirty  versts,  and  over  one  thousand 
five  hundred  lay  between  us  and  the  good  city  of 
Tomsk  ! 

The  waiting-room  at  Tielminskaya  had  just  been 
vacated  by  a  Siberian  family  eii  route  for  Irkoutsk. 
Its  appearance  was,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  uninviting, 
and  did  not  give  one  a  very  high  opinion  of  the 
cleanliness  of  the  Siberian  en  voyage.  No  horses 
were  obtainable  till  four  o'clock  next  morning,  so  we 
spread  our  furs  and  rugs  on  the  floor,  resolving 
to  sleep  in  the  waiting-room,  filthy  as  it  was.  One 
might,  to  use  a  slang  expression,  have  cut  the 
atmosphere  with  a  knife.  Though  it  had  been 
oppressively  warm  all  day,  every  window  was  tightly 
closed,  while  a  huge  fire  roared  in  the  brick  stove. 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  479 

The  dirty,  worm-eaten  floor,  strewn  as  it  was  with 
mud,  straw,  scraps  of  paper,  fisli-bones,  egg-shells, 
and  other  abominations,  was  anything  but  appetiz- 
ing to  look  at,  to  say  nothing  of  the  stench  of 
stale  cigarette  smoke,  furs,  and  salt  fish,  but  we 
managed  to  make  a  good  meal  notwithstanding,  and 
thoroughly  enjoyed  the  fresh-laid  eggs,  clotted 
cream,  and  preserved  berries  that  the  post-master's 
wife  provided.  We  little  knew  then  that  a  time 
was  coming  when  even  eggs  and  milk  would  be 
unobtainable  luxuries. 

A  "  Pope  "  (as  priests  of  the  Greek  Church  are 
called)  made  his  appearance  about  ten  o'clock,  just 
as  we  were  thinking  of  turning  in — a  noisy,  bustling 
fellow,  who  put  further  rest  out  of  the  question ; 
for  he  was  of  a  communicative  turn  of  mind,  and 
would  talk,  whether  one  answered  him  or  not,  so  I 
made  the  best  of  a  bad  job,  and  got  out  my  dic- 
tionary, with  a  view  to  picking  up  a  little  Eussian. 
The  conversation  was  somewhat  laboured,  and 
consisted  chiefly  of  pantomime.  Lancaster  did 
not  join  in,  but  slumbered  away  peacefully  in  a 
comer.  I  verily  believe  he  would  have  slept  through 
an  earthquake. 

A  word  constantly  made  use  of  by  my  clerical 


480  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

friend  was  KatorgL  I  do  not  know  whether  the 
reader  has  ever  attempted  to  look  out  a  Russian 
word,  having  but  a  sHght  knowledge  of  the 
language.  If  so,  it  will  not  surprise  him  that 
it  took  me  a  considerable  time  to  discover  that  the 
word,  in  English,  means  "  Convicts."  By  dint  of 
hard  work  I  manao-ed  at  the  end  of  an  hour  to 
glean  that,  firstly,  the  road  between  Koutoulik  and 
Xijni  Udinsk  was  infested  with  robbers  ;  secondly, 
that  on  no  account  must  we  travel  at  night  through 
these  districts ;  and,  thirdly,  that  a  whole  family  on 
their  way  to  Irkoutsk  from  Krasnoiarsk  had  been 
murdered  by  thieves  (escaped  convicts)  but  a  week 
previously. 

This  was  scarcely  encouraging  our  jBrst  day  out. 
Referring  to  the  Posting-book,  I  found  that 
Koutoulik  lay  fifty  versts  further  on,  which 
would  probably  land  us  there  about  2  p.m.  the 
following  day,  always  supposing  there  was  no  delay 
at  Maltinskaya  or  Polovilnaya,  the  intervening 
stations.  We  were  well  armed,  as  I  took  care  to 
show  the  clerical  stranger,  who,  for  all  I  knew,  might 
himself  be  in  leaofue  w^th  the  thieves.  Siberia 
makes  one  very  suspicious.  At  any  rate  we  resolved 
to  travel  as  little  as  possible  by  night,  and  when 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  481 

doing  so  to  keep  a  good  look-out,  sleeping  only  one 
at  a  time  while  on  the  road. 

It  was  past  2  a.m.  before  the  loquacious 
"  Pope  "  allowed  me  to  snatch  a  few  hours'  rest. 
The  wind  had  now  risen,  and  the  rain,  which 
had  threatened  at  intervals  through  the  day, 
was  pouring  down  in  torrents,  and  rattling 
against  the  window-panes  with  a  force  that 
boded  ill  for  our  next  day's  journey.  Given  fine 
weather  and  average  luck  in  obtaining  horses, 
I  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  of  being  able  to  reach 
Tomsk  in  time  for  the  last  steamer  to  Tinmen,  but 
a  week  of  steady  rain  would  upset  all  our  plans, 
and  probably  result  in  our  being  kept  prisoners  at 
Tomsk  through  the  mists  and  fogs  of  early  autumn, 
until  the  roads  set  for  sleighing.  To  post  through 
Siberia  in  October  is  next  to  impossible. 

We  had  already  been  two  hours  on  the  road 
when  day  broke.  By  eight  o'clock  the  thick  woolly 
clouds  had  rolled  away,  and  the  sun  burst  forth  clear 
and  cloudless,  which  soon  dried  our  wet,  shiver- 
ing frames,  for  the  tarantass  hood  leaked  badly, 
and  we  had  been  lying  in  a  pool  of  water  all  the 
morning.  About  mid-day  we  sighted  the  Angara 
for  the   last  time.       The  river   hero    presents  the 

I  i 


482  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

appearance  of  a  vast  lake  (so  broad  is  the  distance 
from  shore  to  shore),  its  bhie  waters  fringed  with 
massive  rocks  and  boulders  of  grey  granite,  while 
further  inland  a  fertile  plain  of  hay  and  corn  fields 
stretched  away  to  where  on  the  horizon  a  low  dark 
green  line  marked  the  recommencement  of  forest. 
Men,  women,  and  children,  were  working  in  the 
fields,  and  it  seemed  strange  to  a  European  eye  to  see 
the  peasantry  gathering  the  harvest  and  making  hay 
at  the  same  time.  This  part  of  the  country  teems 
with  game,  wild  fowl,  and  a  very  large  species  of 
hare. 

Being  detained  for  five  hours  at  Polovilnaya,  we 
did  not  reach  Koutoulik  until  nine  o'clock  p.m. 
The  post-house  being  fairly  comfortable,  we  resolved 
to  sleep  here,  and  make  a  start  at  daybreak  next 
day.  We  had  the  place  to  ourselves  till  about 
11  p.m.,  when  a  loud  cracking  of  whips  and 
jingling  of  collar-bells  announced  a  fresh  arrival, 
and  one  of  no  little  importance,  to  judge  by  the 
bustle  and  confusion  displayed  by  the  yemstchiks. 

"  The  gospodin  will  perhaps  kindly  vacate  the  bed," 
whispered  the  old  post-master.  "It  is  an  officer 
of  high  degree  and  his  lady."  The  "  bed  "  being 
composed    of   hard    planks   and    about    two    feet 


IRKOUTSK   TO    TOMSK.  483 

broad,  I  took  the  floor  without  demur  ;  for  there  was 
little  difference  ;  and  a  few  moments  after  the  new 
arrivals  entered  the  waiting-room,  one  a  tall,  hand- 
some man  in  uniform,  his  companion  a  pretty 
little  woman  of  the  true  Russian  type,  with  violet 
eyes  and  finely  cut  features. 

"  You  are  English,  the  post-master  informs 
me,"  said  our  new  acquaintance  in  French. 
"  Will  you  do  my  wife  and  myself  the  pleasure  of 
supping  with  us  ?  I  conclude,  you,  like  ourselves, 
are  detained  here  till  to-morrow  morninsf." 

I  have  seldom  enjoyed  a  meal  more  than  that  supper 
in  the  wilds  of  Siberia,  for,  apart  from  the  fact  that 
we  had  tasted  no  solid  food  for  two  days,  our  new 
friends  were  capital  company.  Madame  had  left 
school  in  Paris  only  seven  short  months  before,  to 
marry  the  gay  Cossack,  whose  military  duties  called 
him  to  the  dreary  convict  settlement  of  Nertchinsk, 
in  Trans-Baikal.  "  Un  drole  de  voyage  de  noces, 
n'est-ce  pas,  messieurs,"  said  he,  laughing  heartily, 
while  his  poor  little  wife,  who  looked  tired  to  death, 
tried  hard  to  screw  up  a  smile  at  the  joke.  A  good 
supper  and  two  or  three  glasses  of  Kiimmel,  however, 
worked  wonders,  and  a  merrier  party  could  scarcely 
be  found  than  we  were  that  night.     It  was  such  a 

1  i  2 


484  FEOil    TEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

relief  to  meet  a  fellow- creature  with  whom  one 
could  converse  without  racking  the  brain  over 
E,eiff's  dictionary  and  dialogue-book,  and  we  chatted 
awa}^  far  into  the  early  hours.  While  the  Cossack 
enlarged  upon  Petersburg  and  its  delights  to  Lan- 
caster, little  Madame  Y.  and  myself  had  a  long  talk 
over  the  delights  of  Paris,  the  opera,  the  "Bois," 
Sara  Bernhardt,  and  a  thousand  other  subjects  con- 
nected with  the  beautiful  city  so  far  away.  She 
was  a  bright,  plucky  little  thing,  though  worn  to 
a  shadow,  and  haggard  from  constant  travel  and 
fatigue.  I  could  not  help  wondering  h.ow  long  that 
pretty  face  and  expression  would  last  in  dreary, 
desolate  Nertchinsk. 

Madame  having  retired  to  rest  (tucking  up  on 
the  hard,  cushionless  sofa  in  the  most  matter-of- 
fact  way).  Colonel  V.  did  not  attempt  to  con- 
ceal his  satisfaction  at  having^  come  unscathed 
through  the  Katorgi  infested  district.  "  There 
have  been  two  more  murders  since  the  ones 
you  speak  of,"  he  said  in  a  low  tone,  on  our 
telling  him  of  my  conversation  with  the  priest  at 
Tielminskaya.  "  One  that  of  a  Jew  pedlar  from 
Kansk,  the  other,  T.,  the  contractor  at  Krasnoiarsk, 
who  was  found  dead  in  his  tarantass  two  days  ago. 


IKKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  485 

near  Touloung,  Lis  throat  cut  from  ear  to  ear.  I 
saw  the  body  myself,  and  it  was  not  a  pleasant 
sight,  I  assure  you.  His  yemstchik  and  the  horses 
have  since  disappeared,  which  proves  to  me  that 
the  drivers  have  a  good,  deal  to  do  with  it.  No, 
well  armed  though  you  be,  take  my  advice  and 
travel  onl^'  by  day,  till  you  have  left  the  town  of 
Nijni  Udinsk  far  behind  you."  ^ 

"  Their  mode  of  attack  is  simple,"  said  V.,  in 
answer  to  my  inquiry,  and.  pouring  himself  out  a 
huge  tumbler  of  vodka  (his  fifth),  "  Travellers  are 
never  molested  in  the  day-time.  It  is  only  at 
night  that  these  blackguards  (of  whom  there  are 
sixty  or  seventy)  attack  wayfarers.  The  most 
dangerous  hours  are  between  3  and  6  a.m., 
when  travellers  who  have  been  on  the  qui-vive  all 
night,  somewhat  relax  their  vigilance.  A  couple 
of    the    thieves    are    told    off   to    cut   the    traces, 

*  Extract  from  tlie  Volga  Messenger,  of  October  16th,  1887  : — 
"  The  entire  tract  of  country  between  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk  is 
infested  with  runaway  convicts,  so  that  travelling  in  this  region, 
especially  on  dark  autumn  nights,  is  extremely  dangerous.  Lately 
a  whole  family  was  murdered  at  the  distance  of  a  few  versts  from 
Irkoutsk,  and  we  hear  of  such  cases  frequently  enough.  So  bad  is 
the  state  of  the  roads  in  this  respect,  that  the  Government  is  about 
to  put  a  stop  to  it  by  abolishing  exile  to  Siberia,  and  a  proposal  to 
this  effect  is  now  under  the  consideration  of  the  Imperial  Council." 


486  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

two  more  to  seize  and  bind  the  yemstcliik 
(accomplice  or  not),  and  tliree  or  four  others 
at  the  same  moment  to  climb  over  the  back 
of  the  tarantass,  and  falling  suddenly  in  front 
of  the  hood,  despatch  the  passengers  with  a  blow 
from  a  heavy  bludgeon.  According  to  report,  they 
have  no  firearms.  Most  of  the  victims  are  first 
stunned,  and  then  their  throats  are  cut.  In  no  case 
of  late  has  a  traveller's  life  been  spared."  But, 
as  V.  remarked,  it  was  a  significant  fact,  that  not 
a  single  yemstchik  had  lost  his  life,  while  no  less 
than  twelve  travellers  had  been  brutally  murdered. 

The  sun  was  high  in  the  heavens  when  we  rose 
the  next  morning,  V.'s  entertaining  conversation 
having  kept  us  up  till  past  five  o'clock.  Yet  we 
woke  to  find  them  both  gone,  for  they  had  left,  the 
post-master  informed  us,  a  little  after  seven  o'clock. 
For  staying  powers  in  the  sitting-up  line,  commend 
me  to  a  Russian  Cossack.  It  is  my  firm  belief  that 
many  never  sleep  at  all.  Perhaps  vodka  is  the 
secret. 

We  were  anxious,  if  possible,  to  reach  Tiretskaya, 
fifty  versts  distant,  before  sundown,  and  make  the 
latter  our  sleeping-place.  It  would  not  be  a 
difiicult  task,  the  post-master  said.     There  was  but 


linvOUTSK   TO   TOMSK  487 

one  relay  at  Zalariusk,  twenty  versts  off,  and  unless 
Ave  fell  in  with  the  mail  from  Petersburg,  then 
about  due,  we  were  sure  to  be  able  to  get  horses 
without  delay.  The  troika  was  therefore  put  in  at 
once,  and  we  were  hastily  swallowing  a  couple  of 
glasses  of  tea,  preparatory  to  a  fast  of  twelve  hours, 
when  a  shouting  and  cracking  of  whips  was  heard 
in  the  villasfe  street,  and  in  another  minute  in 
galloped  the  mail,  four  mud-splashed  carts,  followed 
by  a  tarantass,  in  which,  armed  to  the  teeth  and 
resplendent  in  green  and  gold,  reclined  the  courier 
in  charge. 

"  Lochade  scorei  "  (horses  quickly),  shouted  the 
latter,  as  he  leapt  from  the  tarantass,  and  brushed 
past  us  into  the  waiting-room,  where  a  few 
moments  after,  we  saw  him  pouring  down  tumbler 
after  tumbler  of  scalding  tea.  To  appeal  to  his 
finer  feehngs  was,  we  knew,  useless.  Sadly  we 
watched,  as  our  troika  was  ruthlessly  taken  out 
and  harnessed  to  a  mail-cart,  to  the  evident  satisfac- 
tion and  amusement  of  the  courier,  who,  having 
finished  his  tea,  was  smoking  a  cigarette  and 
watching  our  discomfiture  with  no  little  amusement. 
"  Sibiri,  gospodin  !  "  he  said,  as  he  climbed  into  his 
tarantass,  and  the  cortege  dashed  off  again  on  its 


488       FROM  PEXIX  TO  CALAIS  BY    LAND. 

way  to  China.  It  was  indeed  Siberia !  and  we 
realized  to  the  full  that  patience  is  a  virtue,  wlien 
the  post-master  told  us  that  under  no  circum- 
stances could  we  hope  to  get  horses  till  five  o'clock 
that  evening. 

The  long  sunny  day  wore  slowly  away.  There  was 
absolutely  nothing  to  do,  or  look  at,  and  time  hung 
fearfully  heavy  on  our  hands.  Towards  mid-day  we 
strolled  up  to  the  prison,  situate  as  usual  about  a 
hundred  yards  outside  the  village. 

The  village  prisons,  or  temporary  resting-places 
for  prisoners  on  the  road  to  the  mines,  are  square  or 
rather  oblong  wooden  buildings,  three  sides  of  which, 
form  quarters  for  the  convicts  and  their  guards, 
while  the  remaining  wing,  a  little  detaclied  from 
the  main  building,  is  used  for  washing  and  cooking 
purposes.  The  open  courtyard  in  tlie  centre  of  the 
building  is  used  for  exercise.  It  is  rough  and  unpaved, 
and  in  wet  weather  often  knee-deep  in  mud  and 
slush.  This  yard  is  entered  by  a  pair  of  high  gates, 
the  only  entrance  to  the  building,  the  whole  being 
surrounded  by  a  high  pahsade,  at  every  corner  of 
which  is  posted,  night  and  day,  a  sentry  with  a 
loaded  rifle.  This  vigilance,  however,  is  only  main- 
tained  during    the   summer  months.     From   April 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  489 

to  October  it  is  a  very  different  matter ;  and  as  the 
sentries  often  sleep  upon  their  posts,  and  the  bars 
and  oTatiuo-s  of   the   windows  are    so  rickety  and 
insecure  that  a  child  could  dislodge  them,  escape 
becomes     comparatively     easy.      An     escape     or 
attempted  escape  does   not  increase  the  length  of 
a    prisoner's    sentence.     There    is   a    chance   of  a 
sound  flogging  with  rods  if  the  runaway  is  brought 
back,    but    that    is    all.     Without   the   connivance 
of  their  guards,   I  doubt  if  prisoners  would  ever 
attempt  to  break  out  at   all,   and  were  the  prison 
officials  more  careful,  not  to  say  conscientious,  in  the 
discharge  of  their  duties,  the  Siberian,  roads  would 
be  comparatively  safe,  instead  of  being,  as  they  now 
are,  infested  with  thieves  and  desperadoes  of  the 
worst    description.      There    is    another    and     still 
more   powerful    reason,    which   was    explained    to 
us   by   our    travelling   acquaintance    Y.,    and    one 
that  clearly  demonstrates  that  the  highest  as  well  as 
the  lowest  officials  connected  with  Siberian  prisons 
are  very  far  from  being  sans  rejproche.     The  prac- 
tice I  am  about  to  describe,  however,  takes  place 
only  in   the  remoter  districts   of    Eastern  Siberia, 
whence   no    whisper  of  the    scandal  is  ever   likely 
to  reach  the  ears  of  the  Petersburo;  authorities. 


490  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

It  is  marvellously  simple.  Lieutenant  A.,  of 
the  Imperial  Guard,  having  lived  not  wisely  but 
too  well  in  the  Russian  capital,  is  compelled  to 
exchange,  and  finds  himself  transferred  in  five  or 
six  short  months  from  the  gaiety  and  gilded 
salons  of  Petersburg  to  some  desolate  convict 
settlement  in  the  Trans-Baikal,  his  only  society  the 
Cossacks  under  his  command ;  his  sole  occupa- 
tion, maintaining  order  among  the  two  or  three 
hundred  convicts  in  his  charge.  The  next  station, 
thirty  versts  off,  is  under  the  command  of  his 
friend  and  brother  officer  in  misfortune,  Lieu- 
tenant B.,  who  to  lighten  the  long,  wintry  evenings, 
makes  periodical  visits  to  A.  Heavy  drinking, 
high  play,  and  other  little  amusements,  which  I 
need  not  mention,  but  which  will  continue  so  long 
as  female  prisoners  exist  in  Siberia,  are  the  result 
of  these  meetings;  very  frequently,  also,  one  of 
the  guardsmen  loses  considerably  more  than  he  is 
able  to  pay.  A  Russian  would  sooner  die  than  owe  a 
debt  of  honour,  but  the  pockets  of  both  these  dash- 
ing guardsmen  are  probably  sadly  deficient  of  that 
necessary  commodity,  "ready  money."  There  is 
but  one  way  out  of  the  difficulty.  Early  in  spring, 
a  batch  of  fifty  or  sixty  convicts  are  liberated  (upon 


IRKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  491 

the  UDderstanding  that  they  return  before  the  end 
of  September)  to  get  their  living  as  best  they  can 
upon  the  roads.  Some  have  been  known  to  reach 
Tomsk  from  Nertchinsk  on  these  summer  excur- 
sions. Nor  do  they  ever  fail  to  return,  for  none  but 
a  lunatic  vfould  ever  think  twice  of  escaping  outright 
from  Siberia.  During  the  absence  of  the  gang,  M.  le 
Lieutenant  draws  the  money  for  their  rations,  &c. 
from  Petersburg,  and  discharges  his  just  debts. 
"  Cela  n'est  pas  plus  difficile  que  cela  !" 

Though  I  visited  three  "  ostrogs,"  it  was  only 
with  considerable  difficulty  and  a  lavish  expenditure 
of  roubles  that  I  succeeded  in  doins^  so.  It  seems 
strange  that  the  Russian  Government  should  show 
such  a  strong  dislike  to  strangers  visiting  their 
convict  establishments,  for  I  must  confess  to  being 
most  agreeably  disappointed  by  what  I  saw.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  blood-curdling  and  revolting 
accounts  so  vividly  set  forth  by  the  authors  of 
"Called  Back,"  "The  Russians  of  To-day,"  and 
similar  works,  T  found  the  prisons  of  Siberia  clean 
and  comfortable,  though  perhaps  not  so  sweet- 
smellino-  as  our  convict  establishments  at  Chatham 
or  Dartmoor.  It  would  be  hard  to  keep  them  so, 
considering  that  every  twenty-four  hours  brings  in 


492  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

a  fresh  batcli  of  prisoners,  each  in  wet  weather, 
with  a  pound  or  so  of  black,  stinking  mud  on  his 
feet.  At  one  village  only  (Rasgonnaia)  along  the 
whole  post-road  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk  was  the 
ostrog  (a  very  old  one)  almost  uninhabitable.  It 
sv^armed  with  rats,  the  post-master  told  us,  and 
convicts,  in  winter,  were  sometimes  severely  bitten ; 
while  they  were  forced  to  sleep  in  the  daytime,  rest 
at  night  being  rendered  impossible  by  the  swarms 
of  vermin.  Let  me  in  justice  add  that  this  was 
the  only  really  bad  ostrog  I  heard  of  or  saw  during 
the  whole  journey,  and  the  authorities  were  on  the 
point  of  pulling  it  down  and  building  a  new  one. 
"We  hear  a  deal  in  England  of  wretched  hovels, 
where  convicts  are  housed  together  like  sheep  in 
a  pen,  human  pigstyes  reeking  with  filth  of  every 
description,  where  not  a  day  passes  but  a  prisoner  is 
carried  off  by  typhus  or  some  other  malignant  fever. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  I  have  seldom  seen  neater  build- 
ings. But  for  the  black  and  white  sentry  boxes, 
the  barred  windows,  and  imperial  eagle  over  the 
gate,  one  would  never  take  them  for  prisons  at  all, 
and  they  were  often,  with  their  bright  yellow  walls, 
red  roof,  and  neatly  kept  gardens,  the  only 
cheerful-looking    building   in   the    squalid    villages 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  493 

through  which  we  passed.  The  ostrog  at  Koutoulik 
was  empty,  but  a  gang  was  expected  that  afternoon, 
a  Cossack  told  us.  Preparations  for  their  arrival 
were  already  being  made  in  the  shape  of  cakes, 
cream,  eggs,  apples,  sw^eetmeats,  and  cigarettes 
spread  out  on  snowy  linen  cloths  for  the  delectation 
of  lucky  convicts  who  had  made  a  few  kopeks  on 
the  road. 

We  strolled  back  to  the  post-house  after  our 
inspection,  and  called  in  sheer  desperation  for  the 
Samovar.  There  was  literally  nothing  else  to  do. 
Seven  lono;"  hours  must  be  Q:ot  throug-h  before  we 
could  hope  to  get  horses  and  proceed  on  our 
journey.  It  is  this  eternal  delay,  this  irksome 
waiting  that  makes  Siberian  travel  so  monotonous 
and  dispiriting.  The  fatigue  and  privation  were 
trifling  compared  to  the  long  weary  days  of 
boredom  and  inaction.  We  got  into  a  habit  at  last 
of  calling  mechanically  for  tea  at  every  station. 
Fifteen  or  twenty  glasses  were,  after  the  first  week, 
our  daily  allowance,  and  I  verily  believe  I  drank 
tea  enough  during  the  two  months  I  was  in  Siberia 
to  keep  a  dozen  old  maids  going  for  a  year. 

Koutoulik  consists  of  some  eighteen  or  twenty 
houses    and    presented    a    depressing    appearance 


494  I'ROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

enough  even  that  bright  sunny  afternoon,  for  the 
village  was  deserted  by  all  save  women,  children, 
dogs,  and  pigs,  tlie  men  being  busy  in  the 
fields  getting  in  the  harvest.  Under  the  guidance 
of  the  post-master,  a  Pole  who  spoke  a  few 
words  of  French,  I  visited  one  of  the  cottages. 
Most  of  the  women  were  dirty,  bedraggled  crea- 
tures, but  some  of  the  younger  girls  were  good- 
looking,  and  the  children  many  of  them  beautiful, 
with  fair  flaxen  hair  and  light  blue  eyes  that  made 
one  wonder  how  such  thoroughly  northern  types  of 
beauty  could  have  been  born  and  reared  so  far  east. 
The  mistress  of  the  cottage  we  entered  (a  young  and 
rather  pretty  woman)  apologized  for  her  costume^ 
which  consisted  simply  and  solely  of  a  thin  and 
almost  transparent  muslin  nightgown  reaching  a 
little  below  the  knee ;  the  only  garment  worn 
indoors  by  peasant  women  in  the  brief  but  tropical 
Siberian  summer.  We  begged  her  not  to  apologize, 
assuring  her  that  the  costume,  though  scanty,  suited 
her  remarkably  well. 

The  interior  of  the  cottage  was,  though  primitive, 
scrupulously  clean.  In  one  corner  hung  the  sacred 
"  Ikon,"  or  image  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  a  huge  brick 
stove  immediately  facing  it.     Half  a  dozen  wooden 


iravouTSK  TO  tomsk.  495 

chairs  and  a  rough  pine  table  comprised  the  fur- 
niture, the  flooring  of  the  room  was  at  an  angle  of 
about  forty-five  degrees,  which  made  sitting  down 
a  somewhat  dangerous  experiment.  From  the 
centre  of  the  roof  hung  a  Siberian  cradle,  a  kind 
of  linen  bag  secured  by  a  long  rope  to  a  hook  in 
the  ceiling,  to  which  our  hostess  gave  a  swing 
every  twenty  minutes  or  so,  the  length  of  the  cord 
keeping  it  (and  her  last  born)  in  motion  for  quite 
that  length  of  time. 

While  we  were  smoking  a  cigarette  and  regaling 
ourselves  with,  a  glass  of  iced  "  Quass,"  -^  the 
pretty  housewife,  who  soon  lost  her  shyness, 
produced  a  Russian  guitar,  and  sang  to  us  (in  a 
sweet,  clear  voice)  two  or  three  national  airs.  One, 
a  Volga  boat-song,  seems  an  especial  favourite, 
for  we  heard  it  continually  the  whole  way  from 
Kiakhta  to  Nijni  Novgorod,  sung  by  peasants, 
prisoners,  and  yemstchiks  alike.  The  Siberian 
peasantry  appear  to  have  a  good  ear  for  music, 
but  their  airs  are  nearly  all  in  minor,  and  in- 
tensely depressing,  after  a  time,  to  a  European 
ear. 

The    Siberian    peasant  cannot    be    called    over- 

-  A  kind  of  spruce  beer. 


496  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

taxed,  all  that  the  imperial  Government  exacts 
being  a  poll-tax  of  seventeen  roubles.  Those 
living  on  the  Great  Post-Road  are  exempt  from  this 
even,  if  they  breed  and  provide  horses  for  the 
postal  service,  of  course  receiving  a  remuneration  for 
the  same.  The  men  are  cheery,  good-tempered 
fellows  enough,  with,  as  a  rule,  but  one  vice,  drunk- 
enness ;  when  they  do  take  too  much,  it  is  done  in 
a  good-tempered  way,  and.  they  become  more  urbane 
and  benevolent  than  when  sober.  I  have  never 
once  seen  a  Siberian  quarrelsome  in  his  cups,  though 
I  met  many  the  worse  for  vodka  in  every  town  we 
passed  through.  As  regards  the  women,  they  are 
clean,  thrifty,  and  very  religious,  but  at  the  same 
time  rather  lax  in  their  morals,  a  mixture  of 
qualities  not  peculiar,  I  imagine,  to  Siberia. 

It  was  nearly  seven  o'clock  before  we  left  Kou- 
toulik,  so  we  had  to  abandon  all  hopes  of  getting 
further  than  Zalarinsk  (the  next  station,  twenty- 
eight  versts  distant)  that  night.  We  looked  to  our 
pistols  before  starting,  and  took  care  to  let  the 
yemstchik  see  we  were  armed,  for  it  was  a  desolate, 
cutthroat-looking  road,  and  the  forest  so  thick, 
one  could  hardly  see  a  foot  either  side  of  the 
tarantass,    but   we   kept    a   bright   look-out,    with 


A   SIBERIAN    VILLAGE    STREET. 


PiigC  100. 


lEKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  497 

revolvers  at  half-cock,  and  had  we  been  attacked, 
our  assailants  would  have  met  with  a  warm  recep- 
tion. About'  ten  o'clock  some  twinklino^  lights 
ahead  heralded  the  approach  of  Zalarinsk,  and 
by  half -past  ten  we  were  safe  for  the  ilight. 

The  succeeding  two  days  were,  as  regards 
weather,  perfect,  a  blue  cloudless  sky  and  bright 
sun,  which  at  mid-day  was  sometimes  too  hot  to  be 
pleasant;  on  more  than  one  occasion  the  thermometer 
rose  to  over  90°  Fahr.,  although  the  instant  the  sun 
set  it  sometimes  dropped  to  only  a  few  degrees 
above  Zero,  so  rapid  are  the  changes  of  tempe- 
rature. On  the  26th  of  August  the  country 
became  more  cultivated,  and  the  thick  forest  gave 
place  to  large  clearings  of  corn,  maize,  and  mus- 
tard. This  was  on  the  eastern  side  of  Tiretskaya. 
The  latter  village  passed,  the  landscape  again 
changed,  and  we  returned  to  dull,  monotonous  pine 
forests,  varied  by  occasional  silver-birch-trees  or 
bushes  with  bright  red  and  white  berries.  Siberia  is 
noted  for  the  latter.  There  are  no  less  than  twenty 
different  kinds,  and  in  parts  of.  the  country  they 
form,  with  black  bread,  the  staple  food  of  the  inhabi- 
tants in  summer-time.  We  found  most  of  them 
insipid,  flavourless  things,  with  the  exception  of  the 

K  k 


498  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

"  Brousniki,"  a  kind  of  bilberry,  wliicli  eaten  with 
cream  and  sugar  was  delicious.  The  "  Brousniki  " 
is  also  very  efficacious  as  a  febrifuge. 

Two  large  caravans  were  passed  between  Zalarinsk 
and  Tiretskaya ;  one  laden  witb  calico,  ironmongery, 
and  Manchester  goods — the  other  with  tea — the 
former  eastward,  the  latter  westward  bound.  Each 
consisted  of  over  two  hundred  carts,  in  charge  of 
about  eight  or  ten  men,  who,  till  our  driver  had 
roused  the  foremost  with  a  cut  of  his  whip,  were  fast 
asleep  when  we  came  up  to  them,  the  horses  rolling 
about  the  road  from  side  to  side,  and  threatening 
every  moment  to  dash  the  clumsy  heavy  carts  into 
our  tarantass.  The  tea-caravans  travel  day  and  night, 
only  halting  five  hours  out  of  the  twenty-four,  from 
1  p.m.  till  3  p.m.,  and  midnight  till  three  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  Yet  the  horses  looked  sleek  and  fat, 
and  not  in  the  least  out  of  condition,  the  reason, 
perhaps,  being  that  they  never  exceed  a  speed  of 
three  miles  an  hour. 

We  rarely  passed  more  than  two  or  three  con- 
veyances in  a  day,  and  this  is  what  makes  posting 
in  Siberia  so  irksome  and  monotonous.  Between 
the  villages  there  is  absolutely  nothing  to  look  at 
but   the    dreary    sand-coloured   road — the    endless 


lEKODTSK    TO   TOMSK.  499 

vista  of  dark  green  forest.  A  cottage  is  never 
found  alone  in  Siberia  or  outside  a  village  enceinte. 
Except  in  the  villages,  usually  twenty  to  thirty 
versts  apart,  one  sees  no  dwelling  of  any  sort  or 
kind.  The  monotony,  after  a  week  or  so,  becomes 
absolutely  maddening.  AVhat  must  it  be  to  the 
wretched  exiles  who  sometimes  take  two  years  to 
reach  their  destination  ! 

We  reached  Tiretskaya  at  sunset.  A  large 
river  just  beyond  this  station  was  swollen  by 
the  rains  to  a  considerable,  not  to  say  dangerous, 
extent.  Only  that  evening  the  ferry  had  been 
carried  away  and  washed  down-stream,  the  Peters- 
burg mail  having  to  wait  out  in  the  open,  on  the 
river-bank,  till  it  was  repaired.  This  was  not 
pleasant  news,  but  we  derived  some  consolation 
from  the  fact  that  the  weather  was  fine  and  the 
glass  rising.  We  had  the  waiting-room  to  our- 
selves till  midnight,  when  a  telega  clattered  into 
the  yard,  and  out  clambered  an  enormously  fat 
man  and  a  small,  wizened  woman,  who  informed 
us,  before  they  had  been  in  the  room  five  minutes, 
that  they  were  newly  married,  and  had  come  straight 
through  from  Irkoutsk.  Divested  of  their  furs,  I 
discovered  that  the  man  was  clad  in  a  bran-new^ 

K  k  2 


500  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

suit  of  shining  broadcloth,  the  woman  in  what  had 
evidently  been  her  bridal  array,  a  white  muslin 
dress,  covered  with  sprays  of  orange  blossom, 
but  terribly  soiled  and  creased  by  travel  and  the 
amorous  advances  of  her  bridegroom,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  mud  and  dirty  straw  of  the  telega. 
When  the  partner  of  his  joys  and  sorrows  had 
retired  to  rest  (on  two  chairs),  the  unhappy  bride- 
groom became  confidential,  and  confided  to  me,  in  a 
low  tone,  that  he  would  much  rather  have  remained 
quietly  in  Irkoutsk,  that  he  did  not  like  this  sort  of 
thing  at  all,  and  was  only  doing  it  to  amuse  his 
bride  !  I  could  not  help,  like  Mr.  Pickwick,  envy- 
ing the  facility  with  which  the  lady  was  amused. 
"I  shall  take  her  as  far  as  Nijni  Udinsk,  if  her 
strength  holds  out,"  he  said  resignedly,  "  if  not, 
we  shall  return  to  Irkoutsk."  What  a  honeymoon  ! 
Next  morning,  when  I  woke,  they  were  gone. 

.  I  shall  never  forget  my  first  night  in  a  Siberian 
post-house.  Unless  the  traveller  falls  asleep  at 
once,  it  is  long  odds  against  his  getting  any  rest 
at  all,  for  tarantasses  and  telegas  are  arriving 
and  leaving  at  all  hours  of  the  night.  There  is 
(by  order)  a  lamp  kept  burning  till  morning,  and 
the  jingle    of    bells,    shouting  of    yemstchiks    and 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  501 

stamping  of  heavy  feet  on  the  carpetless  floor, 
that  goes  on  at  intervals  through  the  night,  would 
waken  the  dead.  There  is  another  powerful  antidote 
to  sleep  in  every  Siberian  post,  be  it  ever  so  clean — 
vermin — to  say  nothing  of  cockroaches  and  rats, 
who  subsist  on  the  scraps  of  food  dropped  on 
the  floor  by  travellers,  and  who  run  about  the 
floor  and  over  one's  face  and  body  with  supreme 
indifference  during  the  quieter  moments  of  the 
night.  Till  I  went  to  Siberia,  I  had  the  most 
unutterable  loathing  for  rats  ;  but  now,  like  the 
Yankee  and  the  snake,  I.  almost  feel  lonely  without 
them. 

About  2  a.m.  the  cocks  commenced  crowing, 
and  were  promptly  answered  by  the  dogs  of  the 
village.  Long  before  daylight  the  inhabitants  of 
the  post-house  were  astir  and  bustling  about, 
cleaning  up,  lighting  fires,  chopping  wood,  &c.  I 
usually  rose  about  4  a.m.,  and,  lighting  a  cigarette, 
amused  myself  by  studying  the  strange  types  of 
humanity  around  me  till  the  samovar  made  its  appear- 
ance. They  were  a  strange,  motley  crew,  as  a  rule. 
Men  and  women  lying  about  pell-mell,  and  looking, 
in  the  weird  half-light  between  night  and  day, 
like   a   lot  of  corpses  in    a   fosse  commune.     One 


502  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

could  always  tell  at  a  glance,  the  new  hands  at  the 
game ;  the  Russian  official's  wife  travelling  the  post- 
road  for  the  first  time  in  smart,  tailor-made  gown, 
beaver  toque,  and  costly  furs,  or  the  Siberian 
with  her  awkward,  ill -cut  dress  in  the  fashion  of 
thirty  years  ago.  It  was  second  nature  to  the 
latter  to  remain  unwashed  for  a  couple  of  weeks,  and 
sleep  on  the  filthy  floor,  with,  perhaps,  a  greasy, 
ragged  Jew  pedler  for  a  neighbour,  but  one  could 
not  help  pitying  the  better  class,^  travelling  from  St. 
Petersburg  or  Moscow  to  rejoin  their  husbands 
in  Eastern  Siberia  or  the  Amour  district,  sitting,  if 
they  could  get  them,  on  the  hard,  stifl'-backed, 
wooden  chairs  all  through  the  night,  and  almost 
falling  off  them  at  times  from  sheer  weariness. 
The  prettiest  looked  hideous  in  the  early  morn- 
ing hours,  with  tangled  hair,  disordered  dress, 
and  pale,  pasty  faces,  while  their  diamond  rings 
only    served   to    show   off    the   blackness   of  their 

^  Such  a  one  is  the  young  and  beautiful  Coimtess  Ignatieff, 
Avife  of  the  Governor  of  Irkoutsk,  who,  it  would  seem,  is  as  much 
at  home  in  the  frozen  forests  of  Eastern  Siberia  as  in  the  salons 
of  Paris  or  Petersburg,  One  of  her  latest  exploits  was  to  accom- 
pany the  general  to  Yakoutsk — a  voyage  of  three  months  from 
Irkoutsk- — the  greater  part  of  which  had  to  be  accomplished  in 
small  birch-bark  canoes. 


lEKOUTSIv   TO    TOMSK.  503 

hands  and  nails,  whicli  tbey  had  probably  been 
unable  to  wash  for  days.  Few  women  look  well, 
even  in  England,  at  six  in  the  morning  after  a 
ball.  Imagine  their  appearance  after  a  dozen 
nights  and  days  of  Siberian  travel.  Many  of  the 
post-houses  are  worse  than  that  I  have  described, 
but  few  are  better.  I  have  seen  sights  in  these 
waiting-rooms  that  will  not  bear  description.  They 
are  better  left  to  the  reader's  imagination ;  for  in 
matters  of  decency  the  Siberian,  ]:iur  et  simple,  is 
inferior  to  the  Chinese. 

I  date  the  commencement  of  our  mishaps  and 
difficulties  from  the  morning  of  the  27th  of  August, 
when  I  awoke  in  the  dirty,  little  waiting-room  of 
Tiretskaya  post-house  to  find  the  rain  pouring 
down  in  torrents,  the  sky  one  mass  of  grey, 
woolly  clouds.  It  had  evidently  been  raining  some 
hours,  for  the  road  in  front  of  the  post-house  was 
one  pool  of  water,  almost  half-way  up  to  the  axle 
of  our  tarantass,  on  the  roof  of  which  the  rain 
was  pelting  down  unmercifully.  Instinct  told  me 
that  the  water  inside  was  quite  an  inch  deep  by  this 
time.  Mentally  thanking  Providence  that  we  had 
taken  out  the  mattress,  I  rolled  myself  in  my  furs 
and  went  to  sleep  again.     It  was  hopeless  to  think 


504  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

of  starting  with  a  dangerous  river  to  cross  and  tlie 
next  post  twenty-five  versts  distant. 

Tlie  weather  cleared  a  little  towards  mid-day,  and 
we  resolved,  though  it  was  still  raining  hard,  to 
make  a  start,  and,  if  possible,  reach  Listvinskaya, 
seventy  odd  versts  distant,  that  evening.  The 
tarantass  had  to  be  baled  out  before  we  got  in. 
A  tarantass  for  Irkoutsk  arrived  as  we  were  put- 
ting to,  and  reported  the  ferry  in  working  order, 
though  the  river  was  rapid  and  swollen  to  a 
dangerous  extent.  We  thanked  our  informants  and 
set  off.  The  latter  were  travelling  en  famille, 
Monsieur  and  madame,  four  children  and  a  nurse, 
all  packed  into  the  same  tarantass.  I  envied  them, 
for  they  had,  at  any  rate,  the  advantage  of  warmth, 
the  weather  having  suddenly  become  raw  and 
cold,  with,  every  now  and  then,  blinding  showers 
of  sleet. 

Although  the  river  Oka  is  situated  only  a  mile  or 
so  from  the  village  of  Tiretskaya,  it  took  us  nearly 
an  hour  to  reach  the  ferry.  Parts  of  the  road  were 
entirely  submerged,  and  our  yemstchik  had  to  find 
his  way  by  guesswork.  As  we  knew  there  was  a 
broad,  deep  ditch  on  either  side  of  the  road,  the 
work  was,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  exciting.     It  was  im- 


lEKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  505 

possible  to  go  out  of  a  walk,  and  even  then  it  was 
as  much  as  our  five  game  little  horses  could  do 
to  drag  the  heavy,  clumsy  carriage  along.  We 
stuck  fast  twice,  and  all  hands  had  to  get  out  "  to 
shove  her  off,"  knee-deep  in  icy  cold  water.  We 
were  wet  through  by  the  time  the  ferry  was  reached, 
and  shivering  with  cold,  a  somewhat  unpleasant 
condition  in  which  to  embark  on  a  stage  of  twenty- 
five  versts,  which  it  would  in  all  probability  take 
us  several  hours  to  accomplish,  supposing  we  ever 
succeeded  in  reaching  Ziminskaia  at  all.  There 
were,  the  ferryman  said,  four  bridges  to  cross  before 
we  reached  it,  and  one  or  two,  at  least,  would 
probably  have  been  washed  away  by  now,  for  the 
floods  were  worse  there. 

The  appearance  of  the  river  Oka  was  highly 
picturesque,  but  not  reassuring.  A  broad,  swiftly 
flowing  stream  at  any  time,  continuous  rains 
had  widened  its  waters  to  double  the  ordinary 
width,  the  torrent  now  being  quite  a  mile 
across.  The  rotten  and  insecure  ferry  looked  as 
if  a  touch  from  one  of  the  snags  or  tree-trunks 
which  were  whirling  madly  along  the  surface  of 
the  stream  would  send  it  to  the  bottom  in  a  second , 
and  the  ferryman  was  for  some  time  inexorable,  but 


506  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  temptation  of  a  lOr.  note  was  too  much  for  him, 
and  with  much  muttering  about  "  it  would  be  our 
own  fault  if  we  were  drowned,"  we  got  the  tarantass 
and  horses  aboard,  and  shoved  off  for  the  opposite 
shore.  Scarcely  were  the  chains  let  go  when  a  loud 
shout  from  the  bank  attracted  my  attention.  The 
crowd  were  shouting  and  gesticulating,  running 
backwards  and  forwards  on  the  bank  like  madmen, 
and  pointing  to  a  splashing,  indistinct  mass  in  the 
water  which  I  presently  made  out  to  be  a  man  and 
a  horse.  The  latter  had  been  brought  down  to 
water,  but  the  bank,  rotten  with  perpetual  rain, 
gave  way,  precipitating  the  animal  and  its  rider 
into  deep  water.  I  have  seldom  experienced  a 
moment  of  more  intense  excitement.  It  quite 
took  our  thoughts  away  from  our  own  danger — for 
all  this  time  we  were  forging  slowly  ahead.  The 
ferryman  dare  not  stop,  nor  could  we  have 
rendered  the  poor  fellow  any  help,  for  the  current 
was  rapidly  carrying  him  further  and  further  into 
the  centre  of  the  river.  He  was  evidently  a  good 
swimmer,  but  could,  we  saw,  do  nothing  against  the 
terrific  force  of  the  current.  Three  times  we  saw  him 
rise  to  the  surface,  when  his  screams  were  pitiful 
to  hear,  but  the  third  time  he  was  silent,  and  throw- 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  607 

ing  up  both  arms,  sank  for  the  last  time,  in  full 
view  of  us  all.  He  was  only  twenty — the  ferryman 
told  us — a  tall,  good-looking  fellow,  who  had  stood 
by  and  given  a  hand  to  get  our  tarantass  on  board 
but  three  or  four  minutes  before  he  met  with  his 
sad  fate. 

Crossing  the  river  without  mishap,  we  found  the 
road  on  the  other  side  in  better  order  than  the  one 
we  had  left.  At  any  rate  it  was  not  flooded,  the 
yemstchiks  could  see  where  they  were  going,  and 
there  was  not  so  much  danger  of  being  stranded  ten 
miles  from  anywhere  with  a  broken  wheel  or  axle. 
Ziminskaia  was  reached  at  3  p.m.,  and  with  a 
fresh  relay  of  seven  horses  in  (for  which  we 
had  not  to  wait  more  than  ten  minutes),  we  con- 
tinued our  journey,  hoping  to  reach  Listvinskaya, 
fifty  versts  further  on,  some  time  that  night,  or  the 
next  morning. 

Listvinskaya  was  reached  at  11  p.m.  The  post- 
house  was  full  of  soldiers,  who  had  been  out  all  day 
in  the  rain,  searching  for  prisoners,  with  no  result, 
and  no  wonder.  It  was,  indeed,  a  case  of  looking 
for  a  needle  in  a  bundle  of  hay,  to  expect  to  find 
fugitives  in  these  thick,  impenetrable  forests. 
We  were  not  sorry  when  they  had    finished  their 


508  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

vodka  and  departed,  leaving  us  at  2  a.m.  to  snatcTi 
a  few  hours'  sleep,  before  again  taking  the  road. 
The  rain  had  now  ceased,  and  the  niofht  was  bright 
and  starlit. 

Our  anticipations  of  a  fine  day  were  not  dis- 
appointed, for  we  were  awoke  by  the  bright  sun 
streaming  into  our  faces,  and  the  voice  of  our  host 
inquiring  how  much  longer  we  were  going  to  sleep. 
And  sure  enough,  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  the 
anxieties  of  the  previous  day,  we  had  slumbered  on 
undisturbed  by  the  noise  of  arrivals  and  departures, 
till  past  mid-day,  or  at  least  so  the  station  clock  said. 
But  one  was  never  quite  sure  about  the  time  in 
Siberia.  Every  post-master  has  a  time  of  his  own. 
It  seemed  strange  at  first  to  leave,  say,  Tirestskaya 
station  at  nine  in  the  morning,  and  arrive  at  Zimin- 
skaia,  twenty  versts  off,  at  half -past  eight !  But  we 
soon  got  used  to  it,  and  after  the  first  week  never 
troubled  our  heads  about  the  hour.  It  was  but  a 
minor  detail. 

We  made  good  way  that  and  the  following  day,  and 
on  the  evening  of  the  29  th  of  August  reached  the 
village  of  Touloung.  But  alas  !  good  luck  as  regards 
weather  was  not  destined  to  last.  Just  before  sun- 
set, the  sky  became  overcast,  and  two  hours  before 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  509 

reacliino^  our  destination  for  tlie  nisfht  the  rain 
was  falling  in  -torrents.  The  hood  was,  as  usual, 
worse  than  useless,  and  in  a  few  minutes  we  were 
wet  through  to  the  skin.  There  were  fortunately  no 
more  rivers  between  us  and  Nijni  Udinsk,  which 
town,  all  being  well,  we  hoped  to  reach  on  the 
morrow. 

Had  we  known  that  night  that  we  were  destined 
to  be  imprisoned  in  the  filthy  room  in  which 
we  slept  for  two  days,  I  doubt  if  we  should 
have  retired  to  rest  in  such  good  spirits.  We 
had  come  to  the  end  of  our  provisions,  and 
should  now  have  to  subsist  entirely  on  the 
meagre  fare  provided  by  the  post-houses.  I  could 
stand  everything  well  enough  but  the  bread. 
Oh!  that  Siberian  bread.  My  stomach  recoils  at 
the  mere  recollection  of  the  sour,  greasy  substance, 
as  black  as  ink,  as  heavy  as  lead,  and  in  consistency 
so  soft  and  damp,  that  one  could  pull  it  out  like  a 
piece  of  unbaked  dough. 

Swallowing  a  glass  of  tea,  we  rolled  up  in  our 
furs,  wet  through  as  we  were.  Such  a  proceed- 
ing in  England  would  probably  have  resulted  in 
an  attack  of  rheumatic  fever,  but  a  special 
providence  seems    to  watch   over   one's   health  in 


510  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

Siberia,  and  we  never  had  a  day's  sickness,  hard 
though  the  work,  and  short  the  supply  of 
food  and  (with  the  exception  of  tea)  drink.  We 
did  not  get  much  sleep  that  night,  but  lay 
awake,  listening  to  the  howling  of  the  wind 
and  pattering  of  the  rain  on  the  window-panes. 
About  two  in  the  morning  I  dropped  into  an  uneasy 
dose,  from  which  I  awoke  about  an  hour  after,  to 
find  the  old  post-master  replenishing  the  stove. 
"  A  terrible  night,  gospodin,"  he  muttered,  tossing 
a  huge  pine  log  into  the  flame.  "One  almost 
pities  the  Katorgi,  with  no  roof  over  their 
heads.  Poor  devils,  they  must  be  like  drowned 
rats  !  "  Too  tired  to  answer,  I  was  about  to  turn 
on  my  side,  when  a  loud  knock  startled  me  into  a 
sitting  position,  and  brought  the  old  man  shuffling 
back  from  the  kitchen  in  double  quick  time.  It  was 
no  tarantass  or  telega.  There  had  been  no  bells  or 
sound  of  wheels.  Whoever  the  nightly  visitor  was, 
he  had  come  on  foot.  The  old  man  displayed  no 
desire  to  open  the  door,  and  showed  signs  of 
such  uneasiness,  that  then,  for  the  first  time,  flashed 
across  me  the  words  of  our  Cossack  friend  at 
Koutoulik,  "  Keep  a  good  look-out  about  Touloung. 
They  are  worse  there  than  anywhere." 


TEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  511 

A  second  knock,  louder  than  tlie  first,  cut  short 
my  reflections,  and  induced  me  to  make  signs  to 
the  Pole  that  my  revolver  was  loaded,  and  that 
Lancaster  (who  was  still  slumbering  peacefidly) 
had  a  similar  weapon.  Apparently  reassured,  lie 
then  went  to  the  door,  unbolted  it,  and  let  in  the 
mysterious  visitor. 

A  tall,  spare  man  with  reddish  grey  beard  and 
moustache,  apparently  about  sixty  years  of  age, 
pushed  rudely  past  the  Pole  and  entered  the  room ; 
and  divesting  himself  of  a  huge  bearskin  pelisse, 
sank  into  a  chair  with  a  sigh  of  satisfaction. 
"  Enfin  !  "  he  muttered  in  French,  adding  in  Russian 
sharply,  "  I  thought  you  were  going  to  keep  me 
out  there  all  night.  Why  did  you  not  open  sooner  ? 
Come !  quick,  the  samovar,  and  some  eggs  and 
bread.     Don't  stand  staring  there  like  a  fool." 

That  the  stranger  had  no  earthly  right  to  order 
provisions  in  a  Government  post-house,  without  a 
podarojna,  I  was  well  aware.  This  fact,  however, 
did  not  seem  to  occur  to  the  post-master,  who  slunk 
away  without  a  word  of  remonstrance  to  get  the 
refreshments.  In  the  meantime,  being  unobserved, 
I  had  a  good  opportunity  of  taking  stock  of  the  new 
arrival  from  behind  my  dacha. 


512  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    TA'    LAND. 

It  was  not  a  pleasing  or  reassuring  countenance. 
One  thing  especially  struck  me  as  curious;  he  had 
not  removed  his  cap  on  entering  the  room,  and 
had,  apparently,  no  intention  of  doing  so.  It  is,  as 
I  have  said,  an  unwritten  law,  that  on  entering  an 
apartment  in  Russia  the  head  shall  be  uncovered, 
more  out  of  respect  to  the  sacred  Ikon,  which 
always  stands  in  one  corner,  than  out  of  polite- 
ness to  the  occupants  of  the  compartment.  I 
had  never  yet  seen  the  rule  departed  from,  and  felt 
sure  that  the  man  had  some  hidden  motive  in  re- 
maining covered.  His  dress  was  unique  if  not  be- 
coming :  a  pair  of  grey  tweed  trousers,  surmounted 
by  a  Siberian  peasant's  caftan,  secured  by  a  broad 
red  sash  round  the  waist,  and  a  pair  of  high-heeled, 
buttoned  boots.  Save  for  a  thick  wooden  cudgel, 
which  lay  on  the  table  beside  him,  the  stranger  was 
apparently  unarmed.  Who  could  the  man  be  ?  and 
where  in  Heaven's  name  had  he  dropped  from  this 
wild  stormy  night,  or  rather  morning  ?  for  I  noticed 
with  satisfaction  that  day  was  beginning  to 
dawn. 

Who  he  was,  must  remain  a  mystery.  He  left 
about  5  a.m.,  as  suddenly  as  he  had  come,  and 
the   old  post-master   was  either  too  frightened  or 


lUKOUTSK    TO    TOiMSK.  513 

too  lazy  to  send  up  to  the  prison  for  a  couple  of 
Cossacks.  One  circumstance  convinced  me  tliat 
my  suspicions  were  well  founded.  Having  made 
a  hearty  meal  of  tea,  black  bread,  and  sardines, 
he  pushed  his  chair  back,  and  resting  both 
feet  on  the  stove,  lit  a  cigarette.  While  so  doing 
his  cap  slipped  off,  and  I  distinctly  saw  that  one 
half  of  his  head  was  partly  shaved,  the  distinguish- 
ing mark  of  the  Siberian  convict.  That  he  was 
a  "Katorgi"  I  do  not  for  a  moment  doubt.  He 
never  once  caught  sight  of  me,  lying  as  I  was  in  the 
shadow  of  the  table ;  but  Lancaster,  who  slept 
calmly  through  the  whole  business,  lay  close  to  him, 
and  my  only  wonder  is  that  lie  did  not  take  a  fancy 
to  the  gold  watch-chain  lying  so  temptingly  across 
my  friend's  chest.  He  left  the  post-house  very  quietly 
without  paying  for  his  food,  nor  did  the  old  post- 
master make  any  further  remarks  anent  his  strange 
visitor.  It  might  have  got  him  into  trouble  with  the 
authorities. 

The  poor  wretch  had  probably  been  starving  for 
the  past  two  or  three  days,  afraid  to  show  his  face 
in  the  village  near  which  so  many  brutal  murders 
had  been  committed.  Judging  there  would  be  few 
travellers  abroad    a  night  like  this,  he   had  made 

L  1 


514  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

for  the  post-liouse,  and  seeing,  as  he  thouglit,  its 
only  inmate  the  old  Pole,  had  summoned  up  courage 
to  enter.  It  seemed  odd  that  with  the  dirty  and 
ragged  dress  he  wore,  a  large  diamond  ring, 
sparkled  on  the  first  finger  of  his  left  hand.  We 
afterwards  heard  that  the  contractor  had  been 
robbed  of  one  of  unusual  size  and  brilliancy. 

Any  hopes  we  had  of  pushing  on  to  Nijni 
Udinsk  the  next  day  were  soon  dispelled,  for  at 
about  ten  o'clock  the  Imperial  post  clattered  in, 
and  every  available  horse  was  harnessed  to  the 
mail-carts.  We  were  not  altogether  sorry,  for  the 
rain  was  comins:  down  as  hard  as  ever.  Even 
the  d\vtj,  dreary  post-house  was  preferable  to  a 
lonof  drive  of  eio-htv  odd  versts,  wet  to  the  skin  and 
chilled  to  the  bone,  with  a  filthy  post-house  and  no 
food  at  the  end  of  the  journey. 

What  a  day  that  was  !  I  have  experienced  many 
miserable  hours  in  the  course  of  my  travels  but  never 
a  day  so  wretched,  and  unspeakably  depressing  as 
that  30th  of  August  in  Touloung  post-house. 
Save  the  mail,  nothing  passed  the  whole  livelong 
day,  not  even  a  telega.  Having  read  all  that  the 
rain  had  left  us  of  our  books,  we  simply  sat  down 
and  looked  at  each  other  in  sheer  despair.      The 


TKKODTSK   TO   TOMSK.  515 

situation   would   have  been    laug-liable  had   it   not 
seemed,  at  the  time,  so  serious. 

The  main  street  of  an  Eastern  Siberian  village  is 
not  an  inspiriting  sight,  even  on  a  fine  and  sunny 
day.  I  have  never  looked  upon  a  more  dismal 
spectacle  than  met  the  eye  from  the  post- 
house  windows  at  Touloung.  There  were  four, 
two  looking  on  to  the  village  street,  the  others 
on  to  a  lonely  barren  stretch  of  common,  at  the  end 
of  which,  through  the  grey  mist,  loomed  the  red 
roof  of  the  ostrog.  It  was  hard  to  say  which 
depressed  one  most,  the  dirty  village  street,  knee- 
deep  in  mud  and  filth,  the  dirty  dilapidated  houses  ; 
the  only  signs  of  life  half  a  dozen  mangy-looking 
ducks  splashing  and  wallowing  in  the  rain,  and  a 
couple  of  shivering  post-horses  crouching  under 
shelter  of  our  tarantass ; — or  the  lonely,  drab- 
coloured  road,  winding  away  like  a  great  snake 
over  the  common,  past  the  prison,  and  into  a  green 
mass  of  forest  just  beyond ;  the  tall  gaunt 
telegraph  poles  and  black  and  white  verst  posts 
almost  undistinguishable  in  the  dense  grey  mist, 
dispelled,  ever  and  anon,  by  driving  showers  of 
rain  and  sleet.  The  interior  was  no  better  than 
the  look-out.     Our   amusement   became  at   lensrth 

L    1    2 


516  FROM    PEKIX   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

reduced  to  killing  the  flies,  which  swarmed  in 
thousands  on  the  dirty  walls,  and  drinking 
tea,  that  never-failing  solace  of  the  Siberian 
traveller.  There  was  no  food  in  the  house  to  speak 
of.  The  unwelcome  visitor  of  last  night  had  ex- 
hausted our  old  friend's  stock,  and  reduced  the 
contents  of  his  larder  to  some  salted  "  omuli " 
and  a  couple  of  loaves  (or  rather  "  lumps ")  of 
black  bread.  This  constituted  our  evening  meal. 
A  buxom  female,  who  appeared  as  if  by  magic 
from  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  kitchen,  waited 
on  us.  We  would  willingly  have  dispensed  with 
her  services,  for  she  was  not  only  disgustingly 
dirty,  but  was  afflicted,  in  addition,  with  a  loath- 
some skin  disease.  Nor  was  it  reassuring  when 
our  host  explained  the  cause.  "  Poor  girl,"  he 
said  pensively,  "  she  has  suffered  much  the  last 
three  weeks.  You  would  hardly  think,  to  see  her 
busthng  about  so  cheerfully,  that  she  only  rose  for 
the  first  time  to-day  from  a  bad  attack  of  sraall-pox, 
caught  from  one  of  those  beastly  tea-caravans  from 
China.  Curse  them !  they  spread  it  all  over  the 
country."  Under  any  other  circumstances  I  should 
have  felt  uneasy,  but  we  were  becoming  so  desperate 
that  had  violent  symptoms  developed  themselves,  I 


IKKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  517 

believe  we  should  have  taken  it  quite  as  a  matter 
of  course.  For  this  very  reason,  perhaps,  neither 
of  us  caught  it,  for  the  fair  "  Liouba "  had  un- 
doubtedly arrived  at  the  most  infectious  stage  of 
the  disease. 

Towards  sunset  the  rain  abated  a  little.  About 
seven  o'clock,  some  women  emerged  from  the  houses 
opposite,  each  carrying  a  basin  and  slice  of  black 
bread,  which,  having  placed  under  shelter  of  the 
eaves,  they  left  and  returned  within  doors.  A  Siberian 
woman's  out-door  costume  on  a  rainy  day  is  even 
more  peculiar  than  that  in  which  she  receives  her 
guests  in  summer,  for,  from  the  waist  downwards, 
with  the  exception  of  a  pair  of  high  boots  reaching 
to  the  knee,  there  is  no  attempt  at  clothing  of  any 
description,  the  linen  skirt  being  fastened  appa- 
rently round  the  neck.  The  appearance  of  these 
worthy  dames  all  at  once  at  the  gates  of  their 
courtyards  was  curious  in  the  extreme,  nor  did  they 
appear  the  least  disconcerted  when  they  caught 
sight  of  our  faces  at  the  window.  On  inquiry. 
It  is  the  custom,  throughout  Siberia,  for  the 
peasants  of  every  village  and  town  to  place  outside 
each  house  refreshment  of  some  sort  (which 
usually  takes  the  shape  of  bread  and  milk)  for  the 


518  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

use  of  any  convict  that  may  make  bis  escape.  The 
rule  is  an  old  one,  nor  has  it  ever  been  interfered 
with  by  the  Imperial  Government.  It  is  also  under- 
stood that  the  bowl  and  plate  holding  the  provisions 
shall  not  be  tampered  with  or  taken  away,  china 
utensils  being  rather  valuable  in  Eastern  Siberia. 
Whenever  this  code  of  honour  has  been  infringed 
the  next  convict  who  escapes  is  bound,  should  he 
come  across  him,  to  kill  the  thief.  A  sentence  of 
this  kind  was  carried  out  near  Tomsk  while  we 
were  staying  there.  Both  convicts  had  made  their 
escape  from  the  ostrog  at  Kolinskaya,  about 
ninety  versts  from  Tomsk,  the  first  escaping  about 
three  weeks  before  the  second.  As  usual,  both 
made  what  they  could  upon  the  road,  till  the  latter 
accidentally  heard  of  the  theft  committed  by  the 
former,  and  never  rested  till  he  had  hunted  him 
down,  and  after  a  severe  struggle  beaten  him  to 
death  with  a  bludgeon.  His  body  was  found  in 
the  forest  some  days  later. 

But  if  the  day  at  Touloung  had  been  depressing, 
the  night  was  infinitely  more  so.  The  remains  of 
our  scanty  meal  having  been  carried  away  by  the 
small-pox  patient,  the  post-master  appeared  with 
two  guttering  tallow  dips,  which  just   sufficed  to 


IKKOUTSK   TO    TOMSK.  619 

make  darkness  visible,  and,  bidding  us  good 
night,  retired  to"  tlie  depths  of  his  ill-smelling  den, 
whence,  a  few  moments  after,  there  issued  sounds 
of  music  in  the  shape  of  a  groaning,  wheezing 
concertina.  We  were  given  the  benefit  of  this 
inspiriting  music  from  a  httle  past  eight  o'clock 
till  far  into  the  night.  I  used  to  think  the  Russian 
National  Anthem  a  fine  and  stirring  composition, 
but  can,  even  now,  scarcely  hear  it  without  a 
shudder.  It  was  the  only  tune  he  knew.  It  was 
past  1  a.m.  when  I  got  to  sleep.  The  howling 
of  the  wind,  and  rattling  of  the  rain  and  sleet 
against  the  window-panes,  made  one  feel  thankful 
one  was  under  shelter,  even  in  such  a  den  as  this. 
A  huge  grey  rat,  sitting  near  on  the  floor,  his  eyes 
gleaming  in  the  semi-darkness,  appeared  to  share 
my  opinion.  Two  months  before,  I  could  not  have 
slept  a  wink  with  the  knowledge  that  such  an  animal 
was  in  the  room,  but  I  now  composed  myself  to 
slumber  quite  unconcernedly,  although  with  the  firm 
conviction  that  when  asleep,  he,  and  probably  many 
others,  would  be  scrambling  over  my  body  and  face. 
An  excellent  school  is  Siberia  for  the  fastidious,  and 
I  know  many  a  youthful  London  "masher"  who 
would  derive  incalculable  benefit  (both  physical  and 


520  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAXD. 

and    mental)     from     a    short    residence    at    Tou- 
loung. 

Awakening  at  five  o'clock,  I  sprang  eagerly  to 
the  window,  to  see  how  the  weather  was.  Alas  !  it 
was  pouring  harder  than  ever.  Still  the  same 
sodden  grey  sky  of  yesterday,  vvith  sooty-coloured 
clouds  driving  over  it,  still  the  same  desolate 
landscape,  dripping  houses,  and  distant  forest 
shrouded  in  white  mist.  Another  day  at  Touloung  ! 
Cursing  Siberia  and  everything  connected  with  it,  I 
wrapped  myself  in  my  pelisse,  and  lay  down  again 
on  the  filthy  worm-eaten  floor,  nor  did  I  wake  again 
till  past  ten  o'clock,  to  find  a  new  arrival  seated,  in 
front  of  the  hissing  samovar,  and  the  rain  coming 
down  harder  than  ever. 

The  new  comer  was  a  Jew,  and  a  very  dirty  one 
into  the  bargain,  though  evidently  a  man  of  means, 
as  his  private  tarantass  and  fat  podgy  hands, 
covered  with  enormous  diamond  rings,  testified. 
Like  most  of  his  race,  he  was  as  curious  as 
a  monkey,  and  no  sooner  had  I  opened  my  eyes 
than  I  was  assailed  with  the  usual  bevy  of  ques- 
tions. "What  was  my  nationality?"  "Where 
had  I  come  from  ? "  "  Where  was  I  going  ?  " 
"  What  was  my  income  ?  "  and  finally,  "  What  had 
brought  me  to  Siberia?  "     My  answer,  "  Pleasure," 


ITvKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  621 

was  invariably  met  with  shouts  of  laughter  on  these 
occasions.  'Nov,  now  that  I  have  crossed  that 
dreary  country,  can  I  blame  my  fellow-travellers  for 
what  at  the  time  I  looked  upon  as  a  somewhat  rude 
and  unnecessary  display  of  mirth.  The  Jew  spoke 
a  little  French,  and  was  a  welcome  addition  to  our 
melancholy  party,  for  besides  being  a  cheery,  talkative 
fellow,  full  of  fun  and  anecdote,  he  had  a  large 
stock  of  provisions.  We  were,  almost  starving,  and 
accepted  with  alacrity  his  invitation  to  join  him  in 
a  tin  of  preserved  mutton,  washed  down  by  a  couple 
of  glasses  of  vodka.  I  do  not  know  when  I  ever 
enjoyed  a  meal  more.  We  had  not  tasted  solid 
food  for  nearly  three  days,  and  the  pangs  of  hunger 
were  beginning  to  make  themselves  felt  in  a  moat 
painful  and  unmistakable  manner.  We  more  than 
once  experienced,  seriously  speaking,  the  pains 
of  starvation  in  Siberia  :  that  terrible  gnawing 
sensation  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  which  is  so 
hard  to  describe,  but  which  for  sheer  mental  and 
physical  suffering  is  unequalled. 

Our  Hebrew  friend  was,  it  transpired,  a  bagman 
"  travelling "  in  gunpowder,  and  a  native  of 
Irkoutsk.  He  was  now  on  his  way  to  Tashkent,  in 
Central  Asia,  having  come  the  whole  distance  from 
Nicolaievsk,  on  the  Sea  of  Okhotsk,  without  a  break, 


522  FROM   PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

save  a  rest  of  a  couple  of  days  in  his  native  city. 
Such  a  voyage  as  ours  paled  before  the  prodigious 
length  of  this  journey,  which  must  be  at  least  four 
thousand  miles  from  end  to  end.  The  Jew  had  already 
done  it  four  times,  once  in  winter,  an  experiment,  he 
added,  he  would  not  care  to  repeat.  "  In  summer," 
said  our  talkative  friend,  "it  is  charmino:.  Like 
what  you  English  would  call  one  great  Picque- 
Nicque.^^  How  I  envied  the  little  man  his  cheerful 
disposition  ! 

He  made  a  start  by  five  o'clock,  when  the  weather 
cleared  a  little,  and  by  nine  o'clock  the  sky  was 
cloudless  and  covered  with  bright  stars.  Dreading 
a  rainy  morrow,  we  almost  decided  to  have  the 
horses  put  in  and  push  on  at  once.  The  next 
station  could  not,  at  any  rate,  be  worse  than 
Touloung,  and  might  be  better;  but  the  post-master 
begged  us  not  to  attempt  it.  The  floods  were 
out  in  places,  and  he  had  but  a  young  and  in- 
experienced yemstchik  to  give  us,  who  would 
probably  lose  his  head,  should  anything  go  wrong. 
We  were  not  sorry  next  day  that  we  had  taken  the 
old  man's  advice.  Morning  broke  bright  and  clear, 
though  the  roofs  of  the  houses  were  still  wet  and 
gleaming  in  the  sunshine,  as  with  six  horses  in,  we 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  523 

slowly  made  our  way  up  the  mivy  street,  and  said 
good-bye,  with  a  sigh  of  relief,  to  the  grimy  post- 
bouse  in  which  we  had  passed  so  many  dreary, 
comfortless  hours. 

A  newly  steam-ploughed  field  in  the  boggiest 
parts  of  Cambridgeshire  after  a  week's  steady  and 
incessant  rain,  but  faintly  describes  the  condition  in 
which  we  found  the  road.  In  many  places  it  was 
entirely  submerged,  and  we  had  to  trust  to  Pro- 
vidence and  the  yemstchik's  knowledge  of  the  road 
for  safety.  At  one  place  the  water  was  well  over  the 
hind  wheels.  We  were  not  sorry  to  emerge  on  dry 
land  again,  for  we  had  to  cross  a  broken-down  bridge 
during  this  aquatic  interlude,  when  a  false  move  to 
the  right  or  left  would  have  precipitated  us  into  a 
ditch  about  ten  feet  deep  and  broad  in  proportion. 
For  the  first  eighteen  versts  it  was  quite  impossible 
to  attempt  a  faster  pace  than  a  walk,  and  several 
times  we  stuck  altogether.  It  was  anxious  work, 
for  a  loosened  bolt  or  screw,  a  broken  axle,  may, 
in  Siberia,  detain  one  for  a  week  or  more. 
We  had  not  much  confidence  in  our  yemstchik, 
who  could  not  at  the  most  have  been  more  than 
twelve  or  thirteen  years  old,  and  should  have  fared 
badly  had  we  adhered   to  our  original  intention 'and 


524  PKOM    PEKIX    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

started  over-night,  for  tlie  liorses  did  exactly 
as  they  liked.  What  the  little  imp  lacked  in 
strength,  however,  he  made  up  in  assurance,  and 
waved  his  whip  about,  alternately  cursing  and 
praising  his  team  after  the  most  approved  style. 
We  had  a  narrow  escape  of  an  upset  once 
when  the  horses,  taking  fright  at  a  dead  horse  on 
the  side  of  the  road,  made  a  bolt  for  it  into  the 
forest.  Luckily  a  large  hole  into  which  the  tarantass 
dived,  brought  us  up  all  standing,  and  saved  us  from 
further  mishap.  During  this  performance  two  of 
the  traces  broke,  and  we  were  detained  over  an  hour 
repairing  them.  Three  telegas  and  a  tarantass 
having  passed  us  meanwhile,  we  were  detained  at 
the  next  station  (Kourjinskaj^a)  for  twenty-four 
hours. 

The  utterly  inadequate  number  of  horses  kept  at 
each  station  may  be  said  to  have  been  one  of 
our  chief  drawbacks.  Whenever,  on  the  road, 
one  has  the  misfortune  to  meet  the  post,  it  is 
impossible,  although  the  mail  consists,  as  a  rule, 
of  four  or  six  tarantasses,  at  the  most,  to  procure 
horses,  and  a  long  weary  wait  is  the  result. 
Sometimes,  when  we  had  the  post-house  to 
ourselves,    it  was   bearable  enough,    but   on  most 


TRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSIv.  255 

occasions  ouv  sufferings  were  sliared  by  a 
number  of  other  travellers.  Sitting^  or  standins^ 
in  a  bare,  whitewashed  room  for  half  a  dozen 
hours  together,  is  not  conducive  to  good  temper 
or  conversation,  and  on  these  occasions  tlie 
waiting-room  reminded  me  of  nothing  so  much  as 
a  cage  of  wild  beasts,  eacb.  eyeing  the  other  witli 
envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  the  women  especiallj^ 
looking  as  if  tbey  would  like  to  tear  each  other's 
eyes  out.  The  peculiarities  of  men  too  came  out  at 
such  times,  some  taking  the  matter  coolly  and 
philosophically,  alternately  drinking  tea  and 
smoking  cigarettes,  till  their  horses  were  ready ; 
others  pacing  restlessly  up  and  down  the  room, 
cursing  the  post-master,  yemstchiks,  and  every- 
body connected  with  the  establishment  ;  others, 
again,  subsiding  into  a  state  of  dull  apathy,  and 
staring  straight  before  them  for  hours  together. 
I  often  thought  at  such  times  of  men  I  know  in 
England,  to  whom  a  wait  of  a  couple  of  hours  in 
a  snug  waiting-room,  surrounded  by  papers  and 
books,  food  and  drink,  is  an  excuse  for  a  good 
British  grumble.  I  thought  of  what  they  would 
say  to  a  detention  of  three  days,  or  so,  in  one  of 
these  post-houses,  with  nothing  but  tea  for  nourish- 


526  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

ment,  nothing  to  look  at  but  four  dirty  whitewashed 
walls,  nothing  to  do  but  to  pace  up  and  down  for  hours 
together,  to  try  and  keep  the  circulation  going  in 
one's  tired,  hungry  frame,  a  thousand-mile  journey 
before  tliem,  and  probably  a  dozen  such  delays  ere 
they  reached  their  final  destination  ! 

I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  an  account  of 
every  stage.  SuflBce  it  to  say  that  we  reached 
Mjni  Udinsk,  after  some  delay  and  trouble,  on  the 
31st  of  August ;  and  with  the  exception  of  the 
desert,  I  do  not  think  J  have  ever  made  a  rougher 
or  more  uncomfortable  journey  than  that  from 
Toulouno;  to  this  town.  The  last  stao^e  was  a 
terrible  one,  and  I  thought  more  than  once  we 
should  have  to  abandon  all  hope  of  reaching  Nijni 
Udinsk  that  night  at  an}^  rate.  About  half-way  the 
horses,  of  which  we  bad  seven  in,  shied  while  cross- 
ing a  rickety  wooden  bridge,  both  near  wheels 
went  over  the  edge,  and  for  a  few  moments  things 
looked  ugly.  Though  the  team  pluuged  a  good 
deal,  however,  no  harm  was  done,  and  by  the  aid  of 
two  young  fir-trees  that  our  yemstchiks  cut  down, 
we  got  the  clumsy  vehicle  hoisted  on  to  terra  firma 
again.  Although  well  broken  into  jolting  and 
shaking  by  camel-cart  experiences,  I  do  not  think  I 


IRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  527 

ever  made  a  more  fatiguing  journey.  Our  bodies 
and  bones  aclied  for  days  after. 

We  were  detained  some  time  at  the  ferry  over  the 
River  Uda,  on  which  river  the  town  of  Nijni 
Udinsk  is  situated,  for  a  caravan  of  over  200  carts 
was  being  taken  across,  and  it  was  quite  an  hour 
before  we  managed  to  persuade  the  ferry-man  to 
take  us  on  board.  In  the  meantime  we  amused 
ourselves  watching  the  busy  scene  and  the  frantic 
efforts  made  by  men  and  horses  to  drag  the  heavy 
tea-carts  up  the  steep  river-bank.  Not  a  hun- 
dred yards  off,  a  young  and  pretty  woman  was 
bathing  in  the  stream,  stark  naked,  a  proceeding 
which  seemed  to  amuse  not  a  httle  the  rao-o-ed,  wild- 
looking  fellows  in  charge  of  the  caravan.  Some, 
bolder  than  the  rest,  ventured  to  embark  in  an 
interchange  of  chaff  with  the  fair  bather,  who,  far 
from  being  dismayed,  only  laughed  and  showed  her 
white  teeth  derisively,  giving  her  assailants  back  as 
good  as  they  gave.  Siberian  women  are  certainly 
not  troubled  with  shyness. 

It  was  dusk  when  we  reached  the  post-house,  a 
large  brick  building,  with  a  good  garden  and  shady 
courtyard.  The  waiting-room  was  taken  possession 
of   by    five  Japanese   youths,  who,  after  a  course 


228  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

of  study  at  St.  Petersburg,  were  returning  to 
Japan  via  Wladivostok  and  the  Amour.  But 
tlie  innkeeper's  wife  (a  pretty  flaxen-haired  Swede), 
would  not  hear  of  our  sharins;  the  bio^  room 
with  the  Japs,  but  laid  us  a  table  in  her  own 
private  sitting-room,  where,  at  the  open  window, 
looking  on  to  the  garden,  redolent  of  sweetbriar 
and  honeysuckle,  we  enjoyed  the  first  comfortable 
meal  we  had  made  for  nearly  a  fortnight.  Our  little 
hostess  prepared  it  with  her  own  hands,  and  took 
quite  a  motherly  interest  in  us,  a  kindness  we 
could  not  but  repay  by  visiting  and  admiring  her 
firstborn  (a  little  chubby-cheeked  girl  of  a  few 
weeks  old),  the  miniature  of  her  mother,  that  lay 
asleep  in  a  swinging  cradle  suspended  from  the 
ceiling  of  her  neat,  chintz-curtained  bedroom. 
That  all  post-houses  were  like  this,  I  thought,  as  I 
turned  in  on  a  comfortable  (and  stuffed)  sofa.  A 
slight  touch  of  frost  in  the  air  made  a  couple  of 
blankets,  that  our  little  friend  insisted  on  giving 
us,  very  acceptable,  and  a  last  look  at  the  night 
having  shown  us  a  bright  moon  and  cloudless 
sky,  we  slept  soundly  without  any  fear  of  rain  on 
the  morrow. 

Had   we  consulted  our   own  wishes,   we   should 


IRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  529 

have  stayed  at  least  a  couple  of  days  at  this  friendly 
oasis,  but  time  would  not  allow  us  more  than  a 
few  hours'  rest,  and  bidding  farewell  to  our  kind 
little  hostess,  we  had  left  Nijui  Udinsk  far  behind 
us  ere  the  sun  had  fairly  risen.  The  town,  is 
neatly  and  regularly  built,  and  contains  about  four 
thousand  inhabitants.  Though  the  pavements  are 
of  wood,  many  of  the  houses  are  of  whitewashed 
brick,  which,  with  their  bright  green  roofs  and 
shutters,  somewhat  relieve  the  melancholy  effect 
which  in  every  Siberian  town  is  produced  by  the 
sombre  colour  of  the  roads,  and  unpainted  wooden 
houses.  There  were  but  one  or  two  shops,  however, 
for  the  sale  of  stores  of  all  kinds ;  and  the  streets, 
though  broad  and  regular,  were  unlighted. 

All  went  "merry  as  a  marriage  bell"  for  two 
days  after  leaving  Nijni  Udinsk,  the  weather,  though 
cold  and  frosty  at  nights,  remaining  bright  and 
fine.  The  asj^ect  of  the  country,  too,  was  more 
picturesque  and  cheerful  than  any  we  had  passed 
through  since  leaving  the  Trans-Baikal.  The  roads 
were  smoother  and  wider.  By  the  side,  wild  roses, 
convolvuli,  bluebells,  and  wild  hyacinth  grew  luxu- 
riantly— while  a  kind  of  high,  red-leafed  fern, 
common  in  this  district,  gave  a  pleasant  and  bright 

M  m 


530  FEOM    FKKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

relieving  spot  of  colour  to  the  dull,  monotonous 
pine  and  larch. 

As  a  set-ofF  to  these  advantages,  however,  we 
suffered  terribly  from  mosquitoes,  which  swarmed 
by  day,  but  which,  as  soon  as  the  sun  had  set, 
were  driven  in  by  the  cold.  So  bad  were  they,  that 
the  peasants  we  passed  on  the  road  or  in  the  corn- 
fields wore  black  gauze  veils,  fastened  like  a  mask 
over  their  faces,  and  we  had  cause  to  regret  not 
having  provided  ourselves  with  these  safeguards, 
for,  for  the  few  days  they  lasted,  these  plagues  gave 
one  no  rest  for  an  instant,  and  one's  blood  was  in 
a  constant  state  of  fever,  from  the  irritation  set 
up  by  the  poisonous  bites.  Fortunately  they  did 
not  trouble  us  long,  and  once  past  Atchinsk  disap- 
peared altogether. 

Scarcely  a  day  now  passed  that  we  did  not  meet 
prisoners,  in  gangs  of  two  to  three  hundred  each,  on 
their  way  to  Irkoutsk,  Chita,  and  other  parts  of 
Eastern  Siberia.  The  appearance  of  our  tarantass 
was  invariably  the  signal  for  stragglers  to  fall  in, 
and  as  we  passed  through  the  crowd,  the  poor 
wretches  pressed  in  eagerly  on  either  side  and 
begged  for  kopeks,  cigarettes,  and  food,  though,  as 
regarded   the  latter  necessary,  we  were  usually  as 


IRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  531 

badly  off  as  they  themselves.  We  noticed  that  the 
further  west  we  got,  many  more  of  the  men  wore 
chains,  probably  on  account  of  the  facilities  for 
escape  being  easier.  Also  that,  while  the  ostrogs 
east  of  Tomsk  are  insecure,  dilapidated  buildings, 
those  to  the  west  are  nearly  all  new  and  substantial- 
looking,  surrounded  by  a  double  guard  of  Cossacks, 
and  protected  in  many  cases  by  a  brick  wall  sur- 
mounted with  high  chevaux  de  frise. 

I  remember  meeting  a  gang,  two  days  after  leav- 
ing Nijni  Udinsk.  It  was  a  wild,  desolate  bit  of 
road,  and  though  a  bright,  sunny  day,  in  semi- 
darkness,  for  the  forest  trees,  through  which  we 
were  passing,  almost  met  over  our  heads.  Suddenly, 
a  turn  of  the  road  brought  us  full  in  view  of  one 
of  the  dismal  grey  processions  with  which  we  had 
now  grown  familiar,  and  as  it  was  a  large  gang, 
we  ordered  the  yem^stchik  to  draw  up  for  a  few 
moments  while  they  filed  by.  Poor  wretches ! 
There  was  but  little  talking  or  laughing  that 
day.  The  heat  and  thirst  had  taken  all  desire  for 
conversation  out  of  them,  for  it  had  been  a  long 
stage,  of  nearly  thirty  versts,  from  the  last  ostrog, 
and  they  had  still  seven  more  to  do  before  resting 
for    the    night.      Mosquitoes    fairly    swarmed   in 

M  m  2 


532  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

this  defile,  and  the  Cossacks  on  guard  wore 
black  gauze  masks.  I  noticed,  with  satisfac- 
tion, that  one  of  the  brave  fellows  had  taken 
off  his  to  give  to  one  of  the  women,  who  was 
struggling  along  with  difficulty,  two  children  cling- 
ing to  her  skirts.  Seeing  we  had  pulled  up,  they 
halted,  as  if  by  common  consent,  as  they  passed  us, 
and  led  by  one  of  the  men,  with  a  sweet  tenor  voice, 
struck  up  the  sad,  pathetic  air,  "  Kouda  Doroga 
Sibiri,"  we  had  heard  on  Lake  Baikal.  It  was  an 
impressive  scene,  the  guard  carelessly  resting  on 
their  rifles,  the  men  with  their  sunburnt,  weary 
faces,  the  women  in  long  robes  of  white,  their 
children  clinging  to  them,  and  joining  with 
tiny  treble  in  the  tune  they  knew  so  well. 
All  sang  in  parts,  and  correctly,  and  with  over 
two  hundred  voices,  joining  in  the  sweet  melan- 
choly air,  the  effect  may  be  imagined. 

About  a  mile  further  on  we  passed  four 
telegas,  containing  political  prisoners.  On  either 
side  of  each  cart  marched  a  Cossack  with  fixed 
bayonet  and  loaded  rifle.  The  men,  three  in 
number,  were  in  ordinary  walking  dress,  which 
showed  plainly  the  order  to  which  they  had 
belonged   in   happier  days.     It   was    easy   to   dis- 


lEKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  533 

tinguisli  the  liomme  du  peuple  in  shabby,  greasy 
garments  taken  from  the  scum  of  Petersburg 
or  Odessa,  from  the  sHght,  well-built  man  in  the 
next  telega,  in  neat  tweed  suit,  holding  a  cigarette 
in  his  small  white  hand,  evidently  a  gentleman, 
who  perhaps,  but  a  few  short  months  before  had 
been  surrounded  with  every  comfort  and  luxury. 
The  woman  in  the  last  telega  was  neatly  clad  in  a 
black  silk  gown,  beginning  to  show  slight  symptoms 
of  wear,  and  a  red  worsted  "  Tarn  O'Shanter " 
hat,  a  head-dress  very  popular  among  lady 
political  exiles  in  Siberia.  Though  not  pretty, 
she  had  a  bright,  clever  face,  and  returned  our 
bow  with  a  pleasant  smile  and  nod.  We  after- 
wards heard  that  this  was  Madame  B ,  who,  for 

an  alleged  conspiracy  against  the  Government  at 
Odessa,  was  on  her  way  to  the  mines  of  Kara,  in 
the  Trans-Baikal  provinces,  for  life. 

A  large  and  luxurious  tarantass  brought  up  the 
rear  of  this  weird  procession.  In  the  vehicle  were 
a  Cossack  officer,  and,  seated  by  his  side,  a  re- 
markably pretty  and  well-dressed  woman.  We 
had  a  good  look  at  her,  our  yemstchiks  stopping 
by  mutual  consent  to  have  a  chat  and  give  the 
horses  breathing- time.    She  did  not  look  particularly 


534  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

enamoured  of  her  companion,  a  coarse,  red-faced 
man  with  bristly  grey  moustache,  bloodshot  eyes, 
and  spectacles.  Hers  was  a  true  Russian  face — 
small  regular  features,  deep  blue  (almost  violet) 
eyes,  and  that  sweet  sad  expression  rarely  seen 
out  of  the  Czar's  dominions.  In  reply  to  my  ques- 
tion, as  soon  as  we  had  resumed  our  journey,  if 
he  knew  who  the  lovely  vision  was,  our  yemstchik 
replied  with  a  wink  :  "  A  prisoner's  wife."  The 
wink  spoke  volumes,  and  fully  explained  the  poor 
woman's  aversion  to  her  travelling  companion. 

She  was,  we  afterwards  heard,  the  wife  of  Count 
L.,  the  young  and  good-looking  prisoner  we  had  met 
in  the  telega.  It  must  have  been  somewhat  tanta- 
lizing to  travel  on  day  after  day,  week  after  week, 
within  sight  of  his  wife,  and  yet  not  be  allowed 
to  open  his  lips ;  more  maddening  still  to  see 
the  advances  made  by  the  untutored  boor  who  a 
very  short  time  before  would  have  deemed  it  an 
honour  to  be  allowed  even  to  address  her.  This  is 
perhaps  one  of  the  hardest  evils  that  political  exiles 
have  to  endure.  The  wife  of  a  prisoner  may  by 
Russian  law  accompany  her  husband  to  his  destina- 
tion at  the  expense  of  the  Government,  on  condition 
that  she  travels  with  the  prisoners,  lives  on  prison 


IRKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  000 

food,  sleeps  in  the  ostrogs,  and  submits  to  prison 
discipline.  There  is  but  one  distinction  made 
between  the  wife  of  the  political  prisoner  and  the 
criminal  convict,  this  being  that  the  former  is  not 
compelled  to  walk,  but  may,  if  she  prefers,  travel  in 
a  "  telega,"  a  vehicle  so  rough  and  uncomfortable 
that  walking  is  infinitely  preferable.  But  should  a 
married  woman  be  young  and  pretty,  heaven  help  her, 
especially  if,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  the  Cossack 
lieutenant  in  charge  of  the  party  is  susceptible  to 
the  charms  of  female  beauty.  No  sooner  has  the 
barge  arrived  at  Tomsk  than  her  persecutions 
commence,  nor  do  they  end,  as  a  rule,  until 
the  unhappy  woman  has  ceased  to  resist  the 
advances  of  her  brutal  admirer.  The  commander 
of  a  prison-gang  is  as  great  a  despot  in  his  way 
as  the  Czar  of  all  the  Eussias,  for  there  is  no  one 
to  check  or  gainsay  him,  the  whole  way  from 
Tomsk  to  the  shores  of  Okhotsk,  and  who  would, 
take  the  word  of  a  convict  (and  especially  a 
political  one)  against  that  of  an  officer  of  the  Czar  ? 
In  most  cases  the  unfortunate  husband  is  the  un- 
conscious means  by  which  the  wife  is  brought  to 
her  ruin.  Threats  of  punishment,  deprivation  of 
food,  and  even  flogging  are   made    by  the  human 


536       FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAXD. 

devil  in  charge,  till  at  length,  worn  out  with  re- 
peated insults  and  ill-treatment,  the  poor  wife  too 
often  yields,  and  is  promoted  to  a  place  in  his  taran- 
tass,  whence  she  is  forced  to  submit  daily  to  the 
silent  reproaches  of  the  husband  for  whose  good,  in 
nine  cases  out  of  ten,  she  has  fallen. 

I  heard  in  Tomsk  many  sad  and  heart-breaking 
narratives,  but  none  perhaps  so  touching  as  the  case 
of  a  young  Scotchwoman,  Mrs.  B.,  whose  husband 
had  in  1879  practised  as  a  physician  for  some  years 
in  the  district  of  ChernigoflP,  European  Russia.  Al- 
though a  liberal,  Dr.  B.  had  religiously  abstained 
from  openly  expressing  his  views,  or  meddling  in  any 
way  with  politics,  in  fact  had  lived  as  a  peaceful  and 
industrious  citizen  in  every  way.  In  the  spring  of 
1880,  however,  two  young  women  from  St.  Peters- 
burg arrived  at  his  house  with  letters  of  intro- 
duction. They  had  been  studying  medicine  at 
the  hospitals  in  the  capital,  and  finished  the  course 
of  lectures,  but  wishing  to  continue  their  studies, 
called  upon  the  ^  doctor  upon  their  return  to  their 
native  town,  to  ask  whether  he  would  receive 
them  as  pupils,  a  proposal  to  which  he  at  once 
assented.  The  girls  were  then  introduced  to  his 
wife,    who    took    a   fancy    to    them,    and    a    day 


IRKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  537 

seldom  passed  tliat  oue  or  botli  did  not  visit  the 
house. 

One  morning,  about  a  mouth  after  their  arrival, 
the  doctor  was  visited  by  the  police  superintendent, 
who  informed  him  that  his  youug  friends  were 
political  suspects,  and,  from  information  received 
from  Petersburg,  were  living  on  forged  passports. 
But  the  next  piece  of  news  fairly  staggered  him  : 
the  women  were  to  be  sent  at  once  by  administrative 
process  to  the  village  of  Verkhoyansk,  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Yakoutsk,  where  in  a  week's  time  he,  the 
doctor  was,  condemned  to  follow  them  for  an  in- 
definite number  of  years  ! 

As  is  usual  in  such  cases,  a  guard  was  put  over 
the  house,  and  Dr.  B.  forbidden  to  leave  it.  To 
make  matters  worse,  his  wife,  a  young  and  beautiful 
woman  of  twenty-two,  was  enceinte.  But  there 
was  no  help  for  it.  The  day  of  his  departure 
arrived,  when  poor  B.  excused  himself  on  the 
plea  of  going  for  a  few  days  to  Petersburg  on 
business.  It  was  only  two  months  later,  when  her 
child  was  born,  that  Mrs.  B.  learnt  the  truth,  and 
within  a  week  had  made  up  her  mind  to  follow  her 
husband,  and  start  on  a  journey  of  six  thousand 
miles   before   she  had   really    recovered   from   her 


538  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LA^^D. 

confinement,  under  circumstances  before  wliicli 
many  a  strong  man  would  have  quailed.  Not 
possessing  the  necessary  means  for  travelling  by 
steamer  and  tarantass,  Mrs.  B.  joined  a  party  of 
exiles  at  Tomsk,  and  set  out  for  her  long,  weary 
journey.  She  would,  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
affairs,  reach  her  destination  in  sixteen  months, 
always  supposing  she  was  not  taken  ill  on  the  road. 
For  weeks,  months,  did  her  almost  superhuman 
courage  and  determination  sustain  her,  and  enable 
her  to  bear  the  long,  weary  marches  under  a  burning 
sun,  the  insufficient  food,  the  fetid  atmosphere  of 
ostrogs,  and,  worse  still,  the  insults  of  her  male  com- 
panions. For  four  months  she  struggled  on,  but 
the  tax  had  been  too  great  on  the  nervous  system, 
and  on  arrival  at  Krasnoiarsk,  her  mind  showed 
symptoms  of  wandering.  Still  the  thought  that 
every  day,  every  hour,  was  bringing  her  nearer  her 
husband's  arms,  gave  her  courage  and  additional 
energy,  and  put  her  in  better  spirits,  which,  alas ! 
were  soon  destined  to  have  a  terrible  fall.  It  was 
within  three  or  four  stages  of  Irkoutsk  that  she 
heard  her  death-warrant.  "  At  Irkoutsk,"  said  the 
poor  woman  one  fine  sunny  evening  when,  the  day's 
march  over,  she  was  sitting  out  in  the  prison-yard 


lEKODTSK   TO   TOMSK.  539 

witli  lier  fellow-prisoners,  "  At  Irkoufcsk  I  sliall 
only  be  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles  from  my 
husband.  Only  fancy,  in  another  month  I  may  be 
at  Yerkholeusk,  and  with  him  again."  "  Is  that 
the  Englishman  who  was  banished  from  Ohernigoff," 
asked  a  "political,"  a  stranger,  who  had  just  come  in 
from  Krasnoiarsk,  "  if  so,  you  will  have  to  go  a  good 
deal  further  than  Verkholensk  to  find  him.  Do  not 
you  know  that  they  have  sent  him  to  Verkhoyansk, 
a  Yakout  settlement  three  thousand  miles  from 
Irkoutsk,  within  the  Arctic  circle  ?  " 

Within  the  Arctic  circle  !  Poor  soul  !  little  as 
she  knew  Siberia,  she  knew  what  that  meant ;  knew 
that  to  reach  her  husband's  place  of  banishment 
she  must  travel  weeks  and  months  alone,  in  dog 
or  reindeer  sledges,  through  the  arctic  desolation 
and  fever- stricken  "Toundras"  of  North-Eastern 
Asia.  Next  morning,  however,  she  resumed  her 
march  mechanically,  ate  and  drank  nothing,  spoke 
to  no  one,  but  seemed  dazed  and  bewildered  by 
the  blow.  The  very  evening  of  the  day  the 
gang  reached  Irkoutsk  (the  city  which  through- 
out the  weary  pilgrimage  had  been  her  haven  of 
hope  and  rest),  she  went  raving  mad,  and  died  in  the 
criminal   asylum  three  days  afterwards.     Has  any 


540  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

writer  of  fiction  ever  imagined  a  more  tragic    or 
heart-rending  story  than  this  ? 

We  reached  Biriousinsk,  a  town  of  five  tfiousand 
inhabitants,  about  mid-day  on  the  3rd   of  Septem- 
ber.    Gold  has  lately  been  discovered  near  here  in 
large  quantities.     This  event  caused  some  surprise 
amongst  the  gold- workers  of  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk, 
for  until  just  lately  this   district  had  been   looked 
upon  as  almost  barren  of  mineral  productions,  the 
richest  gold-fields  being  situated  to  the  nortb  of  the 
province   of    Yeneseisk,  Nertchirsk,  in   the  Trans- 
Baikal,  and  Yuz,  near  the  Altai  chain,  on  the  borders 
of    China.     The  whole  of  Siberia,  however,  may  be 
said  to  teem  with  the  precious  mineral,  and,  as   a 
Russian  once  remarked  to  me,   "Where  it  has   not 
been  found,  it  has  not  been  looked  for  ! "    Silver, 
copper,     and     iron,     are     also     found     in      large 
quantities  in  certain  districts  of  Russian  Asia,   as 
many  as  40,000  lbs.  of  the  first-named  metal  being 
annually  sent  from  the  district  of  Barnaul,  in  South- 
western Siberia,  to    Petersburg.     On   arrival,    the 
silver  is  refined,  and  about  three  per  cent,  of  gold 
extracted  from  it. 

The    Government    gold    and    silver    mines    are 
worked  bv  convicts,  who  receive  no  pay  for  their 


IRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  541 

labour.  The  private  mines  are  mostly  of  gold, 
and  are  leased  by  Government  to  private  indi- 
viduals on  certain  conditions.  The  applicant  must, 
however,  be  a  Eussian  subject.  No  foreigner, 
although  naturalized,  is  permitted  to  rent  ground 
for  gold-digging  purposes.  The  land,  once  allotted, 
is  the  property  of  the  lessor,  until  it  has  been 
completely  worked  out,  or  has  been  abandoned. 
It  then  reverts  to  the  Crown,  or  if  not  worked  by 
the  lessor  at  least  one  out  of  every  three  years, 
the  claim  is  forfeited  to  Government,  who  may 
let  it  out  to  another  applicant.  All  gold  must 
be  delivered  to  the  imperial  mint  at  a  fixed  price, 
which  leaves  a  good  profit  to  the  Government. 
Many  private  mines  employ  as  many  as  two  and 
even  three  thousand  men.  The  Siberian  peasant 
seldom  goes  to  work  at  the  diggings ;  he  can  earn 
far  more  by  agriculture  at  home,  for  Siberia  is 
as  rich  a  country  above-ground  as  below.  The 
workmen  employed  by  the  mine  owners  are 
generally  discharged  convicts,  who  have  been  sent 
to  Siberia  for  theft  and  other  minor  offences.  Bad 
characters  of  all  sorts — drunkards,  vagabonds,  the 
scum  of  Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk — are  the  kind  of  men 
who  find  refuge  in  the  private  gold-mines,   which. 


542  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

as  may  be  imagined,  are  perfect  pandemoniums 
v,']ien  compared  with  the  strict  and  well-regulated 
government  establishments.  The  usual  pay  of  a 
miner  is  four  roubles  (about  8s.)  a  month.  On 
making  the  contract,  however,  he  is  paid  a  sum  of 
money  varying  from  six  to  ten  English  pounds 
sterling.  With  this  he  proceeds  solemnly  and 
dehberately  to  get  drunk,  nor  does  he  desist  till 
every  penny  of  the  "  Hand-money,"  as  it  is  called, 
is  exhausted.  When  sufficiently  sober,  he  is  sent 
off  with  a  couple  of  hundred  companions  to  the 
diggings.  The  working  season  lasts  about  a 
hundred  and  twenty  days,  and  terminates,  at  latest, 
by  the  15th  of  September.  Work  commences  at 
3  a.m.  all  weathers,  and  is  seldom  finished  till  eight 
or  nine  o'clock  at  night.  The  workmen  are,  therefore, 
as  may  be  imagined,  well  fed.  Each  man  gets  from 
1^  to  2  lbs.  of  fresh  beef  per  diem,  salt,  buckwheat, 
and  as  much  black  bread  as  he  can  eat.  His 
lodgings,  too,  are  in  most  cases  good,  and  well  ven- 
tilated, and  every  gold-mine  owner  is  bound  by 
Government  to  keep  up  a  fully-equipped  hospital, 
with  a  resident  surgeon  and  staff  of  assistants  on 
the  premises.  Besides  the  fixed  rations  of  food,  a 
large  stock  of  "  vodka  "  is  also  kept  for  the  men. 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  543 

who  get  a  tumbler-full  of  the  spirit  once  or  twice 
a  week,  by  way  of  warding  off  ague,  and  other 
malarial  attacks.  A  pound  of  brick  tea  is  also 
allowed  each  man  per  mouth.  When  the  season  is 
over,  the  majority  of  the  gaugs  find  their  way  to 
one  of  the  large  towns  with  the  balance  of  their 
wages,  and  spend  their  money  in  drink  and 
debauchery,  till  the  return  of  the  summer,  and  this 
accounts  largely  for  the  frequency  of  crime  in 
Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk.  The  idea  of  saving  money  or 
in  any  way  bettering  his  condition  rarely  enters  the 
head  of  a  Siberian  gold-digger. 

We  were  not  detained  loug  at  Biriousinsk,  and 
after  a  substantial  breakfast  of  tea  and  boiled  eggs, 
took  the  road  again,  and  by  seven  o'clock  that  even- 
ing had  rolled  off  nearly  fifty  versts.  At  Ilinskaya, 
however,  we  were  brought  to  a  sudden  check.  Our 
off  wheel  had  caught  fire,  and  it  was  only  on  dis- 
covering this  that  we  remembered  that  in  our  eager- 
ness to  push  on,  we  had  for  the  last  half-dozen 
stages  neglected  to  oil  the  axles,  an  operation  that 
should  be  performed  at  the  very  least  every  other 
stage. 

We  made  up  our  minds  therefore  to  stop  the 
night,  and  push  on  to  Kansk  early  the  next  morning, 


544  FROM   PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

for  clouds  gathering  to  windward  looked  anything 
but  reassuring.  About  midnight  I  was  awoke  from 
a  delicious  dream  of  home  and  its  comforts,  to  find 
a  huge,  shapeless  fur-clad  figure  standing  over  me, 
and  in  a  loud  and  imperious  voice,  commanding 
me  to  rise  and  get  horses.  "Yeshchi  lochade,"  ^ 
it  yelled,  as  I  with  difficulty  made  out  that  my 
nocturnal  visitor  was  a  woman.  Vainly  I  endea- 
voured to  make  her  understand  that  I  was  not 
the  post-master,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  The  more 
I  reasoned,  the  more  she  stormed,  till  even  Lan- 
caster turned  uneasily  in  his  slumbers.  "  Get  me 
horses,"  shrieked  the  gorgon,  "  get  me  horses  at 
once,  or,"  and  here  she  pointed  dramatically  to  the 
complaint-book.  At  last,  losing  all  patience,  she 
knelt  down,  and  seizing  my  shoulders,  shook  me 
with  masculine  force.  Thinking  the  joke  had 
gone  a  little  too  far,  I  was  about  to  summon  the 
post-master,  when  that  worthy  appeared.  Then 
with  true  Siberian  politeness,  and  without  a  word 
of  apology,  the  gorgon  turned  upon  him,  a 
small  meek  man,  who  was  utterly  powerless  to 
compete  with  this  dread  vision  of  the  night.  Her 
system  seemed  to  pay,  for  in  less  than  half  an  hour 

*  Are  there  any  liorses  ? 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOilSK.  545 

the  horses  were  in  and  we  heard  her  jingle  out  of 
the  yard,  leaving  us  to  our  slumbers  in  peace. 

The  rain  came  on  a  few  versts  from  Ilinskaya 
with  every  appearance  of  settling  in  for  a  steady 
downpour.  The  landscape  to-day  was  less  wooded 
and  more  cultivated  than  any  we  had  passed 
since  leaving  Irkoutsk.  A  couple  of  post  taran- 
tasses  passed  us  a  few  versts  from  Kansk,  return- 
ing to  Ilinskaya.  Their  drivers  were  fast  asleep 
inside,  coiled  up  out  of  the  rain.  Our  yemstchik 
did  not  attempt  to  wake  them.  Although  we 
were  on  the  summit  of  a  steep  hill,  he  gave  the 
horses  a  cut  over  the  quarters  and  sent  them 
careering  away  down  the  decline  full  gallop. 
I  did  not  see  what  happened.  This  is  thought  a 
good  joke  in  Siberia. 

Perhaps  the  most  trying  time  to  a  beginner 
on  wheels  in  Siberia  is  getting  on  board  the  river 
ferries,  when  each  yemstchik  vies  with  the  other 
who  shall  gallop  the  quickest  on  board  and  pull  up 
the  shortest  without  going  over  the  other  side.  As 
the  ferries  were  invariably  approached  by  a  steep 
road  cut  down  the  river-bank,  there  was  no  lack  of 
excitement  on  these  occasions.  I  remember  once, 
just  before  reaching  Krasnoiarsk,  our  driver,  who 

N  n 


54G  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAKD. 

was  somewhat  intoxicated,  oversliot  the  mark,  one 
of  his  horses  tumbling  over  the  side,  and  only  being 
got  back  with  great  difficulty.  Rarely  a  day  passed 
that  one  of  our  outside  horses  did  not  fall,  once  or 
twice  at  least,  but  no  yemstchik  ever  pulls  up 
for  anything  under  a  broken  rein  or  wheel. 

The  post-horses  are  game,  wiry  little  beasts, 
ranging  from  14  hands  2  in.  to  15  hands.  Though 
rough  and  ungroomed,  they  are  well  fed,  and  they 
need  be,  for  a  rest  of  only  six  hours  is  allowed  between 
the  stages.  In  busy  times,  such  as,  for  instance, 
the  great  fair  of  Nijni  Novgorod,  when  traders 
flock  to  the  World's  Fair  from  all  parts  of  Asia, 
many  of  the  poor  beasts  die  from  sheer  fatigue.  The 
usual  number  used  in  a  tarantass  or  telega  is  three, 
or  a  "troika,"  harnessed  abreast.  In  bad  weather, 
when  the  roads  are  deep,  four  or  five  are  used. 
We  have  had  as  many  as  seven  in,  and  even  with 
that  number  failed  to  progress  quicker  than  at  a 
walk !  The  harness  and  reins  are  of  the  most 
primitive  description,  and  made  of  rope,  while  the 
shaft  horse  wears  the  high  yoke  collar,  with  bells 
attached,  which  seems  such  a  useless  appendage 
(except  for  the  look  of  the  thing)  in  Eussian 
harness. 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  547 

For  cleverness  I  have  never  seen  the  equal  of 
these  game,  wirj  little  animals.  I  recollect  on  one 
occasion  (when  crossing  the  Yenisei  River)  the 
guard-rail  running  round  the  ferry  boat  was 
quite  five  feet  high.  On  disembarking,  there 
was  a  scramble,  for  the  outlet  was  too  narrow 
to  admit  of  five  horses  (the  number  we  had  in). 
Our  outside  horse  was  consequently  jammed  up 
asfainst  the  rail.  With  a  run  it  would  have  been 
an  extraordinary  jump  to  get  over,  nothing  short 
of  a  miracle  under  present  circumstances,  for 
the  other  horses  were  plunging  madly  in  their 
endeavours  to  get  once  more  on  to  terra  firma. 
But  the  little  beast  remained  quite  cool.  Not  in 
the  least  put  out  by  the  row  and  confusion,  he 
simply  reared  up,  rested  his  fore-feet  on  the  top  of 
the  rail,  and  sliding  over  on  his  stomach,  fell  heavily 
in  a  heap  on  the  other  side.  In  another  second  he 
had  picked  himself  up,  and  we  were  off  again. 

I  was  much  struck  by  the  scarcity  of  bay  horses. 
All  are  chestnut,  grey,  or  dun,  the  latter  colour  pre- 
dominating. I  did  not  see  more  than  half  a  dozen 
bay  horses  the  whole  way  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk, 
though  from  first  to  last  we  must  have  used  quite  four 
hundred,  and  seen  four  or  five  times  that  number. 

N  n  2 


548  FROAI    FKKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

The  yemstcliik  or  driver  is  a  stupid,  good- 
natured  creature,  addicted  to  vodka  when  he  can 
get  it.  As  the  drink-money  is  only  fifteen  kopeks 
a  stage  (and  many  travellers  do  not  give  that), 
they  have  not  much  opportunity  of  gratifying  this 
penchant,  for  tobacco  ruDs  away  with  most  of 
their  money.  I  can  safely  say  I  do  not  think  I 
ever  saw  a  yemstcliik  without  a  pipe  in  his  mouth. 
Though  kind  to  a  fault  to  his  own  horses,  he 
does  not  show  much  pity  for  animal  life  in 
the  villages.  Calves,  pigs,  poultry,  ducks,  each 
had  their  turn,  and  we  rarely  passed  through  a 
villao^e  without  runninsf  over  and  killino^  some- 
thing ;  the  bigger  the  beast,  the  more  pleased  the 
driver.  On  such  occasions,  he  would  turn  round 
and  look  at  us  with  a  smile  of  satisfaction, 
regardless  of  the  threats  and  curses  of  the  in- 
furiated owner  as  he  bore  the  maimed  or  defunct 
one  into  his  cottage.  This  is  another  "  joke " 
much  in  vogue  with  yemstchiks !  Yet,  notwith- 
standing all  we  were  told,  we  found  the  Siberian 
yemstchik  a  good  fellow  enough,  and,  considering 
the  hard  work  and  privation  he  goes  through,  far 
more  sober  than  many  men  in  the  same  position  in 
more  civilized  countries.     Indeed  he  need  be,  for  a 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  549 

single  accident  on  tlie  road  ensures  instant  dismissal, 
be  it  tlie  fault  of  the  driver  or  not. 

We  spent  the  night  at  Kansk.  A  mysterious  and 
seedily  dressed  individual  here  begged  to  be  allowed 
to  share  our  tarantass  and  expenses  as  far  as  Kras- 
noiarsk,  but  we  declined  with  thanks.  He  was  a 
cutthroat-looking  villain,  and  probably  up  to  mis- 
chief, for  he  seemed  much  less  keen  about  accom- 
panying us  on  seeing  we  were  well  armed.  Though 
we  were  now  past  the  so-called  "robber  district," 
we  did  not  relax  our  vio^ilance  when  travellino^ 
by  night,  till  we  reached  Tomsk. 

Kansk  is  a  neat,  well-built  town  of  ten  thou- 
sand inhabitants.  In  appearance  it  is  an  Ir- 
koutsk  in  miniature,  though,  there  is  more  attempt 
at  ornamentation  here,  some  of  the  streets  being 
planted  with  trees  on  either  side  like  boulevards. 
The  post-house,  too,  was  comfortable,  and  tlj^re 
was  a  sofa  therein  stuffed  with  horsehair,  au 
unwonted  luxury  in  Siberia.  The  night's  rest  we 
looked  forward  to  was,  however,  somewhat  marred 
by  a  party  going  on  in  the  next  apartment,  and 
given  in  honour  of  his  birthday  by  the  post-master  ; 
a  party  which,  commencing  at  9  p.m.,  did  not 
break  up  till  nearly  eight  the  next  morning,  when  it 


550  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

was  time  to  think  of  getting  up  and  being  off  again. 
The  guests  were  all  more  or  less  intoxicated  by 
midnight,  and  kept  on  coming  in  in  relays  to  look 
at  us,  as  we  lay  feigning  sleep,  throughout  the 
night.  They  did  not  break  up  till  about  4  a.m., 
after  obliging  us  with  "  Volga,"  the  boat-song 
T  have  mentioned,  at  the  top  of  their  voices,  and  all 
in  different  keys.  It  was  past  ten  o'clock  next  morn- 
ing before  the  fumes  of  the  vodka  had  sufficiently 
evaporated  to  enable  the  fuddled  post-master  to 
produce  a  troika.  We  were  not  sorry  to  make  a 
late  start,  however,  for  the  morning  was  bitterly 
cold,  and  the  roads  coated  with  ice,  unmistakable 
sign  of  the  approach  of  winter,  and  which  made  us 
doubly  anxious  to  push  on  without  delay  to  Tomsk. 
The  aspect  of  the  country  between  Kansk  and 
Atchinsk  was,  if  not  so  picturesque,  much  more  civil- 
ized than  any  we  had  as  yet  passed,  the  dense,  thick 
forest  being  superseded  by  large  tracts  of  cultivated 
land  and  fields  of  corn  and  mustard.  It  had 
frequently  been  a  source  of  wonder  to  me  that 
the  timber  of  Siberia  is  not  more  largely  worked ; 
l)ut  I  ascertained  at  Tomsk  that  this  is  forbidden 
by  the  Imperial  Government.  Every  peasant  is 
at  liberty  to  cut   down  for  his  own  private  use  as 


IRKOUTSK   TO    TOMSK.  551 

many  pine  or  fir  trees  as  he  likes,  but  the  export 
or  selling  of  them  is  strictly  forbidden.  This 
seems  strange,  for  a  brisk  trade  might  be  driven 
with  Mongolia,  where  wood  is  invaluable,  to  say 
nothing  of  North  China,  where  it  is  also  so  scarce. 
We  passed  thousands  of  trees  killed  by  fires  having 
been  lighted  at  their  foot,  their  trunks  charred  and 
blackened  to  a  height  of  several  feet,  where 
peasants  had  encamped  in  the  woods.  In  dry 
weather  these  occasionally  set  fire  to  neighbouring 
trees,  and  large  tracts  of  country  are  devastated 
by  the  flames. 

We  rattled  off  the  two  hundred  odd  versts 
separating  Kansk  from  Krasnoiarsk  with  but  little 
delay,  being  only  detained  twice  on  the  road,  once 
at  Ribinskaya,  where,  meeting  the  post,  we  were 
delayed  for  nine  hours,  and  at  Balanskaya,  our 
axle  havino^  cauo;ht  fire  and  worn  down  to  a 
dangerous  extent,  without  our  being  aware  of 
the  mischief.  Had  we  known  the  trouble  in  store 
for  us  owing  to  this  apparently  trifling  incident, 
we  should  not  have  felt  so  light-hearted  as  when, 
having  repaired  the  mischief,  we  set  off  again, 
after  a  delay  of  seven  hours,  on  our  journey. 

At  four  o'clock,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  Sep- 


552  PROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

tember,  we  caiiglit  sight  of  the  blue  waters  of  the 
Yenisei,  winding  through  a  fertile  landscape  of 
plain  and  forest,  and  beyond  it  the  red  cliffs  of 
Krasnoiarsk  standing  out  sharp  and  clear  against 
the  sky-line.  We  reached  the  ferry  about  nine 
o'clock  that  evening.  The  town  was  brightly 
illuminated  in  honour  of  General  Ignatieff,  Governor 
of  Eastern  Siberia,  who  was  passing  through 
from  Petersburg  en  route  to  Irkoutsk ;  and  I 
have  seldom  seen  a  prettier  spectacle  than  the 
illuminations  presented,  the  lights  reflected  in  the 
dark,  swift  waters  of  the  Yenisei,  as  we  crossed  it. 
Darkness  lent  CDchantment  to  the  view,  however, 
for  as  we  drove  through  the  slushy,  ill  lit  streets  to 
the  filthy  hotel,  we  were  almost  sorry  we  had  not 
remained  over-night  at  Botolskaya,  and  gone  right 
through  the  following  day, 

A  good  scrub  in  a  bucket  of  water,  however, 
worked  wonders,  and  though  the  apartment  given 
us  was  dirty  and  entirely  devoid  of  furniture,  we 
did  ample  justice  to  the  supper  of  cold  steret  soup, 
beefsteak,  and  caviare,  and  bottle  of  claret  that 
our  bost  (the  dirtiest  man,  without  exception, 
that  I  have  ever  seen)  set  before  us.  The 
luxury  of    a  change   of    clothes    after  wearing  the 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  553 

same  for  a  fortnight  must  be  experienced  to  be 
appreciated.  Our  bodies  were  literally  covered 
with  bites,  and  the  sensation  of  a  rest  for  a  while 
from  the  intolerable  itching  and  irritation  of  the 
past  ten  days,  was  worth  the  discomfort  and 
annoyance  one  had  gone  through,  though  it  was 
not  till  we  were  well  over  the  Urals,  and  after 
repeated  applications  of  carbolic  acid  soap,  that  we 
entirely  got  rid  of  that  most  pertinacious  and 
venomous  of  insects,  the  white  Siberian  bug. 

A  visitor  was  announced  while  we  were  at  supper. 
This,  I  may  mention,  is  one  of  the  chief  drawbacks 
of  Siberian  travel.  No  matter  how  late  the  hour, 
or  how  tired  he  may  be,  every  traveller  is  bound, 
by  the  custom  of  the  country,  to  receive  any  one 
who  chooses  to  call  upon  him,  often  enough  from 
idle  curiosity.  I  was  told  in  Moscow,  that  such 
persons  are  often  spies,  employed  by  Government. 
If  so,  the  individual  who  now  made  his  appearance 
had  a  peculiar  way  of  pursuing  his  calling. 

M.  Dombrowski  was,  according  to  his  own  account, 
a  Pole,  who  had  been  banished  to  Tomsk  for  a  short 
period,  on  account  of  an  article  written  in  a  Warsaw 
paper.  He  was  a  tall,  pale  young  man,  with  washed- 
out  features,  clad  in  a  long  black  cloak  about  three 


554  FROM    PEEIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAKP. 

sizes  too  large  for  him,  which  he  wrapped  loosely 
about  him  in  the  fashion  of  a  Roman  toga.  His 
official  cap,  with  green  band  and  button,  pro- 
claimed him  a  servant  of  the  Russian  Government ; 
as  we  afterwards  discovered,  a  clerk  in  the  court- 
house at  Tomsk. 

We  were  both  tired  to  death,  and  I  felt  strongly 
inclined  to  get  up  and  kick  the  stranger  down-stairs, 
when,  having  taken  off  his  cap,  he  took  his  seat 
at  the  table  without  invitation,  produced  a  dia- 
logue-book, and  calmly  helped  himself  to  a  glass  of 
claret.  But  the  cool  impudence  of  the  man  was 
amusing,  too,  so  we  made  the  best  of  it,  and  ordered 
up  another  bottle  of  wine,  and  a  cutlet  for  the 
poor  devil,  who  looked  half  starved,  and  as  if  he 
had  lived  on  wood  shavings  for  a  month  or  two. 
The  kindness  was  misplaced,  for  he  utterly  declined 
to  leave  till  about  6  a.m.,  when  we  were  compelled  to 
eject  him  by  main  force,  not  a  very  difficult  operation 
after  the  repeated  libations  of  kiimmel  and  vodka 
of  which  he  had  partaken  at  our  expense.  Under 
their  influence  the  wretch  confessed  that  he  had  never 
really  had  an  idea  of  accompanying  us  to  Tomsk ; 
but  the  news  had  spread  in  less  than  half  an  hour, 
that  two  Englishmen  had  arrived  in  Krasnoiarsk, 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  555 

and  always  having  had  an  intense  admiration  for  the 
English  nation,  our  friend  had  determined  on  making 
our  acquaintance.  We  had  the  satisfaction  of  pay- 
ing him  out  and  making  him  feel  thoroughly  uncom- 
fortable once  during  the  evening,  when  Lancaster,  in 
answer  to  his  toast  of  "  England,"  responded  by 
drinking  to  the  health  of  "  Poland  !"  "  For  God's 
sake  not  too  loud,  gospodin,"  said  our  unwelcome 
guest.  "  If  those  words  were  heard  by  the  keeper 
of  this  hotel,  they  would  give  me  another  year  in 
Siberia.     There  is  no  Poland  now." 

On  leaving  the  hotel,  our  strange  and  now  some- 
what drunken  acquaintance  presented  us  with  his 
card,  and  by  the  aid  of  a  dialogue-book,  essayed 
to  convey  how  much  he  had  enjoyed  his  evening, 
and  morning,  for  the  sun  was  now  high  over  the 
house-tops.  His  card  (a  half-sheet  of  note-paper), 
bore  the  following  inscription  scrawled  upon  it  with 
a  lead  pencil : — 

"  Monsieur  le  Gentilhomme," 
"  (N'oble)  Dombrowski, 

"  Eau  (sic)  Palas  de  Justice," 
"  Eau"  Tomsk— 
"  La  Siberie  de  Russie." 

I  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  inquire  whether  it 


55G  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

was  customary  for  Polish  noblemen  to  wear  no  sbirt, 
eat  meat  with  their  fingers,  expectorate  freely 
during  dinner,  and  perform  various  other  little  feats 
too  numerous  to  mention.  These  harmless  eccen- 
tricities may  have  been  born  of  exile.  The  "  Grentil- 
homme  Noble  "  gave  one,  at  any  rate,  a  favourable 
idea  of  the  capacity  of  his  race  for  drinking,  his 
share  being  five  bottles  of  claret,  a  bottle  of  kiimmel, 
and  two  of  vodka.  Bore  as  he  was,  I  could  not 
help  pitying  the  poor  wi'etch,  who  was  sent  to 
Tomsk  nominally  for  six  months,  but  had  already 
been  there  nearly  two  years.  His  salary  was,  he 
told  us,  20/.  English  per  annum,  and  on  this  he 
had  to  live  and  clothe  himself.  "  The  criminals 
are  better  off  than  we,  gospodin,"  he  said,  as  he 
took  leave  of  us.  "  Let  them  know  iu  England 
how  we  are  treated  in  this  cursed  country.  How  a 
murderer  who  kills  his  whole  family,  has  a  far  easier 
time  of  it  than  the  unhappy  man  or  woman  who 
ventures  to  stand  up  for  the  people." 

Krasnoiarsk,  which  stands  on  a  plain  fringed  by 
the  precipitous  cliff's  of  red  earth,  from  which  the 
town  takes  its  name,  is  neither  picturesque  nor 
interesting.  Wooden  hovels  here,  stone  palaces 
there,  wooden    pavements,  oil    lamps,  open  drains 


IRKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  557 

by  tlie  roadway,  deep  mud  in  rainy  weather, 
blinding  dust  in  dry ;  dirty,  greasy  men,  frowsy, 
ill-dressed  women,  Cossack  soldiers,  and  occasional 
gangs  of  prisoners  ;  such  is  the  visible  population. 
For  one  thing  only  is  Krasnoiarsk  famous :  its  fire 
brigade.  There  are  at  least  thirty  watch-towers  in 
the  town,  and  the  stations  are  models  of  smartness 
and  cleanliness.  Though  so  frequent  at  Irkoutsk, 
Tomsk,  and  the  other  smaller  towns,  a  bad  fire 
here  is  rare. 

We  paid  a  visit  while  at  Krasnoiarsk  to  the  White- 
ley  of  Siberia — one,  Gadolovitch,  in  whose  establish- 
ments at  Irkoustk,  Tomsk,  Atchisk,  Krasnoiarsk, 
and  Tobolsk,  almost  anything  may  be  purchased, 
from  a  Waterbury  watch  to  a  ship's  anchor,  and, 
curiously  enough,  at  reasonable  prices.  I  bought  a 
box  of  revolver  cartridges  at  Krasnoiarsk  cheaper 
than  I  should  have  paid  for  them  in  London  or 
Paris. 

The  morning  of  the  9th  of  September  saw  us 
once  more  en  route.  The  road,  after  leaving  the 
town,  skirts  for  some  distance  the  banks  of  the 
Yenisei  river,  that  huge  volume  of  water  which, 
rising  on  the  borders  of  China,  traverses  half  Asia 
to  discharge  itself  into  the  Gulf  of  Yenisei  in  the 


558  FKOM    PEKIN"    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Arctic  Ocean,  its  entire  lengtli  being  computed  to 
be  something  over  three  thousand  miles.  It  is,  of 
course,  unnavigable  throughout  the  winter,  though 
that  intrepid  explorer.  Captain  Wiggins,  has  satis- 
factorily demonstrated  that,  during  the  summer 
months,  water  communication  between  England  and 
Central  Siberia  is  by  no  means  impossible. 

Our  axle  now  gave  us  a  good  deal  of  anxiety, 
for  before  we  were  many  miles  out  the  tarantass 
was  leaning  over  at  a  most  uncomfortable  angle. 
The  road,  too,  was  worse  than  it  had  been  since 
leaving  Lake  Baikal,  and  every  roll  the  carriage 
made  gave  us  the  greatest  anxiety,  for  there  was 
no  blacksmith  procurable  nearer  than  Atchinsk, 
nearly  two  hundred  versts  off.  It  put  us  out  of 
our  suspense  at  Kosoulskaya  by  snapping  in  two 
altogether,  although  we  were  going  at  a  most 
gingerly  pace,  precipitating  the  yemstchik  into  the 
road,  where,  had  it  not  been  for  the  hood  of  the 
tarantass,  Lancaster  and  I  should  have  followed 
him. 

Here  was  a  pretty  predicament.  Luckily  the 
horses  were  quiet,  and  stood  still  while  we  scram- 
bled out  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the  damage. 
Luckier  still,  we  were   only  four  versts  from  the 


TRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  559 

post-house — the  last  before  Atchinsk.  Lopping  off 
a  couple  of  stout  fir  boughs,  our  yemstchik  prized 
the  carriage  up  straight,  and,  mounting  one  of  the 
horses,  galloped  off  to  Chernoj^echinsk  in  quest  of 
another  axle  and  pair  of  wheels,  by  the  aid  of  which 
we  might,  at  any  rate,  reach  Atchinsk. 

Luckily  the  day  was  fine,  and  though  the 
mosquitoes  were  troublesome,  we  had  plenty  of 
cigarettes  and  half  a  dozen  bottles  of  claret, 
which  we  had  purchased  at  Krasnoiarsk,  to  while 
away  the  weary  hours.  Being  a  lonely  part  of  the 
road,  we  loaded  the  revolvers,  and  kept  them  ready 
in  case  of  need.  Nothing  passed  us,  however,  the 
whole,  long,  weary  day,  from  eight  in  the  morning, 
when  the  accident  occurred,  till  5  p.m.,  but  a 
couple  of  hay-carts  and  a  gang  of  three  hundred 
prisoners,  most  of  them  in  chains,  followed  by  six 
telegas  with  political  prisoners,  four  wom.en  and  two 
men,  the  latter  on  foot.  Two  of  the  women  were 
young  and  pretty,  and  laughed  heartily,  as  they 
passed,  at  our  woe-begone  condition,  and,  indeed, 
we  must  have  looked  somewhat  ridiculous,  seated 
in  the  middle  of  the  road  in  our  tarantass,  with  the 
hind-wheels  and  axle  gone,  propped  up  on  a  couple 
of  fir-trees,  solemnly  discussing  a  bottle  of  claret  ! 


560  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

A  casual  observer  might  have  taken  tlie  political 
exiles  for  a  pleasure-party,  to  judge  from  the 
shouts  of  merry  laughter  that  rang  through  the 
forest  long  before  they  came  in  sight.  The  smart, 
tweed  gowns  and  Tam-o'-Shanter  hats  (this  seems  to 
be  the  uniform  of  Nihilist  ladies)  looked  strangely 
out  of  keeping  with  the  rough  wooden  telegas  and 
dirty  straw  on  which  they  were  seated.  And  yet 
the  youngest  and  prettiest  girl  of  them  all  was, 
we  afterwards  heard,  on  her  way  to  Irkoutsk  for 
life.  She  could  not  have  been  more  than  eighteen, 
and  was  as  neatly  turned  out,  with  gants  cle  Suede 
and  neat  grey  dress,  as  if  she  had  come  from  a 
walk  in  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  or  Hyde  Park,  instead 
of  a  long  twenty-days'  march  from  Tomsk.  The 
men,  too,  were  well  dressed  and  respectable  look- 
ing, though  their  high  spirits  were  evidently  assumed 
for  the  occasion,  while  those  of  the  women  were 
perfectly  natural. 

The  yemstchik  returned  about  four  o'clock,  ac- 
companied by  two  villagers  carrying  an  iron  axle. 
It  was  a  clumsy  affair  enough,  having  been  taken 
oflf  one  of  the  Post  telegas ;  but  as  it  was  only  a 
temporary  affair,  this  did  not  much  signify.  We 
arrived  at  Taoutinsk,  the  next  station  to  Atchinsk, 


lEKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  561 

at  ten  o'clock  that  night  without  further  mishap. 
At  times,  though,  the  tarantass  wobbled  about 
terribly,  and  we  constantly  expected  to  find  our- 
selves in  the  old  position — feet  upwards.  The 
yemstchik  who  drove  us  the  last  stage  could  not 
possibly  have  been  more  than  twelve  years  old. 
The  stage  was  only  sixteen  versts,  luckily,  and  I 
luckily  kept  an  eye  on  the  proceedings  of  our 
youthful  jehu ;  for  about  half  way,  being  about  to 
descend  a  long  and  very  steep  hill,  he  got  down 
from  his  box,  and  gravely  proceeded  to  put  the 
skid  heliind  the  front  wheel  instead  of  before  the 
hind  one ! 

Atchinsk  is,  if  not  the  largest,  decidedly  the  most 
taking  town  we  saw  in  Siberia.  It  has  a  popu- 
lation of  about  ten  thousand,  and  is  built  on  the 
summits  of  five  or  six  low  hills.  The  grassy 
hollows  between  these  are  used  as  common  land, 
where  cattle,  pigs,  and  geese  roam  about  at  will. 
The  cheerful  aspect  of  the  place,  when  compared 
with  other  Siberian  towns,  is  partly  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  soil  is  of  a  much  lighter  colour, 
and  nearly  all  the  wooden  buildings  are  painted 
white  or  grey,  picked  out  with  bright  colours. 
The   immediate   neighbourhood    of    Atchinsk,    too, 

0  o 


562  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

is  free  of  forest.  The  town  stands  in  the 
middle  of  a  large  grass  plain  watered  by  the 
Chulim  river — a  plain  composed  of  large  enclosed 
grass  meadows,  where,  as  we  drove  by  that 
bright  sunshiny  morning,  cattle  and  sheep  were 
browsing,  knee  deep  in  rich,  luxuriant  pasture, 
and  wild  flowers.  Atcliinsk  is  the  one  bright  spot 
of  tliat  weary  journey — an  oasis  of  flowers  and 
sunshine  in  the  dark,  dreary  desert  of  gloom  and 
monotony  lying  between  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk. 
The  post-house  was  clean  and  roomy,  the  waiting- 
room  boasting  a  carpet,  plenty  of  chairs,  and  a 
sofa,  while  the  snowy,  whitewashed  walls  hung 
with  bright  engravings)  and  the  windows  filled 
with  flowers,  gave  a  cheerful  look  to  the  place 
that  up  till  now  I  had  thought  impossible  to  find 
in  a  Siberian  dwelling.  We  were  glad  of  a  rest  of 
twentj^-four  hours  here  (the  time  necessary  for 
the  completion  of  our  repairs),  and  after  an  ex- 
cellent breakfast  of  caviare,  fried  eggs,  and  beef- 
steak, sallied  out  refreshed  in  body  and  mind  to 
find  a  blacksmith. 

The  town  was  en  fete  for  some  reason  or  other. 
Bells  were  ringing,  the  houses  decorated  with 
flags  and    evergreens,   and  people   all    turned    out 


IRKOUTSK   TO   TOMSK.  563 

in  their  Sunday  best.  It  was  not  reassuring,  on 
reaching  the  principal  square,  to  find  that  all  the 
shops  were  shut,  save  the  public  houses,  where 
crowds  of  natives  were  refreshing  themselves  with 
vodka  and  other  spirituous  liquors,  preparatory  to 
the  mid-day  meal.  Some  were  drinking  at  the 
bar,  others  seated  at  the  little  tables  by  the 
doorway,  others  rolling  about  in  the  bright 
sunshine  outside,  but  all,  men  and  women,  were 
even  at  this  early  hour — 11.30  a.m. — more  or 
less  drunk. 

The  blacksmiths'  quarter  was,  I  found,  at  the 
other  end  of  the  town,  and  we  had  to  walk  nearly  a 
mile  before  reaching  the  forge.  Like  many  oriental 
towns,  each  trade  in  Atchinsk  has  its  own  street, 
and  we  found  a  regular  colony  of  smithies,  but  all, 
alas  !  closed,  and  their  owners  either  inside  their 
houses  sleeping  off  the  effects  of  the  previous  day's 
debauch  (the  f^te  lasted  two  days),  or  laying 
in  a  fresh  stock  of  vodka  and  brandy  in  the  town. 
We  knocked  at  and  entered  at  least  a  dozen 
houses   before  we  found    a   man    sober  enough    to 

o 

undertake  our  job.  Nor  would  he  till  we  had 
promised  to  pay  him  a  ridiculously  large  sum  in 
proportion   to    the    work,    and  to    keep    him    well 

0  0  2 


564  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

provided  with  liquor  till  it  was  finished.  We 
regarded  the  wheel  with  some  uneasiness  for  two 
or  three  days  after,  but  our  friend,  drunk  as  ho 
was,  had  made  a  good  job  of  it,  and  we  arrived  at 
Tomsk  without  further  mishap. 

Leaving  Atchinsk  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  of 
September,  we  passed  the  same  day  between 
Bogotolsk  and  Bolshoi-Kosoul,  the  two  high  brick 
pillars  that  mark  the  boundary  of  Eastern  and 
Western  Siberia.  We  had  now  entered  the  Govern- 
ment of  Tomsk. 

The  tedium  of  the  journey  now  palled  on  one 
terribly.  No  one  can  thoroughly  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  word  "  monotony,  "  who  has  not 
visited  Siberia,  and  travelled  for  hour  after  hour, 
day  after  day,  week  after  week,  along  its  dark, 
pine-girt  roads.  Along  the  whole  of  the  post-road 
from  Irkoutsk,  distances  are  marked  by  wooden 
posts,  painted  black  and  white,  placed  at  every 
verst,  while  at  every  post-station  a  large  board 
indicates  the  distance  from  the  chief  towns.  My 
heart  sank  whenever  I  looked  at  these  and  saw 
the  word  Petersburg,  with  the  appalling  number  of 
oughts  under  it.  The  few  versts  from  station  to 
station  were  bad  enough,  but  when  it  came  to  the  six 


IRKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  OOD 

thousand  odd  separating  us  from  Petersburg,  one 
almost  gave  up  all  hope  of  ever  seeing  Europe 
again.  However  bright  the  sunshine  or  blue  the 
sky,  a  sense  of  depression  and  loneliness  hung  over 
one,  impossible  to  shake  off.  I  have  never,  even 
in  the  depths  of  a  Bornean  forest,  felt  so  utterly 
lonely  and  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  civilized 
world  as  when  crossing  Siberia.  It  is  rightly 
named  by  Russians,  tlie  land  of  exile  and 
sorrow ;  and  the  dreariest  days  I  have  ever 
experienced  were  those  spent  in  traversing  the 
wild  tract  of  forest  and  steppe  between  Irkoutsk 
and  Tomsk.  One  chafed  and  fretted  at  first  at 
the  daily  difficulties,  the  hours  of  delay  passed 
in  waiting  for  relays  that  never  arrived — hours 
that  seemed  endless  by  day,  but  became  mad- 
dening by  night.  After  a  time,  however,  one 
saw  the  folly  of  attempting  to  fight  against 
fate,  and  fell  into  a  state  of  reckless  apathy,  a 
condition  of  mind  I  should  recommend  any 
traveller  adopting  who  intends  crossing  Siberia,  I 
will  not*  say  with  comfort,  but  without  being  posi- 
tively driven  out  of  his  mind.  Towards  the  end  of 
our  journey,  nothing  put  us  out.  I  verily  believe 
if  the  tarantass    had  stood  on  its  head,  or   rather 


566  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

hood,  we  sliould  have  taken  it  quite  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  remained  quietly  seated  till  it  righted 
itself !  Everything  after  the  first  week  became 
mechanical.  Drinking  tea  at  the  stations,  going  to 
sleep  at  a  moment's  notice,  if  there  were  no  horses, 
harnessing  them  at  once  if  there  were,  and  returning 
to  the  depths  of  our  gloomy  vehicle,  there  to  lie 
hour  after  hour,  day  after  day,  with  nothing  to  look 
at  but  the  black  road  and  eternal  pine-forests, 
nothing  to  think  of  save  fair  civilized  Europe,  so  far 
away,  but  to  whicli  one  felt  with  a  kind  of  gloomy 
satisfaction,  every  jingle  of  the  collar-bells  was 
bringing  us  nearer.  Even  the  scenery  does  not 
atone  for  all  these  drawbacks.  The  Siberian 
forests  are  not  grand,  but  the  trees  have  a  dwarfish 
look  produced  by  the  immense  plains.  Not  a  bird, 
not  a  sound,  is  heard  in  these  vast  solitudes,  and 
when  the  horses  stop  and  the  bells  are  silent,  the 
stillness  becomes  almost  oppressive. 

Two  stations  after  Atchinsk,  the  weather  changed, 
and  the  second  day  out  the  rain  was  pouring  down 
in  sheets,  with  the  usual  result,  that  of  wetting  us 
through  and  through  after  the  first  hour.  The 
post-houses  about  here  were  the  filthiest  we  had 
as   yet   come  across,  and    saving    stale    eggs    and 


IKKOUTSK    TO   TOMSK.  567 

sour  milk,  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  eat. 
Yet  with  all  these  contretemps,  we  could  not 
grumble,  for  rain  as  it  might,  we  were  now  safe  as 
regards  the  steamer,  which  would  soon,  we  thought 
with  relief,  be  bearing  us  out  of  this  cursed  country 
for  good  and  all ! 

There  were  no  delays  to  speak  of  till  reaching 
Haldieva.  But  arriving  here  at  four  o'clock  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  14th  September,  we  found  all  the 
horses  engaged.  We  were  now  but  some  thirty 
versts  from  Tomsk,  so  could  afford  to  wait,  and 
change  our  soaking  garments  for  dry  ones.  For  two 
days  and  a  night  we  had  been  wet  through,  and 
were  chilled  to  the  bone. 

A  roaring  fire  and  three  or  four  glasses  of  vodka 
soon  put  things  in  a  rosier  light,  and  we  retired  to 
rest  with  an  assurance  from  the  post-master  that  at 
4  a.m.  at  latest  the  horses  would  be  forthcoming, 
and  visions  of  civilization  and  a  luxurious  dejeuner 
a  la  fourchette  at  Tomsk  next  day,  mingled  with 
our  dreams,  till  at  about  3  a.m.  the  sound  of  wheels 
and  trampling  of  hoofs  brought  us  back  to  reality. 
Looking  out  into  the  yard,  I  descried  a  confused 
mass  of  telegas  and  tarantasses.  By-and-by  a 
torch   flashed   on   the  gold-laced  cap  of  a  courier 


568  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

standing  up  in  a  tarantass  and  superintending  the 
proceedings.  It  was  the  mail !  "  No  horses  till 
five  to-morrow  afternoon,  monsieur,"  said  the  old 
post-master,  as  he  and  the  courier,  a  smart  stalwart 
young  fellow,  armed  with  a  long  cavalry  sabre  and 
brace  of  revolvers,  sat  down  to  a  glass  of  tea  and 
cigarette  while  the  relays  were  put  in.  A  quarter 
of  an  hour  more,  and  they  were  away  again,  leaving 
us  to  grumble  and  curse  our  ill-luck,  as  the  sound  of 
their  collar-bells  died  away  on  the  clear,  frosty  air. 
We  did  not  get  away  from  Haldieva  till  past 
5  p.m.  the  following  day.  The  clear  amber  light 
of  the  setting  sun  was  flooding  the  dark  green 
forest  of  fir-trees  when  we  reached  Semiloujnaya, 
the  last  station  before  Tomsk.  The  journey  from 
Haldieva  had  been  a  hard  one,  for  the  country  was 
flooded,  and  the  water  in  parts  well  over  the  axles. 
The  last  stage  was  a  long  one,  twenty- nine  versts, 
but  we  refused  to  accede  to  the  post-master's 
pressing  invitation  to  stay  the  night,  and  proceed 
next  morning.  We  had  good  cause  to  regret  our 
obstinacy  ere  morning.  By  six  o'clock  the  relay 
was  in,  and  a  few  minutes  after  w^e  rattled  out  of  the 
village,  as  with  a  loud  clashing  of  bells  the  wiry 
little  horses  tore  away  on  our  last  stage  in  Siberia, 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK.  569 

flinging  the  mud  and  stones  high  in  air  behind 
them,  as  if  in  derision  at  the  desolate  and  depressing 
country  we  were  now  (thank  Heaven  ! )  fast  leaving 
behind  us. 

The  sky  was  still  grey  and  lowering,  and  the 
wind  keen.  "VVe  had  now  left  the  forest  altogether, 
and  were  traversing  the  vast  plains  that  encircle 
the  capital  of  Western  Siberia  for  some  thirty 
miles  on  every  side.  There  is  practically  no 
road  here,  the  yemstchiks  taking  their  own  line, 
and  steering  for  the  city  in  their  own  fashion ; 
evidently,  however,  our  wretched  driver  had  but  a 
poor  eye  for  locality,  for  after  floundering  helplessly 
about  for  three  or  four  hours,  he  calmly  pulled  up 
in  the  middle  of  a  huge  lake  of  water,  the  overflow 
from  a  stream  hard  by,  and  confessed  that  he  had 
lost  his  way.  I  looked  at  my  watch  ;  the  hands 
pointed  to  a  quarter  before  midnight;  we  had 
already  been  six  hours  on  the  way,  and  the  horses 
were  dead  beat. 

I  resisted  the  temptation  to  pull  the  idiot  off  his 
perch  and  give  him  a  sound  ducking.  He  richly 
deserved  it,  but  it  would  have  done  but  little  good 
in  hastening  our  arrival.  So  we  set  about  making 
casts,  to  use  a  hunting  expression,  and  after  four 


570        FROM  PEKIX  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

hours  of  the  coldest  and  most  disagreeable  work 
that  has  ever  fallen  to  my  lot,  a  thin  bright  streak 
appeared  on  the  horizon.  We  led  the  horses  all 
this  time,  be  it  mentioned,  and  were  as  often  as  not 
up  to  our  waists  in  the  pools  of  icy  cold  water  that 
covered  the  marshy  plain.  But  the  longest  lane 
must  have  a  turning,  and  by  three  o'clock  we 
were  rolling  wearily  through  the  silent  and  deserted 
streets  of  Tomsk. 

"  Nothing  but  distance  now  separates  us  from 
England,"  I  thought  as  we  entered  the  portals  of 
the  comfortable  Hotel  d' Europe,  "  and  what  is 
distance  when  steam  is  at  hand  to  overcome  it  !  " 
We  turned  into  a  real  bed  two  hours  later  (with 
sheets  and  pillow-cases),  and  felt,  after  an  excellent 
supper,  contented,  not  to  say  triumphant.  Trouble, 
privation,  filthy  post-houses,  "  katorgi,"  were  now 
things  of  the  past,  but  as  I  sank  into  the  deep  and 
dreamless  sleep  that  a  man  can  only  know  who  has 
passed  twenty-two  days  out  in  the  open,  half 
starved,  and  wet  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
time,  the  thought  uppermost  in  my  mind  was : 
"  Not  for  a  king's  ransom  would  I  do  this  journey 
asrain." 


lEKOUTSK    TO    TOMSK. 


571 


List  of  Post  Stations  (with  Distances,  Telegraph 
Stations,  and  Rivers),  betiveen  IrJwutsh  and 
Tomsk,  Siberia. 


(g.)  Good  Post-house. 

{\^^  Bad  Post-honso.     (f.)  Uninhabitab 

e. 

VERSTS 

VEBSTS 

IrJcotifsl:  (Telegraph  Sta 

- 

Kamoushetzkaya.      (g.)    . 

in 

tion.    Ferry  over  Eivei 

' 

Zamzovskaya.     (g.  ) 

24 

Angara.)     Good  hotel 

Alzaminskaya.     (g.) 

25 

Bokofskaj-a     (g.)     . 

.     13 

Rasgonnaia.     (b.)    . 

19i 

Soukovskaya.    (g.)  . 

21 

Bayeronovskaya.     (g.) 

25 

Tilminskaya.     (b.)  . 

27 

Biriousinsk.     (g.)    . 

21 

Maltinskaya.     (g.)  . 

.     21 

Polovina.     (g.) 

23 

Polovilnaya.     (g.)   . 

.     29 

Kloutchinskaya.     (b.) 

19 

Cheremoffskaya.     (g.) 

18 

Tinskaya.     (g.) 

28 

Koutoulik.     (b.) 

28 

Xijni-Gatchefskaya.     (g.) 

25 

Zalarmsk.     (b.) 

30 

Ilianskaya.     (b.)      . 

26 

Tiretskaya.      Biver    Oko 

Kansk.      Telegraph     Sta- 

dangerous.    Cross      hi 

tion  and  River,     (g.)    . 

27 

day.     (B.)  . 

22 

Bolshoirinskaya.     (b.) 

25 

Ziminskaia.     (g.  )    . 

25 

Klontchefskaya.     (b.) 

22 

Kinultinskaya,  Telegrapl 

Borodinskaya.     (b.) 

16 

Station,     (g.) 

30 

Ribinskaya.     (g.)    . 

16 

Listvinskaya.     (g.)  . 

20 

Oiiyarskaya.     (b.)   . 

26 

Kouitoimgskaya.     (b.) 

18 

Balaiskaya.     (B.)     , 

24 

Tilinskaya.     (f.)     . 

23 

Tertege.     (g.) 

17 

Cheragilskaya.     (b.) 

18 

Kokinskaya.     (g.)  . 

14 

Touloung.     (b.) 

26 

Botoiskaya.     (b.)    . 

25 

Kourjinskaya.     (b.) 

25 

Krasnoiarsk.      Telegraph 

Sliabartinskaya.     (g  ) 

21 

Station.      Ferry     over 

Houdalanskaya.     (g.) 

21 

Yenisei      River,      and 

Kirgitoulskaya.     (f.) 

26 

Fair  Inn.     . 

29 

Nijni        TJdinsk.      Tele- 

Zaldievka.    (b.) 

21 

graph  Station,     (g.)     . 

21 

Sokofskaya.     (g.)   . 

18 

Oukovskaya.     (f.)  . 

28 

Malokemchougsk.     (b.)  . 

18 

0(  ^ 


FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 


Ivralskaya.     (b.)     . 

B  0 1  s  h  i  t  i  e  111  s  h  i  m  s  k. 
(Ferry),     (g.)       . 

Kasoulskaya,     (g.)  . 

Chernoyechinsk.     (g.) 

Taoutinsk.     (b.) 

Atcliinsk.  Telegraph  Sta- 
tion and  Ferry,     (g. 

Bieloyarski.     (g.)    . 

Krasnoiejinska.     (g.) 

Bocjotolsk.     (g.) 

Bolshoi-Xosoul.     (b.) 

Itatskaya.     (b.) 

Pomejoutotclmaya.      (f.) 

Price  of    posting :     Horses 
IrJiOutsIc    to  BogotolsJi.     From 
a  verst. 


VERSTS 

.     2U 

Tiajniskaya.     (g.)    . 
Souslofkaya.     (g.)  . 

.     16 

Marinsk.     Telegraph  Sta 

.     16 

tion  and  Ferry,     (g.) 

.     22 
.     IG 

Podielnichnaya     (g.) 
Birikoulskaya.     (b.) 

Potchitansk.     (f.)  . 

.     IG 

Kolinskaya.      (g.)   . 

.     13 
.     17 

Ichimskaya.     (f.)    . 
Trountaiva.     (f.)     . 

.     30 

Haldieva.      (b.) 

.      16 

.     18 

Semiloujnaya.     (b.) 
Tomsk.      Telegraph    Sta 

17 

tion.     Good  Inn. 

16 

28 

24 
23 

28 
27 
23 
22 
22 
22 
14 

29 


three  kopeks,   a  verst  each   from 
Bogotolsk   to  Tomsk,  H   kopeks 


CHAPTER  XT. 

TOMSK. 

The  city  of  Tomsk,  wliicli  is  situated  on  tlie  river 
Tom,  a  branch  of  the  Obi,  contains  over  40,000 
inhabitants.  Though  scarcely  as  large  as  Irkoutsk, 
it  is  a  more  imposing  place  at  first  sight.  The  streets 
are  broad  and,  though  unpaved,  in  good  order,  not- 
T\4th standing  the  incessant  stream  of  caravan  traffic 
that  pours  through  them  in  the  tea  season.  The 
public  buildings  are  fine,  even  handsome  (of  two, 
three,  and  four  stories  high),  Trithout  the  draggled, 
unfinished  appearance  of  those  at  Irkoutsk  and 
Krasnoiarsk,  and  there  are  shop-windows  to  enliven 
the  appearance  of  the  principal  thoroughfares. 

The  steamer  was  not  to  leave  for  two  days,  a 
time  we  devoted  to  unpacking  and  overhauling  our 
clothes.  \Ve  found  them  in  a  sorry  plight,  while 
the  leather  portmanteaus  were  swollen  like  drowned 
dogs  after  the  pitiless  storms  of  rain.  We  also 
took  the  opportunity  of  writing  home  to  announce 


574  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

our  safe  arrival  so  far.  Posting  letters  in  Siberia  is 
somewhat  wearisome.  It  took  us  nearly  half  an 
hour  to  despatch  them,  and  then  only  by  the  aid  of 
a  Polish  interpreter  called  ia  by  the  landlord  of 
the  Hotel.  I  signed  my  name  at  least  six  times 
before  the  necessary  formalities  were  completed. 
Then,  would  I  have  them  sent  with  one  stamp  or 
two  ?  If  the  latter  and  the  letter  were  lost,  I  might 
claim  ten  roubles  from  the  Government,  said  the 
hotel- keeper,  "  "Which  you  probably  wouldn't  get," 
added  the  Pole ;  so  I  trusted  to  Providence  and  sent 
them  with  one.  All  were  opened  several  times  by 
the  authorities,  one  reaching  London  with  no  less 
than  five  different  seals  upon  it. 

Tomsk  is  built  in  two  parts.  The  lower  portion 
of  the  town,  consisting  nearly  exclusively  of  mer- 
chants' offices,  shops,  and  warehouses,  while  on 
the  heights  overlooking  them  are  the  Governor's 
palace.  Government  offices,  and  private  residences 
of  the  better  class  of  merchants.  But  although, 
as  I  have  said,  Tomsk  is  less  depressing  than  other 
Siberian  cities,  the  absence  of  trees  or  gardens  gives 
the  place  the  usual  bare,  cheerless  appearance.  The 
surrounding  country  is  flat  and  marshy,  and  a  fruitful 
cause  of  malaria  and  fever  during  spring  and  autumn. 


TOMSK.  575 

The  summer  is  the  busy  season,  when  the  tea  from 
China  and  Trans-Baikalian  merchandise  is  unloaded 
from  the  small  carts  which  have  brought  it  from 
Irkoutsk,  Kiakhta,  Stratensk,  &c.,  and  shipped  on 
the  steamers  running  by  the  Tom  and  Obi  rivers 
to  Tinmen.  Just  outside  the  town  is  a  huge  plain 
cut  up  in  all  directions  by  caravan  roads,  and  at 
the  extremity  of  which  are  the  wharves  where 
steamers  lie  to  receive  their  cargoes.  A  dreary, 
desolate  j^lace  it  looked,  the  dull,  wintry  day 
we  saw  it,  but  in  summer  the  whole  place  is 
alive  with  caravan  carts,  while  in  dry  weather 
an  eternal  dust-cloud  hangs  like  a  pall  over 
the  huge  plain.  The  railway  which  is  now 
being  projected  between  Tomsk  and  Irkoutsk, 
will  do  away  wdth  all  this.  This  line  completed, 
the  tea  will  be  sent  to  Wladivostok  from  China 
by  sea,  thence  to  Stratensk  by  the  Amour  river,  and 
on  by  rail  from  Irkoutsk  to  Tomsk  and  European 
Russia. 

The  Hotel  d'Europe  afforded  us  very  fair  accom- 
modation (for  Siberia).  The  cooking  was  excellent, 
and  we  managed  to  make  ourselves  comfortable 
enough.  Tomsk  is  famed  for  two  dehcacies,  sterlet 
and  caviare.    I  have  seldom  tasted  anything  to  equal 


57G  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  former  in  flavour,  and  the  caviare,  fresh  from  the 
fish  and  eaten  a  couple  of  hoars  after  it  had  been 
taken,  was  food  for  the  gods,  and  as  unlike  the  potted 
abomination  sold  in  England  as  can  well  be  imagined. 
In  all  other  respects,  however,  the  hotel  was  sadly 
deficient.  Oar  room  swarmed  with  vermin,  and 
there  was  not  a  bath  to  be  had  in  the  place  for  love 
or  money ;  the  only  washing  appliance  in  the  hotel 
being  a  small  tin  vessel  nailed  up  against  the  wall 
of  the  corridor,  and  holding  about  a  pint,  a  small 
tap  turning  on  a  tiny,  trickling  stream  of  water, 
which  ran  over  one's  hands  and  on  to  the  floor.  I 
asked  our  host  why  he  did  not  provide  washhand 
basins  for  his  customers.  "  They  are  so  dirty,"  was 
the  reply,  "half  the  time  you  are  washing  your 
hands  in  dirty  water.  By  our  plan  it  runs  over  yoa 
fresh  and  clean  !  " 

We  attended  a  performance  at  the  Opera  House 
of  "Barbe  Bleu,"  but  it  was  poorly  performed, 
and  the  artists  very  inferior  to  those  of  Irkoutsk. 
The  streets  of  Tomsk  are,  unlike  those  of  Ir- 
koutsk, fairly  safe  after  dark,  for  they  are  well  lit  by 
gas  and  patrolled  throughout  the  night  by  a  strong 
force  of  police.  Although  invited  to  a  public  ball 
the  third  evening  of  our  stay,  we  were  unable  to 


TOMSK.  577 

put  in  an  appearance,  liaving  so  many  arrangements 
to  make,  and  the  steamer  leaving  at  4  a.m.  the 
following  day.  With  previous  experiences  of  tlie 
manners  and  customs  of  Siberians  after  12  a.m., 
we  determined  not  to  risk  losing  it.  They  must 
be  amusing  sights,  these  Siberian  dances.  It  is 
not  customary  to  walk  about  a  ball-room,  even 
in  the  intervals  of  dancing.  Each  guest  moves 
about  with  a  sort  of  dancing  step,  a  la  Polonaise. 
Judging  from  their  evening  parties,  a  Siberian  ball- 
room must  become  a  very  fair  imitation  of  a  bear 
garden  towards  the  small  hours  of  the  morning, 
and  we  were  perhaps  fortunate  in  having  stayed 
away. 

One  IS  struck  at  Tomsk  by  the  number  of  well- 
turned-out  carriages  and  horses  in  the  streets 
though  the  "  droshki "  or  public  vehicles  are 
rough,  uncomfortable  things,  in  shape  something 
like  an  Irish  jaunting  car,  with  a  seat  about  half 
a  yard  broad,  to  hold  two  persons  sitting  back 
to  back.  They  are  not  built  high  from  the  ground, 
luckily,  for  the  yemstchiks  are  perfectly  indifferent 
as  to  whether  their  passengers  fall  out  or  not,  and 
whirl  round  corners  in  the  most  reckless  way. 
Although   the   male    population    are   of    the   same 

p  p 


578  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

sulky,  hangdog-looking  appearance  as  we  saw  at 
Irkoutsk,  the  women  were  distinctly  pretty,  and  the 
majority  extremely  well  dressed.  But  few  affected 
the  Siberian  costume,  the  long  cloak  and  white 
head-handkerchief,  so  much  in  vogue  in  Eastern 
Siberia,  but  the  smart  gowns  and  neat  figures 
encountered  in  the  streets  pleasantly  recalled 
one  to  the  fact  that  we  were  once  more  nearing 
civilization.  I  saw  women  in  the  Grande  Rue 
of  Tomsk,  who  would  have  been  considered  pretty 
and  well  dressed  in  Bond  Street,  but  these  were 
only  amongst  the  upper  classes.  The  peasantry, 
male  and  female,  are,  with  few  exceptions,  hideous. 
It  says  little,  however,  for  the  intelligence  or 
civilization  of  the  population  of  both  Tomsk  and 
Irkoutsk,  that  we  were  unable  to  procure  a  single 
French  or  German  book  at  either  city.  We  had 
not  had  a  single  book  of  any  kind  to  read  since 
leaving  Pekin,  and  were  naturally  anxious  to  get 
something  to  lighten  the  tedious  and  weary  hours 
that  lay  between  us  and  Tinmen,  but,  search  as 
we  might,  could  discover  no  French  or  German, 
to  say  nothing  of  English,  work  of  any  kind. 
A  university  has  since  been  founded  at  Tomsk, 
and  matters  may  have   improved   in  this   respect, 


TOMSK  579 

but  it  seemed  strange  that  in  a  population  of 
nearly  fifty  thousand  souls  (many  of  whom  spoke 
German)  there  should  have  been  nothing  but  Russian 
works  obtainable.  Although  art  of  all  kinds  is  at 
a  low  ebb  in  most  of  the  Siberian  towns,  there  is 
one  thing  in  which  they  certainly  do  excel — in  pho- 
tography. For  clearness  and  finish  some  of  their  pro- 
ductions are  equal  to  those  of  the  best  photographers 
in  London  or  Paris,  notably  those  of  Bogdanovitch 
in  Irkoutsk.  I  was  told  by  the  latter  that  the  best 
are  taken  in  winter  time,  when  the  clear,  rarefied 
atmosphere  and  dazzling  sunshine  offer  excellent 
opportunities  for  obtaining  good  negatives. 

We  were  somewhat  staggered  by  the  hotel  bill 
presented  us  by  the  host  of  the  Hotel  d'Europe, 
the  total  amountmg  to  two  hundred  and  seventy 
roubles  (or  nearly  30/.)  for  barely  four  days' 
bed  and  board.  In  vain  I  protested  against  the 
enormity  of  the  items  (not  one  of  which,  by  the 
way,  could  I  read),  in  vain  threatened  sooner  than 
be  thus  swindled,  to  stop  in  Tomsk  and  bring 
the  matter  before  a  court  of  justice.  But  the 
old  Jew  was  inexorable,  and  only  smiled  blandly 
and  rubbed  his  hands,  murmuring  now  and  then, 
"  The    gospodin   must   not   lose    his  temper."     He 


p 


P  2 


680  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

laughed  outright  at  my  threat  of  bringing  the 
matter  into  court,  his  amusement  being  accounted 
for  by  the  interpreter,  who  told  us  that  he,  being 
the  chief  magistrate,  would  himself  have  tried  the 
case.  To  make  matters  worse,  w^e  had  that  morning 
sold  the  old  rascal  our  tarantass  for  sixty  roubles 
(about  one-third  of  its  real  value),  on  the  express 
understanding  that  he  would  charge  as  little  as 
possible  for  accommodation. 

We  set  out  at  4  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  the 
19th  of  September  for  the  steamer.  Our  way  was 
fraught  with  considerable  difficulty,  for  it  was  as 
dark  as  pitch  out  on  the  plain,  which  was  covered 
in  places  with  deep  holes  and  pitfalls.  Though 
only  four  versts,  it  took  two  hours  to  do  the 
distance,  and  we  were  right  glad  when,  a  little 
before  daybreak,  the  green  and  red  lights  of  the 
Kazanetse  shone  out  bright  and  clear,  while  at  the 
same  time  her  steam  whistle  sounded  for  departure, 
recaUing  us  to  the  fact  that  we  were  now  no  longer 
at  the  mercy  of  drunken  drivers  and  broken-down 
axles,  but  well  wnthin  reach  of  Europe  by  means  of 
that  blessed  invention,  steam  ! 

The  Kazanetse  would    have  been    a   fairly    com- 
fortable   boat   anywhere.     To    us,    fresh  from    the 


TOMSK.  581 

discomforts  of  the  road,  she  seemed  positively 
luxm-ious.  The  fleet  to  which  she  belonofed 
is  one  of  fourteen  vessels,  each  ranging  from 
one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  tons,  and 
owned  by  two  private  individuals,  Messrs.  Ivour- 
batoff  and  Ignatoff,  who  have  the  contract  for 
carrying  mails  and  prisoners.  These  vessels 
are  built  at  Tiumen,  and  on  the  same  model, 
the  first-class  accommodation  forward,  the  roof 
of  the  saloon  forming  an  upper  deck,  while  abaft 
the  funnel  the  decks  are  roofed  over  with  iron  for 
deck  passengers,  of  whom,  on  the  Kazanetsej  there 
were  some  three  hundred  returning  to  various  parts 
of  the  Obi  district  before  the  closing  of  that  river 
for  navigation.  The  merchandise  is  towed  in 
lighters  of  two  and  three  hundred  tons,  though 
drawing  but  two  or  three  feet  of  water,  for  in  parts 
even  this  huge  stream  becomes  dangerously  shallow 
in  the  summer  months.  The  steamers  burn  wood, 
carried  on  the  deck  of  the  lighters,  the  consumption 
per  diem  being  sometimes  as  much  as  eighty  tons  ! 

It  was  with  a  sense  of  relief  that  we  woke  next 
day  to  hear  the  paddle-wheels  dashing  through  the 
water,  and  the  little  steamer  shaking  with  the 
speed  at  which  she  was  being  driven   through  the 


582  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

grey  misty  morning.  As  usual,  washing  appliances 
were  ??//,  but  after  a  steaming  glass  of  tea  and  two 
or  three  "Kalatchi"^  and  preserves,  we  found  no 
difficult}^  in  dispensing  with  such  minor  details,  and 
felt  as  we  had  not  once  felt  since  leaving  Irkoutsk  ; 
thoroughly  comfortable.  A  coal-barge  would  Lave 
been  a  relief  after  the  incessant  shaking  and  bumping 
of  those  fifteen  hundred  miles.  I  thought  with  a 
shudder  how,  had  we  been  delayed  a  week  later, 
we  should  in  a  few  more  days  have  been  plough- 
ing through  the  deep  muddy  roads  and  flooded 
plains  to  Tinmen,  a  distance  of  quite  one  thousand 
versts.  Though  that  by  river  is  nearly  four  thou- 
sand, we  would  have  chosen  it,  had  it  been  double 
or  treble  the  distance,  in  preference  to  the  leaky, 
bone-shaking  tarantass,  a  vehicle  the  very  name  of 
which  I  shall  ever  recall  with  a  shudder ! 

But  though  one  felt  thoroughly  at  rest,  the 
unvarying  monotony  on  board  the  Kazanetse  was 
trying  enough,  and  the  winding  stream,  flat, 
muddy  banks,  and  slow-going  steamer  grew  in- 
tensely depressing  after  the  first  two  days.  The 
Obi  river  is  neither  grand  nor  picturesque.  It  is  at 
all  seasons  a  cheerless,  dispiriting  landscape  that 
'  A  kind  of  oatmeal  cake. 


TOMSK.  583 

meets  the  eye  from  Tomsk  to  Soorgoot,  but  in  late 
autumn  its  banks  must  present  tlie  appearance  of  a 
bowling  wilderness.  There  are  few  rivers  in  the 
world  with  as  many  tributaries,  or  of  the  same 
enormous  length,  as  the  Obi.  The  basin  of  the 
river  contains  more  than  a  million  and  a  quarter  of 
square  miles,  an  area  nearly  two  thousand  miles  in 
length,  and,  at  the  widest  part,  twelve  hundred  in 
breadth.  From  near  the  Chinese  border,  where  it 
has  its  source,  to  the  Grulf  of  Obi  in  the  Frozen 
Ocean,  it  has  over  seventy  tributaries,  not  includ- 
ing the  Tom  and  Irtish  Rivers,  the  source  of  the 
latter  being  Lake  Zaizan,  near  the  Koochoom 
Mountains  in  Chinese  Tartary.  An  idea  may  thus 
be  gained  of  what  a  stupendous  volume  of  water 
this  is.  A  few  days  above  Tomsk,  it  presents  more 
the  appearance  of  a  succession  of  large  lakes  than 
a  river — lakes  fringed  with  low  banks  of  stunted  fir 
and  beech-trees,  varied  by  occasional  stretches  of 
sandy  waste.  Early  autumn  is,  perhaps,  the  best 
time  to  see  the  Obi,  for  at  this  season  the  varied 
hues  of  decaying  vegetation  give  a  more  or  less 
varied  look  to  the  dull  landscape  of  dirty  green 
and  drab  that  stretches  away,  without  hut  or  habita- 
tion to  mar  its  solitude,  from  its  shores  to  those  of 


584  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

the  Arctic  Ocean.  The  end  of  October,  sees  the 
Obi  covered  with  ice,  and  no  longer  navigable. 
For  a  great  part  of  the  year,  however,  the  water 
flows  on  under  the  ice,  which,  even  as  far  south  as 
Tiumen,  is  from  three  to  four  feet  thick.  Naviga^ 
tion  is  sometimes  entirely  suspended  in  twenty-four 
hours,  so  suddenly  does  winter  come  on.  It  must 
not,  however,  be  imagined  that  the  frozen  rivers  of 
Siberia  present  the  smooth,  unbroken  surface  of 
glassy  ice  which  one  sees  depicted  in  English 
pictures,  presumably  by  artists  who  have  never 
been  nearer  Siberia  than  Moscow  or  Petersburg. 
The  Obi,  with  its  impetuous  torrent,  is,  per- 
haps, the  most  uneven  and  rugged  of  any;  but 
even  on  "the  Yenisei,  which  is  less  rapid,  it  is 
common  enough  in  winter  to  see  hillocks  and 
miniature  cliffs  twenty  to  thirty  feet  in  height, 
thrown  up  by  the  current  upon  its  frozen  surface. 
The  effect,  with  a  blue  sky  and  briUiant  sun- 
shine, is,  I  was  told,  very  beautiful ;  but  on  dull, 
days  (which,  happily  for  Siberians,  are  rare),  the 
sight  of  a  frozen,  deserted  river  must  be  melancholy 
in  the  extreme. 

We  passed  but  two  towns  worthy  of  the  name 
between      Tomsk     and     Tiumen  —  Soorgoot     and 


TOMSK.  585 

Tobolsk,      The   villages    touclied    at    were    simply 
a  collection  of  half  a  dozen    loo;  huts    the  dwell- 
ings  of  the    employes  of  the  steamboat    company, 
and  depots  for  the  firewood  used  by  their  vessels. 
Of   the   nomadic    tribes    inhabiting   the    banks    of 
the   Obi,  we  saw  but  little,  most  of  them   having 
already  struck  their  birch-bark  tents,  and  migrated 
north  to  their  winter-quarters  and  reindeer.      Occa- 
sionally, however,  we  passed  an  Ostiak  encampment, 
with  its  half-dozen  grimy-looking,  triaugular  tents, 
savage    dogs,  and   fleet   of    canoes.      The    Ostiaks 
inhabit   the   vast   tract  of  country   lying   between 
the    Obi    and     the    shores   of    the    Frozen    Ocean. 
Like   the  Yakoutz,   their  neighbours,  the    Ostiaks 
subsist  entirely    upon    what    they    kill.       Fish    in 
summer,  and  game  in  winter.     Like  the  Yakoutz 
also,    scurvy    and    a  still    more  loathsome  disease, 
introduced    by    Russian    traders,    is     slowly     but 
surely    stamping   them    out.       They   are    a   good- 
tempered,    hospitable    people,    fond   of  trade,   but 
averse   to  anything  like  hard  work.     In  summer 
when,  between  the  months   of  June  and  August, 
night   is    unknoW'U    in    these    regions,    their    chief 
occupation   is    fishing,    the   produce   of  their   nets 
being  salted  and  sent  on  to  Tobolsk  for  export  to 


686        FKOM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

Tiumen,  Ekaterinburg,  Perm,  and  European  Russia. 
The  Ostiaks  number  about  thirteen  thousand  in 
all,  and  are  miserable  creatures  to  look  at,  with  a 
yellowish  complexion,  flat  faces,  and  coarse,  dark 
hair.  They  are,  especially  skilful  in  the  use  of  the 
bow.  In  shooting  squirrels,  for  instance,  they  use  a 
blunt  arrow,  and  are  careful  to  hit  the  animal  only 
on  the  head,  so  as  not  to  injure  the  fur. 

During  summer,  the  Ostiaks  live  entirely  upon 
fish,  during  the  winter  months  their  sole  diet  is 
reindeer  milk.  The  costume  is  not  an  ungraceful 
one,  and  is  made  of  reindeer  skin  trimmed 
with  bright  red  or  blue  cloth  and  coloured  beads, 
some  of  the  richer  ones  being  hung  round  with 
small  silver  coins,  E-ussian  twenty-kopek  pieces, 
&c.  It  is  never  safe  to  approach  their  encamp- 
ments alone.  I  did  so  once,  and  had  cause  to 
repent  it,  being  attacked  by  half  a  dozen  huge 
dogs,  who  would  have  made  short  work  of  me, 
had  not  an  old  Ostiak  woman  emerged  from  a  tent 
upon  hearing  the  disturbance,  and  beaten  them 
off.  The  Ostiak  breed  of  dog  is  not  unlike  the 
Mongolian.  They  are  sharp-looking,  sagacious 
creatures  of  a  black  and  white  colour,  and  are  by 
nature  the  cleanest  that  exist,  going  daily  of  their 


TOMSK.  587 

own  accord  to  the  river  and  batliing  throughout  the 
sumnier  months.  In  winter  they  roll  themselves 
in  the  snow.  I  thought  of  buying  and  bringing 
one  home,  but  that  it  -would  have  been  a  nuisance 
and  expense  through  Europe. 

TVe  anchored  one  evening  off  an  Ostiak  encamp- 
ment and  paid  its  inmates  a  visit.  It  was  a 
curious,  weird  scene,  the  broad,  sullen-looking 
river,  the  crimson  sunset  through  the  dark-green 
fir-trees,  the  two  or  three  flims}^,  tumble-down 
tents  with  columns  of  thin  grey  smoke  rising 
into  the  still  evening  air,  while  a  number  of 
silent,  skin-clad  forms  flitted  noiselessly  about, 
getting  in  the  nets  and  canoes  for  the  night,  on 
the  low  sandy  spit  that  ran  for  some  yards  into 
the  river.  Not  a  sound  broke  the  stillness,  for 
we  were  quite  half  a  mile  from  the  steamer,  and 
save  for  the  wash  and  ripple  of  the  stream,  the 
occasional  bay  of  a  dog,  or  cracking  of  sticks  as 
one  of  the  women  gathered  fuel  for  the  night,  all 
was  silent  as  the  grave.  I  have  never  seen  a 
picture  of  more  utter  desolation.  "We  intended 
to  enter  one  of  their  dwellings,  but  beat  a  hasty 
retreat  on  coming  within  ten  or  fifteen  ydvds,  of 
them.     The    stench   was   overpowering,  and   I    am 


588  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

not  exaggerating  when  I  say  that  one  may  smell 
an  Ostiak  quite  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  with  the 
wind  in  the  right  quarter  !  It  is  a  smell  peculiar  to 
their  race,  so  sickening  and  overpowering,  that  I 
cannot  describe  it.  Russians  ascribe  it  to  their 
invincible  repugnance  to  salt.  None  will  touch  it, 
although  it  has  several  times,  and  at  great  expense, 
been  distributed  amongst  them  by  the  Government ; 
and  this  is  no  doubt  the  cause  of  the  majority  of 
the  loathsome  diseases  from  which  they  suffer. 
Some  of  the  men  were  pleasant-looking  fellows, 
and  their  women  would  have  been  pretty  had  they 
possessed  any  teeth,  which,  after  the  age  of  fourteen 
or  fifteen,  usually  loosen  and  drop  out  from  the  same 
cause.  Unlike  their  neighbours  the  Samoyedes,  the 
Ostiaks  are  kind  to  their  women.  In  no  race  in  the 
world  is  woman  so  badly  treated  as  among  the 
former.  To  be  enceinte,  even  legally,  is  considered 
deo-radino-  and  the  unfortunate  mothers  are  beaten 
and  worried  incessantly  during  the  time  of  preg- 
nancy, and  until  their  child  is  born.  During  this 
period,  too,  they  are  tortured  until  they  confess 
with  whom  they  have  been  unfaithful,  very  often 
naming  an  utterly  innocent  person  to  escape  further 
torment.     When  they  have  done   so,  there   is    no 


TOMSK.  589 

great  result  ;  the  husband  simply  claiming  a 
small  sum  of  money  (or  its  equivalent  in  fur 
or  brandy)  as  damages  !  I  was  much  struck 
with  the  likeness  between  the  Ostiaks,  as  resrards 
their  appearance  and  ha,bits,  and  the  Dyaks  of 
Central  Borneo,  altbough  of  course  the  latter  are 
a  much  finer  race,  both  as  regards  physique 
and  intellect.  The  dug-out  canoes  used  on 
the  Obi  are  the  same  identically  in  shape 
and  construction,  while  on  the  handles  of  the 
paddles  I  found  much  the  same  patterns  of 
carving  that  I  had  come  across  among  some  of 
the  inland  tribes  in  Borneo.  This  is  indeed  a  case 
of  "extremes  meeting." 

The  shores  of  the  Obi  river  teem  with  game  and 
wild  fowl.  I  must  have  seen  quite  a  million 
duck  during  the  journey  from  Tomsk  to  Tobolsk, 
while  in  the  season  wild  geese,  teal,  widgeon,  and 
snipe  abound  ;  and  I  was  somewhat  surprised  to 
see  quantities  of  sea-gull  at  this  distance  from  the 
ocean.  There  is  no  lack,  either,  of  bear  and  wolf  in 
these  regions,  and  smaller  ground  game,  and  for 
one  who  cared  for  sport,  I  can  imagine  no  better 
hunting-ground.  But  he  would  be  a  bold  man 
who   would   pitch  his    tent  among  this  unsavoury 


590  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAXD. 

race  for  two  or  three  months.  To  say  nothing 
of  their  filthy  habits,  the  tents  are  seldom  free 
from  smallpox. 

There  were  but  six  first-class  passengers  besides 
ourselves  on  the  Kazanetse.  M.  Sourikoff,  a 
painter  of  some  renown  in  Russia,  his  pretty  wife, 
and  two  little  girls,  Olga  and  Helene,  models 
in  miniature  of  their  mother,  who  were  returninof 
from  Tomsk  to  Moscow,  after  a  somewhat  ex- 
tended tour  in  Siberia,  in  search  of  peasant 
types  for  a  new  historical  picture,  since  com- 
pleted with  great  success  by  M.  Sourikoff.  It 
was  pleasant,  indeed,  to  make  the  acquaintance  of 
these  charming  people,  who  were  true  Russians  {not 
Siberians),  and  the  long  dull  evenings  passed  quickly 
enough.  Although  M.  Sourikoff  spoke  but  a  few 
words  of  French,  madame  was  half  a  Parisienne,  and 
returned  every  year,  for  a  few  weeks  to  the  lovely 
city  she  had  forsaken  for  the  fogs  and  mists  of 
Petersburg.  We  thus  had  many  subjects  in  common, 
and  this  was  undoubtedly  the  pleasantest  part  of 
our  journey. 

There  is  no  fixed  time  for  meals  on  board  these 
boats.  You  order  your  food  when  and  where  you 
like,  so  passengers  are  but  little  thrown  together, 
and  as  the  two  remaining  ones  never   appeared  to 


TOMSK.  591 

take  nourishment  at  all,  or  join  the  Sourikoffs 
and  ourselves  at  dinner  or  breakfast,  we  did  not 
make  their  acquaintance.  They  were  a  queer  couple 
too,  one  an  old  gentleman  of  semi-military  appear- 
ance, who  paced  up  and  down  deck  all  day,  wet  or 
dry,  smothered  up  in  furs,  and  seemed  to  subsist 
solely  on  suction.  I  never  saw  him  eat,  but  he 
consumed  at  least  twenty  bottles  of  beer  a  day, 
to  say  nothing  of  nips  of  vodka  and  glasses  of 
tea  between  whiles.  His  official  cap  and  numerous 
decorations  gave  him  the  appearance  of  a  general  at 
least.  AYe  put  him  down  as  returning  from  an 
important  Siberian  military  command,  and  were 
somewhat  surprised  to  hear  at  Tiumen  that  he  was 
a  simple  government  inspector  of  mines  in  Siberia, 
and  a  civilian.  Where  he  got  the  medals  remains 
a  mystery.  Our  other  fellow-passenger  was  a  lady 
who  might  have  been  any  age  from  twenty  to  fifty, 
and  whose  movements  and  manner  were  so  singular 
and  weird  that  Madame  Sourikoff  christened  her 
"  The  Sphinx."  She  usually  spent  the  whole  day 
locked  up  in  her  cabin.  It  was  only  at  night  that 
she  emerged,  muffled  up  in  furs,  and  thick  veils,  to 
pace  the  solitary  deck  till  long  after  midnight.  Only 
once  did  I  catch  a  glimpse  of  her  face,  a  pale  and 
determined,  tbough   sad  one,  framed  with  jet  black 


592  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

hair  cut  short  and  square  over  the  temples.  When 
alone  one  moonlight  night,  smoking  a  cigar  on  deck, 
I  ventured  to  address  the  mysterious  stranger  in 
French,  a  language  she  understood  perfectly.  Her 
history  was  sad  enough.  She  had  left  her  home 
near  Nijni  Novgorod  "  under  suspicion"  two  years 
ago,  a  girl  of  eighteen,  to  return  an  old  woman. 
Most  of  her  term  of  exile  had  been  passed  at 
Krasnoiarsk.  It  was  only  at  Tomsk  that  she  had 
learnt  the  death  of  her  mother,  and  that  her 
jSiance,  who  had  vowed  to  wait  for  her  return,  had 
married  another.  "I  have  nothing  to  live  for 
now,  monsieur,"  sobbed  the  poor  woman,  "  for  my 
step-father  was  the  means  of  my  being  sent  to 
that  hell  upon  earth.  Let  me  only  ask  you  to 
keep  my  secret,  and  tell  no  one  on  board  I  have 
spoken  to  you.  I  do  not  w^ish  for  society — 
— I  cannot  stand  it."  Poor  soul !  I  have  often 
since  wondered  what  became  of  her ;  whether  she 
returned  to  a  fairly  contented,  though  broken 
life,  or,  as  is  more  often  the  case,  lived  but  to 
welcome  the  day  when  death  should  end  her 
troubles,  and  let  her  forget  that  she  had  ever  been 
sent  to  accursed  Siberia. 

The  cuisine  on  board  the  Kazanetse  was  excellent, 


TOM.'SK.  593 

a  pleasant  change  from  tlie  eternal  77ieims  of  the 
past  six  weeks,  ''  Taitse,"  "  Chi,"  and  "  Moloko."  - 
The  "  Rabchick  "  formed  part  of  our  daily  bill  of 
fare.     This    is    a    bird    peculiar    to    Russia    and 
Siberia,    something    similar    to    a   partridge,    and 
excellent    eating^.     When    strug^o-lino:  with  the   bill 
of    fare,    I  often   thought   of    a   poor    Frenchman 
who  left  Moscow^  for  Irkoutsk  two  years   since — 
completely  ignorant  of   the  Russian  language — and 
who  was  told  by  a  friend  whenever  he  felt  hungry 
merely  to  mention  the  word  "  Teliatina,"   and  the}'' 
would  bring  him  anything  worth  eating.     Thioga 
went  well  till  he  reached  Tobolsk,  when  it  suddenlj 
dawned  upon  the  poor  wretch  that  all  the  animal 
food  he  had  eaten  since  leaving  the  Holy  City  had 
been  composed  solely  of  veal !     By   the  time  our 
friend  reached  Tomsk  he  was  fairly  rabid.     Yeal  is 
an  excellent  thing  in  its  way,  but  "  toujours  veau," 
like  "  toujours   perdrix,"  is  apt  to  pall  upon  the 
palate  after  a  few  weeks  !     It  was  only  at  Tomsk 
that    he   came  across   a  French-speaking    Cossack 
officer  who  was  able  to  change  his  bill  of  fare,  and 
history  relates  that  the  victim  was  so  overcome  with 

-  Eggs,  tea,  milk. 


594       FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

emotion  and  gratitude  that  lie  fell  upon  his  deliverer's 
neck  and  wept  for  joy  ! 

One  is  out  of  it  on  board  a  Siberian  river- 
steamer  if  one  does  not  eat  nuts,  for  every  one 
devours  day  and  night,  hour  after  hour,  a  small 
kind  of  cob-nut,  very  common  in  Siberia,  which  to 
my  taste  was  extremely  insipid  and  iflavourless.  But 
we  were  told  by  the  Sourikoffs  it  was  the  proper 
thing  to  do,  so  purchased  a  pound  or  so  at  the 
first  stopping-place,  and  followed  the  example  of  our 
fellow-passengers.  Every  one  devoured  them,  from 
the  captain  downwards.  Even  the  melancholy  exile 
had  her  bag  of  "  brousniki,"  as  they  are  called,  and 
the  beer-drinking  inspector  furtively  produced 
them  every  now  and  then  from  the  depths  of 
his  fur-lined  "  dacha."  When  the  Siberian  is 
unable  to  obtain  these,  he  chews  a  kind  of  elastic 
composition  made  of  turpentine,  not  unpleasant  to 
the  taste.  The  Russians  call  this  "  Conversation 
Siberienne,"  hardly  a  compliment  to  the  conver- 
sational powers  of  the  inhabitants  of  Asiatic  Russia. 

From  the  day  we  left  Samarof,  our  northernmost 
point,  the  weather  became  cold  and  raw,  so  much 
so  that  furs  were  a  daily  as  well  as  nightly  necessity. 
Cold  and  blinding  showers  of  hail  and  sleet  kept  us 


TOMSK.  595 

prisoners  in  tlie  little  stuffy  saloon  of  tlie  steamer, 
and  we  passed  the  days  sadly  enough,  staring  out 
of  tlie  misty  windows  at  the  flat,  muddy  banks, 
watching  the  grey,  woolly  clouds  as  they  swept 
across  the  desolate-looking  plains.  We  had  now 
entered  the  river  Irtish,  where  navigation  is 
extremely  dangerous  at  this  time  of  the  year  on 
account  of  the  dense  fogs  that  prevail  between 
Soorgoot  and  Tobolsk.  Collisions  are  of  fre- 
quent occurrence,  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at.  There  is  no  rule  of  the  road  as  at  sea 
or  on  most  European  rivers.  Upon  meeting  a 
vessel  a  red  or  white  flag  was  waved  from  the 
bridge  to  intimate  that  we  should  pass  to  the  right 
or  left  of  it.  At  night  the  signal  was  given  by  a 
small  hand-lamp.  On  foggy  days  and  dark  misty 
nights  the  danger  of  this  system  may  be  imagined, 
and  we  got  but  little  sleep  at  nights  for  fear  of  a 
smash,  to  say  nothing  of  a  deafening  fog-horn  kept 
going  almost  without  cessation  from  sunset  till 
dawn.  We  only  anchored  once,  however,  when  the 
fog  became  so  bad  you  could  literally  not  see  your 
hand  before  you.  It  lasted  seven  hours,  as  uncom- 
fortable ones  as  I  ever  wish  to  spend,  for  eyes, 
nose,  and  mouth  were  choked  with  the  fumes  which 

Q  q  2 


596  FROM    I'EKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

penetrated    even   into   tlie    saloon.       The    scenery 
for  a  couple  of  days  after  leaving    Soorgoot   was 
still  more  desolate   and  monotonous.     The  forests 
of  birch  and  beech  disappeared  altogether,  and  were 
replaced   by   vast   plains    of    sand,   varied    by    an 
occasional  salt-marsh,    the    only    signs    of  vegeta- 
tion   beino;   the    stunted    willows    and   scrub   that 
fringed  the   banks    of   the    dirty,    muddy-coloured 
river.     Xot  a  living  thing  is  seen  in  these  regions, 
save  at  long   intervals,  perhaps,  the    encampment 
of  some  Ostiak,  the  tiny  tents  only  accentuating  the 
huge  landscape  of  desolation    surrounding   it.     It 
gives  me  the  blues  even  now  to  recall  the  shores  of 
the  Obi  and  Irtish  on  a  dull  day. 

"We  reached  Tobolsk  at  5  p.m.  on  the  25th  of 
September.  The  night  before,  just  as  we  were 
sinking  into  a  sweet  sleep,  we  were  all  roughly 
tumbled  out  of  our  berths  and  ordered  on  deck. 
"  It's  come  at  last,"  said  Lancaster,  who,  like 
myself,  had  made  up  his  mind  that  an  accident 
had  happened,  for  there  was  a  tremendous  turmoil 
and  scurrying  about  on  deck,  and,  looking  out 
of  the  little  port-hole,  I  made  out  the  red  and 
green  lights  of  a  large  steamer  close  alongside. 
Sourikoff  was  already  on  deck.     Poor  Madame  S. 


TOMSK.  597 

aDd  little  Olga  and  Helene  were  sitting  on  a  pile  of 
luggage,  their  teeth  chattering  and  faces  blue 
with  the  cold.  "Is  it  not  disgraceful?"  said 
tlie  poor  little  lady,  "  we  have  to  change  steamers." 
The  winter-quarters  of  the  Kazanetze  were,  it 
appeared,  at  Tomsk;  those  of  the  Beidern,  the 
steamer  we  had  just  met,  at  Tobolsk.  The  latter, 
having  been  delayed  by  the  fogs  for  nearly  four 
days,  would  not  have  time  to  return  to  her  winter 
port  before  the  closing  of  the  navigation.  "  The 
intention  was,"  said  the  captain,  '*  to  change  us 
at  Soorgoot,  but  these  cursed  fogs  have  thrown 
out  all  the  company's  arrangements." 

We  certainly  got  the  worst  of  the  bargain.  The 
Reutern  was  of  precisely  the  same  dimensions  as 
the  Kazanetze,  and  whereas  we  had  but  eight  first- 
class  passengers  all  told,  she  carried  sixty  or 
seventy  natives  of  Tomsk,  and  other  river-side 
towns,  who  were  hurrying  back  to  their  homes 
before  the  freezing  of  the  Obi.  The  saloon  of  the 
Reutern  was,  as  may  be  imagined,  in  a  truly 
disgusting  state.  The  tables  covered  with  grease 
and  cigarette  ash,  the  floor  strewn  with  chicken 
bones,  egcr  shells,  pieces  of  bread,  squashed  berries, 
&c.,    and  although   it    was  past  midnight,  a'  great 


598        FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

many  of  the  passengers  must  have  been  indalging 
in  a  meal  at  the  time  the  Kazanetse  hove  in  sight, 
for  the  smell  of  grease  and  cooking  was  intolerable, 
the  windows  of  the  saloon  having  evidently  been 
closed  ever  since  the  Reutern  had  left  Tobolsk.  The 
Siberians  have  queer  notions  of  eating,  and  their 
meals  correspond  very  much  with  their  unfinished 
mode  of  life.  While  on  their  travels  they  feed  any- 
how, no  matter  how  great  the  facility  for  obtaining 
food  at  proper  hours.  You  will  see  them,  men, 
women,  and  children  alike,  subsist  throughout  the 
day  solely  on  tea,  bread,  or  sweet  biscuits  and  berries, 
and  then,  as  if  struck  by  a  sudden  happy  thought, 
rouse  themselves  about  midnight,  and  sit  down  to  a 
heavy  meal  of  two  or  three  courses,  washed  down 
by  copious  draughts  of  scalding  tea,  and  preceded 
by  three  or  four  large  glasses  of  vodka.  Cigarettes 
are  incessantly  smoked  during  meals.  Cigars  are 
unobtainable  in  Siberia.  I  tried  one  at  Tomsk,  but^ 
felt  the  effects  for  days  afterwards.  Eussian  cigar- 
ettes are,  in  my  opinion,  better  than  the  Egyptian. 
They  are  more  aromatic,  and  certainly  less  injurious. 
Those  made  by  Laferme  under  the  name  of  "  Petits 
canons,"  are  the  best,  and  are  to  be  bought  almost 
everywhere  throughout  the  Russian  Empire,  from 


TOMSK.  599 

Kiakhta  to  Petersburg,  Archangel  to  Merv.  They 
are  a  beautifully  made  cigarette,  and  the  price  (one. 
rouble  a  hundred)  is  reasonable  enough. 

The  approach  to  Tobolsk  is  picturesque.  One 
felt,  on  looking  at  the  villages  in  the  suburbs, 
with  their  green  church  spires  and  neat  white- 
washed houses,  large  fields,  and  grazing-grounds, 
enclosed  by  neat  wooden  railings,  that  one  was 
indeed  approaching  civilization.  For  some  two 
miles  before  reaching  the  town  itself,  the  river  is 
lined  by  rocky,  precipitous  cliffs  topped  with 
dense  forests  of  pine.  Here  and  there  huge  land- 
slips had  taken  place.  In  one  instance  nearly  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  square  had  sunk  bodily  into  the 
river,  trees  and  all,  looking  at  the  point  where  it 
had  broken  away  as  clean  cut  as  if  it  had  been 
done  with  a  knife.  The  Irtish  River  is  very 
subject  to  these  convulsions  of  nature.  Its  banks 
'  in  1753  fell  a  depth  of  nearly  seventy  feet. 

Tobolsk  is  distinctly  the  prettiest  town  in  Siberia, 
though  perhaps  the  fact  of  our  being  so  pleased 
with  it  was  not  altogether  unassociated  with  the 
thought  that  it  was  the  last  Siberian  city  (except 
Tiumen)  that  we  should  visit.  On  first  appear- 
ance  one   is   reminded   not  a   little  of   Gibraltar ; 


600  FROM    TEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

one  portion  of  the  town  being  built  on  a  steep  cliff, 
the  other  on  the  marshy  plain,  watered  by  the 
winding  yellow  Irtish,  and  its  smaller  tributary,  the 
Tobol  river.  We  were  to  start  again  at  midnight, 
so  lost  no  time  in  landing  and  making  an  excursion 
round  the  city. 

It  will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  the  size  of 
Siberia,  when  I  say  that  the  district  or  government 
of  Tobolsk  alone  is  nearly  eight  times  as  large  as 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  The  population  of  this 
vast  province  are  for  the  most  part  Russians, 
Tartars,  Ostiaks,  and  Samoyedes,  the  two  latter 
aboriginal  tribes.  The  city  of  Tobolsk  was  for  a 
long  time  the  capital  of  the  whole  of  Eastern  and 
Western  Siberia,  and  is  rich  in  historical  asso- 
ciations. It  belonged  up  to  1581  to  the  Tartars, 
and  was  then  known  under  the  name  of  Isker,  the 
governor  or  ruler  of  the  province  being  a  Tartar 
chief  of  the  name  of  Kootchoom. 

It  may  be  said  that  Siberia  was  practically 
unknown  to  the  inhabitants  of  European  Russia  up 
to  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  for  although, 
previously  to  this,  an  expedition  had  penetrated  as 
far  as  the  Lower  Obi,  yet  its  effects  were  not 
permanent.     Later  on,  Ivan  Vassilovitch  II.  sent  a 


TOMSK.  601 

body  of  troops  across  the  Ourals,  laid  some  of  the 
Tartar  tribes  under  tribute,  and  assumed  the  title  of 
"  Lord  of  Siberia."  Kootchoom  Khan,  however,  a 
descendant  of  Chenghiz  Khan,  punished  these 
tribes  for  their  cowardice,  regained  their  fealty,  and 
thus  put  an  end  to  further  encroachments  from 
Eussia.  A  second  invasion,  however,  ended  more 
favourably  for  Russian  interests,  and  in  a  totally 
unexpected  manner.  Ivan  II.  had  extended  his 
conquests  to  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  opened  up  trade 
with  Persia.  The  merchants  and  caravans  were, 
however,  frequently  pillaged  by  hordes  of  banditti 
called  Don  Cossacks,  whom  the  Czar  was  finally  com- 
pelled to  attack,  killing  many,  and  making  prisoners 
of  many  more.  Some  escaped ;  among  the  latter 
being  some  five  hundred  freebooters,  under  the 
command  of  a  chief  named  Yermak  Timoffeef,  who, 
making  their  way  to  Orel,  heard  of  an  inviting 
field  of  adventure  lying  east  of  the  Oural  moun- 
tains. It  is  not  generally  known  that  the  enormou 
country  known  as  Asiatic  Russia  was  conquered 
and  annexed  by  five  hundred  men.  Yermak,  him- 
self an  outlaw,  conquered,  after  a  desperate  battle, 
the  Tartar  hordes  of  Kootchoom  Khan,  then  prince 
of  the  Tobolsk  province,  and  became  in  twenty-four 


602        FROM  I'EKLN*  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

hours  transformed  from  a  lawless  robber  into  a 
prince.  But  he  had  the  good  sense,  notwithstanding, 
to  see  that  he  could  not  hope  to  hold  his  enormous 
empire  without  assistance.  He  sent,  therefore,  fifty 
of  his  Cossacks  to  the  Czar  of  Russia,  their  chief 
being  ordered  to  represent  to  that  monarch  the 
progress  which  the  Russian  troops  under  the 
command  of  Yermak  had  made  in  Siberia,  where 
an  extensive  empire  had  been  conquered  in  the 
name  of  the  Czar.  The  latter,  delighted  beyond 
measure  at  this  fresh  acquisition  of  territory,  gave 
the  rebel  Yermak  free  pardon,  and  at  once  sent  him 
money  and  assistance.  Reinforced  by  five  hun- 
dred Cossacks,  Yermak  renewed  his  efforts,  formed 
fresh  expeditions,  and  was  enabled  to  subdue  and 
conquer  fresh  districts,  which  had  been  fomented 
and  incited  to  rebellion  by  the  conquered  Koot- 
choom  Khan.  In  one  of  the  smaller  engagements, 
Yermak  perished,  not,  it  is  said,  by  the  sword  of  the 
enemy,  but,  having  to  cut  his  way  to^the  water's  edge, 
he  essayed  to  jump  into  a  boat,  and  stepping  short, 
fell  into  the  water,  when  the  weight  of  his  armour 
drowned  him. 

The  stream  of  conquest  flowed  apace   after   the 
death  of  Yermak,  whose  name  will  live  for  ever  in 


TOMSK.  603 

Russia  as  one  of  the  greatest  benefactors  of  that 
country.  Tomsk  was  founded  in  1604,  and  from 
thence  new  expeditions  were  formed  by  the  Cossacks, 
with  the  result  that  Yeneseisk  was  founded  in  1619, 
and  a  few  years  afterwards  the  city  of  Krasnoiarsk. 
Crossing  the  Yenisei  river,  the  invading  army 
advanced  to  the  shores  of  Lake  Baikal,  and  in  1620 
attacked,  and  conquered,  the  populous  nation  of  the 
Bouriattes.  Then,  making  for  the  north,  they 
founded  Yakoutsk  in  1632,  and  subjugated,  though 
not  without  diflSculty,  the  powerful  Yakout  tribe. 
Having  accomplished  this,  the  troops  crossed  the 
Aldan  mountains,  and  in  1639  reached  the  sea  of 
Okhotsk.  Thus  in  less  than  seventy  years  was 
added  to  the  Russian  Empire  a  territory  as  large  as 
the  whole  of  Europe,  whose  ancient  capital  was 
Tobolsk — thus  was  an  empire  comprising  nearly  the 
half  of  Asia  conquered  and  annexed  by  a  simple 
Cossack  and  five  hundred  men.  Ought  not  this  to 
warn  us  that  Russian  enterprise  is  not  a  thing  to 
be  thought  lightly  of;  that  in  most  cases  what  a 
Russian,  be  he  noble  or  moujik,  has  said  "  I  will 
do,"  he  does,  be  it  at  the  cost  of  his  life. 

In  the  public  gardens  of  Tobolsk  is  a  monument 
of  grey  granite,  about  fifty  feet  in   height,  which 


604  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

was  erected  in  1839.  On  the  base  is  inscribed,  in 
gold  letters,  the  words,  "  To  Yermak !  Conqueror 
of  Siberia." 

It  was  getting  dusk  when  we  landed,  and,  hiring 
droshkis,  we  set  out  with  the  Sourikoffs  for  a 
drive  through  the  town.  The  Tobolsk  droshki 
is  a  terrible  vehicle,  a  miniature  jaunting  car 
built  to  hold  two,  and  drawn  by  ahorse  three  or 
four  times  too  large  for  it.  There  is  nothing 
to  hold  on  by,  not  even  a  guard-rail,  and  as  the 
streets  of  Tobolsk  are  anything  but  smooth,  and 
our  yemstchik  drove  at  full  gallop,  it  became  a 
matter  of  considerable  difficulty  to  stick  to  the 
ship,  especially  as  my  companion  was  a  somewhat 
stout  man,  and  took  up  more  than  two-thirds 
of  the  seat.  I  was  not  sorry  when,  the  drive  over, 
we  arrived  at  the  summit  of  the  hill  whereon 
stands  the  governor's  and  archbishop's  palaces, 
and  cathedral,  the  latter  a  fine  building  in  the 
Byzantine  style. 

The  city  of  Tobolsk  has  a  population  of  about 
30,000,^    and    covers    an    area    four   versts     long 

^  It  is  curious  to  note  that,  in  1761,  the  Abbe  d'Autroche  found 
the  population  of  Tobolsk  to  be  15,000  souls  ;  in  18G1,  exactly  one 
hundred  years  later,  it  was  only  1 6,000. 


TOMSK.  605 

by  about  three  broad.  Although  mauy  stone 
buildings  are  springing  up  in  various  parts  of  the 
city,  most  of  those  in  the  lower  town  or  mercantile 
parts  are  of  wood.  Mauy  of  the  streets,  though 
narrow  and  irregular,  are  paved  completely  with 
wooden  planks  laid  crosswise,  so  that  the  town 
presents  a  tidier  and  less  unfinished  appearance  than 
either  Tomsk  or  Irkoutsk,  I  narrowly  escaped  being 
roughly  handled  when  walking  in  the  streets  of  the 
lower  town,  when,  all  unconsciously,  I  threw  away 
the  lighted  end  of  a  cigarette,  a  proceeding  which 
instantly  surrounded  me  withhalf  a  dozen  infuriated 
inhabitants.  It  took  Sourikoff  all  his  time  to 
appease  them,  and  assure  them  that  I  was  ignorant 
of  the  ways  of  the  place,  and  a  stranger  to  Siberian 
customs  and  manners,  though,  as  I  assured  him, 
I  had  frequently  done  the  same  thing  in  other 
towns,  and  no  notice  had  been  taken.  As,  however, 
Tobolsk  has  been  totally  destroyed  by  fire  no  less 
than  thirteen  times,  one  can  scarcely  wonder  at  the 
anxiety  shown  by  the  inhabitants. 

The  shops  were  good.  Though  it  was  past  nine 
o'clock  when  we  returned  to  the  lower  town  from 
visiting  the  public  gardens  and  Yermak's  monu- 
ment, most  of  them  were  open,  and  the  streets  well 


606  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

lit  and  crowded  with  people.  Perhaps  one  of  the 
most  curious  sights  in  Tobolsk  is  the  "  Kamaoulie 
Koloko,"  or,  translated  literally,  "Bell  with  the  ear 
torn  off."  Though  so  late,  we  managed  to  get  a  . 
sight  of  this,  which  is  kept  in  a  kind  of  shed 
close  to  the  archbishop's  palace,  and  of  which  a 
brief  account  may  not  be  without  interest  to  the 
reader. 

Russia,  during  part  of  the  fourteenth  century,  was 
governed  by  the  Czar  Boris  Godorinoff,  who  by  the 
way  had  no  right  whatsoever  to  the  crown.  The  line 
which  had  then  reigned  for  nearly  one  hundred  and 
fifty  years,  a  long  time  in  those  days,  was  represented 
by  one  Prince  Dimitri,  a  boy  of  twelve  years  old,  but 
on  the  death  of  Dimitri's  father  in  1593,  Boris  raised 
a  revolt,  with  the  result  that  he  was  proclaimed 
Czar,  and  the  boy  Dimitri  deposed  from  his  right- 
ful position.  The  seat  of  government  was  then  at 
Boglitch,  near  the  site  whereon  now  stands  the  city 
of  ISTijni  Novgorod,  and  to  this  place  Dimitri  was 
sent,  so  as  to  be  under  the  immediate  supervision 
of  the  peasant  king.  The  latter,  seeing  an  evident 
movement  in  favour  of  Dimitri,  feared  that  if  allowed 
to  live,  the  youthful  pretender  might  one  day  prove 
troublesome,   and  determined  to  have  him  assassi- 


TOMSK.  607 

nated.  "While  crossing  the  market-place,  therefore, 
the  boj  was  seized  by  some  soldiers  and  stabbed  in 
broad  daylight,  while  the  Czar  contemplated  the 
scene  from  the  windows  of  the  palace,  to  see  the 
effect  ic  might  have  on  the  population,  who, 
however,  evinced  not  the  slightest  disposition  to 
protect  the  young  prince  or  avenge  his  murder. 
Only  one  dissentient  tongue  was  heard,  and  that  an 
iron  one.  A  priest  happening  to  see  the  crime  from 
the  cathedral  belfry,  and  being  a  partisan  of  the 
Dimitri  line,  commenced  to  toll  the  great  bell  for  the 
repose  of  the  young  prince's  soul,  a  bell  which  had 
always  been  regarded  as  sacred,  and  was  only  rung 
on  the  occasion  of  the  assembling  of  the  council  or 
the  coronation  or  death  of  a  Czar.  Infuriated  at  the 
priest's  interference,  Boris  gave  orders  that  he  should 
at  once  be  tortured  and  executed.  Nor  was  this 
enough.  The  bell  itself  should  suffer,  and  as  soon 
as  the  ringer  had  expiated  his  offence,  and  lay  a 
mangled  corpse  on  the  open  market-place,  the  bell 
was  unhung,  carried  down  from  the  belfry,  and 
placed  beside  the  body  of  its  ringer.  It  was 
then  beaten  with  clubs  and  sticks  by  the  entire 
populace,  Boris  at  their  head  ! 

But  the  quaintest  part  of  the  story  is  to  come. 


608  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Siberian  exiles  in  those  days  were  as  a  rule  tortured 
before  setting  out  for  their  place  of  imprison  aient. 
The  punishments  inflicted  were  more  or  less  severe, 
according  to   the  nature   of   their    crime,  but   all, 
without    distinction,    had    their    nostrils   torn   off 
with  red-hot  pincers.     This  was  the  distinguishing 
mark  of  the  exile.     The  public  flogging  over,  Boris 
decided  that  the  offending  bell  should  be  placed  on 
a  cart  and  exiled  to  Tobolsk,  where  it  has  remained 
ever  since.     There  was  one  difficulty,  though,   the 
bell  had  no  nostrils.     But  the   czar  was  a  man  of 
infinite  resource,  and,  not  without  a  certain  grim 
humour,    so    had    one    of    the    hangers    removed 
instead !     The  "  Kamaoulie  Koloko"  is  nearly  all  of 
silver,  and  has  a  deep,  beautiful  tone.     The  Tobol- 
skians  are  exceedingly  proud  of  their  trophy.     One 
sees  bells  everywhere ;  as  signs  over  the  inn  doors, 
as    toys,    work-boxes,    handles    of    walking-sticks, 
cigarette-cases,  even  sleeve-links  are  made  in  imi- 
tation of  the  famous  "iron  exile  of  Boglitch."     It 
is  as  celebrated  in  its  way  as  the  Tun  of  Heidelberg 
or  Lion  of  Lucerne. 

Though  a  rising  place  as  far  as  art  and  com- 
merce is  concerned,  Tobolsk  is  very  unhealthy, 
and   is    surrounded    with    vast    stagnant   marshes. 


TOMSK.  609 

fruitful  sources  of  malaria  aud  fever.  There  is  no 
spring,  and  the  summer  is  hot,  dull,  and  rainy, 
the  sun  at  this  season  of  the  year  being  seldom  seen 
for  more  than  two  days  together.  Scarlet  fever 
and  diphtheria  are  seldom  absent,  and  in  the  prison, 
which  is  built  to  accommodate  three  thousand,  but 
is  often  half  as  full  again,  there  are  occasionally 
severe  epidemics  of  small-pox  and  typhus.  Cholera 
is,  however,  unknown.  The  winter  is  perhaps  the 
healthiest  season,  but  even  then,  when  in  most  parts 
of  Siberia  the  sun  is  shining  in  a  cloudless  sky, 
Tobolsk  is  wreathed  in  damp  mists  from  the  fever 
swamps  surrounding  it.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a 
more  melancholy  and  depressing  place  than  it  must 
be  in  the  summer  months,  and  prisoners  say  they 
would  rather  be  sent  to  Nertchinsk  for  ten  ^^ears, 
than  have  to  spend  two  at  Tobolsk,  although  it  is 
so  much  nearer  home  and  European  Russia.  A 
curious  discovery  was  made  here  in  18 02  b}''  the 
superintendent  of  police.  Some  excavations  were 
being  made  by  some  workmen  in  the  lower  town, 
when  they  came  upon  a  number  of  large  sub-* 
terranean  passages  running  in  all  directions  and 
obstructed  every  fifty  yards  or  so  by  massive  iron 
gates.     N"ews  of  this  was  at  once  telegraphed  to 

K  r 


610  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Petersburg,  when,  to  the  surprise  of  the  inhabitants, 
a  message  came  back,  ordering  that  the  places 
excavated  should  be  closed  up  at  once.  As  the  order 
came  direct  from  the  czar,  there  was  nothing  to  be 
said,  and  the  existence  of  the  tunnels,  or  how  they 
ever  came  there,  remains  a  mystery  to  the  present 
day.  The  passages  are  said  to  exist  only  in  the 
lower  town.  There  are  none  under  the  hills 
where  the  government  buildings  are  situated, 
which  inclines  some  to  the  belief  that  they  were 
built  by  some  former  czar,  to  be  used  in  case  of  a 
revolt.  Still  it  must  be  rather  unpleasant  for  the 
good  people  of  Tobolsk  to  live  over  a  possible 
dynamite  mine  ! 

The  voyage  from  Tobolsk  to  Tiumen  was  plea- 
sant enough.  Narrowed  to  a  width  of  scarcely 
two  hundred  yards,  the  blue  river  meanders 
lazily  through  green  fields,  past  pretty  villages, 
neatly  built  and  prosperous-looking,  while  the 
ruddy,  happy-looking  peasantry  at  work  in  the 
riverside  meadows  were  a  contrast  to  the  dirty, 
sullen-looking  population  further  east.  A  few 
hours  before  reaching  Tiumen,  however,  all  vegeta- 
tion disappeared  as  if  by  magic,  and  we  entered  a 
sterile,  sand}^  desert.     "  What  a  paradise  for  sports- 


TOMSK.  611 

men !  "  said  Sourikoil  as  we  watclied,  from  the  deck 
of  the  steamer,  the  flocks  of  geese  and  ducks,  and 
other  wild  fowl,  wheeling  backwards  and  forwards 
over  the  arid  plain.     The  sky  was  black  with  them. 

About  midday  on  the  28th  of  September,  a 
glittering  speck  appeared  on  the  horizon,  which 
presently  developed  into  a  confused  mass  of  stone 
and  wooden  buildings,  spires  and  golden  domes. 
Two  hours  later  we  had  moored  alongside  the  busy 
quay  and  crowded  wharves  of  Tinmen,  realizing  to 
the  full  that  our  journey  was  now  practically  over, 
for  there  within  one  hundred  yards  of  us  was  the 
railway-station  and  just  beyond  it  the  luxurious- 
looking  Pullman  car,  which  was  to  bear  us  to 
Ekaterinburg  and  thence  over  the  Oural  Mountains 
to  Perm.  The  whistling  and  puffing  of  the  loco- 
motive made  one  feel  almost  at  home  again.  We 
forgot,  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  that  we 
were  still  in  Asia,  and  many  a  weary  mile  from 
Old  England ! 

The  line  from  Tinmen  to  Ekaterinburg  has  only  been 
built  two  years,  and  belongs  to  a  private  company. 
The  cars  are  all  open  to  each  other,  on  the  American 
principle,  the  second  class  being  every  bit  as  good 
as  the  first  class  on  the  Midland  or  Great  Northern 

li  r  2 


612  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Jlciilway  in  England,   and  the  fares  absurdly  low. 
That  from  Tinmen  to  Perm,  a  distance  of  nearly  five 
hundred  miles,  is  only  twenty-eight  roubles,   first- 
class  (under  37.  sterling),  and  I  can  safely  say  that  I 
have  never  in  any  country  travelled  so  luxuriously. 
The    stations   are  of  stone,  that  at  Tiumen  being 
built  in  the  centre  of  a  large  and  beautifully  kept 
garden.     It  reminded  one  of  a  railway-station    in 
a  German  Spa,  so  neat  and  beautifully  kept  were 
the    gi^avel-paths    and     flower-beds,    the    fountains 
and    iron  seats    under  the  lime-trees.     As  for  the 
refreshment-room,     it     was      equal      to      any     in 
France,  and  far  better  than  any  I  have  ever  seen 
in    England.      Marble    floors,    tables    spread   with 
snowy  cloths  and  glittering  with  plate  and   china, 
neat,  white-aproned  waiters,  and  a  pretty  barmaid 
presiding  over  the  huge  sideboard,  with  its  tempting 
array  of  caviare,  pickled  salmon,  i^a^^"*  defoie  gras, 
and  forests  of  champagne  and  liqueur  bottles,  was  a 
strange  scene  for  Asia.     It  was  certainly  one  of  the 
most  agreeable  disappointments  of  our  voyage,  and 
after  a  capital  dinner  a  la  carte,  washed  down  by  an 
excellent  bottle  of  Medoc,  coffee,  and  kummell,  we 
came  to  the  conclusion  that,  however  behindhand 
they    may    be    in    other     matters,    the    Russians 


TOMSK.  61.3 

certainly  do  understand  the  art  of  railway  tra- 
velling. The  train  was  not  leaving  till  9  p.m., 
which  gave  us  time  for  a  stroll  round  the  town. 
Cab  fares  in  these  parts  are  not  ruinous.  The 
distance  from  the  railway-station  to  the  town 
(about  three  miles)  costing  us  under  one  shilling 
English  money. 

Tiumen  is  a  bare,  unfinished-looking  place,  with 
a  population  of  thirty  thousand,  and  is  situated  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Toura,  a  smaller  branch  of 
the  Irtish.  In  the  centre  of  the  town  is  a  plain,  a 
dusty  waste  in  summer  and  muddy  swamp  in  winter, 
about  three  miles  square.  This  is  surrounded  on 
three  sides  by  wooden  and  brick  buildings.  In  the 
centre  is  a  cluster  of  rougrh  wooden  sheds  and  canvas 
booths,  which  is  dignified  by  the  name  of  "  Bazaar," 
where  vodka,  provisions  of  all  sorts,  clothes,  and 
agricultural  implements  are  sold.  Hard  by,  a  cir- 
cular building,  built  of  rough  planks,  and  covered 
with  gaudy  posters  representing  impossible  men  per- 
forming still  more  impossible  feats,  was  pointed  out 
to  us  with  evident  pride  by  an  inhabitant,  as  the 
circus.  "  There  would  be  a  performance  that  night," 
said  our  new  acquaintance,  who  spoke  a  few  words  of 
Prench.     "  Why  did  we  not  stay  for  it  and  go  on  the 


614  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

next  day  ?  and  he  would  show  us  round  Tiumen 
after  dark."  But  we  declined  the  offer  with  thanks. 
He  was  a  dirty,  rough-looking  fellow  in  Moujik 
kaftan  and  high  boots,  and  did  not  inspire  con- 
fidence. "  Then  perhaps  your  excellencies  would 
like  to  visit  a  prison  barge.  One  arrived  this 
morning,  and  is  empty,"  was  the  next  suggestion. 

"We  accepted  this  offer,  and  accompanied  our 
friend,  when  the  mystery  was  solved.  He  was  a 
Polish  exile,  who,  having  done  his  time  at  Kara, 
had  been  permitted  to  return  to  Tiumen,  for  the 
remainder  of  his  life.  Here  he  managed  to  scrape 
up  a  living  b}^  doing  odd  jobs  as  porter,  droshki- 
driver,  and  what  not.  He  had  seen  better  days,  he 
told  us,  and  knew  Paris  and  London  well,  having 
once  been  employed  as  waiter  in  an  Italian  restaurant 
in  the  latter  city,  and  had  he  kept  away  from  Peters- 
burg and  politics,  would  now  be  living  an  honest 
and  comfortable  life.  How  many  poor  wretches  in 
Siberia  could,  I  wonder,  say  the  same  thing ! 

Most  of  the  convict  barges  are  of  the  same  size, 
while  all  are  on  the  same  principle.  The  one  we 
visited,  The  Irtish,  was  about  two  hundred  and 
fifty  feet  in  length,  by  forty  in  width,  the  upper 
deck   being   supported  by   two   large    deck-houses, 


TOMSK.  615 

one  of  whicli  formed  a  hospital  and  dispensary,  tlie 
other  quarters  for  the  officers  of  the  convoy,  and 
exiles  belonging  to  the  noble  or  privileged  class. 
No  objection  was  shown  by  the  sentry  to  our  going 
on  board.  Indeed  we  were  not  even  asked  for  our 
passports. 

I  was  certainly  agreeably  surprised.  The  cells 
were  sweet  and  clean,  though,  I  must  add,  they 
had  not  been  occupied  for  more  than  a  month,  the 
vessel  having  been  towed  back  empty  from  Tomsk 
in  preparation  for  her  next  cargo  in  the  spring. 
"  You  should  visit  one  of  these  ships  on  her  arrival 
at  Tomsk,"  said  our  guide,  with  a  sinister  smile. 
"I  do  not  think  then  you  would  be  quite  so 
impressed  with  the  cleanliness  and  comfort.  The 
voyage  is  seldom  made  without  at  least  five  per 
cent,  dying  of  typhus,  and  who  can  wonder  ? 
Human  beings  were  never  intended  to  be  herded 
together  like  swine." 

The  large  iron  cage  on  deck  amidships,  in  which 
the  convicts  are  allowed  to  take  exercise,  certainly 
did  give  one  rather  the  idea  of  a  menagerie,  and 
more  fitted  for  the  reception  of  monkeys  than 
human  beings  ;  and  considering  that  its  dimensions 
were  only    seventy-five    feet    long   by  forty   wide, 


616        FROM  PEKIX  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND. 

and  that  these  prison  ships  carry  eight  hundred  a 
trip,  certainly  seemed  rather  wanting  in  its  arrange- 
ments for  fresh  air.  Companion-ladders  led  down 
from  this  into  the  sleeping-quarters,  of  which 
there  were  three,  ranging  in  length  from  forty 
to  seventy  feet,  with  a  uniform  width  of  forty 
feet,  and  a  height  of  about  seven.  One  of  these 
cabins  is  given  up  for  the  accommodation  of  women 
and  children,  the  others  occupied  by  the  men. 
Through  the  centre  of  each  runs  longitudinally 
two  tiers  of  double  sleeping-platforms,  upon 
which  the  prisoners  lie  athwart-ships  in  four 
closely  packed  rows,  with  their  heads  together 
over  the  line  of  the  keel.  These  sleeping-plat- 
forms are  made  of  wooden  boards.  There  are 
not  even  wooden  pillows,  but  prisoners  are  not 
debarred  from  making  use  of  their  great-coats  for 
that  purpose,  or  any  linen  bags  or  cloths  they  may 
have  about  them.  Indeed,  all  the  prisoners  we  met 
seemed  to  carry  exactly  what  they  liked,  from  a  tin 
saucepan  to  a  gingham  umbrella. 

"We  got  rid  of  our  guide  with  some  difficulty,  for 
he  was  anxious  that  we  should  visit  the  prison  under 
his  auspices.  This  we  thought  wise  to  decline,  not 
relishing  the  idea  of  being  *'  detained  on  suspicion," 


TOMSK.  617 

as  we  probably  should  have  been,  by  the  Tiumen 
authorities,  if  seen  lurking  round  the  prison  gates 
in  the  society  of  a  "  discharged  Katorgi."  A 
couple  of  roubles,  -however,  consoled  him,  and  we 
left  him  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  muddy 
road,  making  deep  obeisances  and  calling  down 
numberless  blessings  on  the  heads  of  the  "  Ingliski 
gospodin."  Passing  the  same  spot  two  hours  later, 
we  found  him  flat  on  his  back  by  the  roadside,  dead 
drunk,  with  two  empty  vodka  bottles  beside  him  ! 

Tiumen  must  be  a  cheap  place  to  live  in,  judging 
from  the  price  of  provisions  and  grain.  Beef  and 
mutton  are  as  cheap  again  as  in  most  parts  of 
England,  while  wheat,  which  is  always  cheap, 
became  in  1887  a  veritable  drug  in  the  market,  and 
was  selling  at  Semipalatinsk,  in  Southern  Siberia, 
for  eight  kopeks  a  pood.  One  speculator  from  that 
city  went  to  the  expense  of  exporting  a  quantity  to 
Vernoe,  four  hundred  miles  off,  on  the  borders 
of  China,  but  then  only  managed  to  get  twenty-five 
kopeks  a  pood,  the  harvests  having  been  equally  good. 
He  had  only  got  rid  of  about  half,  when  the  earth- 
quake occurred,  which  the  reader  may  recollect 
destroyed  the  whole  city,  and  more  than  half  the 
population  in  September,  1887. 


618  FEOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    EY    LAND. 

Many  people  are  under  the  impression  that  the 
Oural  Mountains  are  of  great  altitude,  and  the 
scenery  very  grand.  Though  the  length  of  the  chain 
is  something  over  one  thousand  seven  hundred 
miles,  its  highest  peak  does  not  attain  to  more 
than  six  thousand  feet,  and  at  the  point  where 
the  line  crosses  them,  barely  two  thousand  feet 
above  sea-level.  Xo  part  of  the  Ourals  is  per- 
manently covered  with  snow.  Hard  by  the  town 
of  Ekateniburg,  by  the  side  of  the  G-reat  Post- 
Road  to  Siberia,  is  a  large  stone  pillar,  on  one  side 
of  which  is  carved  the  word  "  Europe,"  upon  the 
other  "Asia,"  and  this  marks  the  boundary  between 
the  two  quarters  of  the  globe.  There  is  probably 
no  spot  in  the  whole  breadth  and  length  of  Siberia 
more  full  of  painful  associations  than  this,  for  no 
less  than  eighteen  hundred  thousand  exiles  have 
passed  it  since  1878,  more  than  half  a  million  men, 
women,  and  children  since  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century.  The  base  of  the  pillar  is  covered 
with  inscriptions,  letters  rudely  carved  by  those 
who  have  here  looked  their  last  on  their  native 
land.  It  is  the  custom  to  make  a  halt 
and  allow  the  exiles  to  bid  good-bye,  many  of 
them   for   ever,    to  Europe.     Travellers  no  longer 


TOMSK.  GIO 

pass  the  spot,  now  that  the  railway  has  obviated 
the  long,  lonely  drive  from  Perm  to  Tinmen.  The 
frontier  on  the  line  is  marked  by  three  stations, 
at  intervals  of  ten  miles  or  so,  "Asia,  Onral,  and 
Europe."  At  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
29th  of  September,  we  passed  hij  rail  from  one 
quarter  of  the  globe  into  another,  and  reached  at 
mid-day  the  town  of  Ekaterinburg. 

We  here  bade  adieu,  with  much  regret,  to  the 
Sourikoffs,  who  were  proceeding  direct  to  Perm, 
and  took  up  our  quarters  at  the  comfortable 
Amerikanske  Gostinza,  or  American  Hotel,  so  called, 
perhaps,  because  but  two  Americans  have  ever  set 
foot  in  the  place.  It  was  evident  that  we  had 
left  Asia.  The  broad,  stone-paved  streets  and 
boulevards,  the  handsome  hotels,  private  houses 
enclosed  in  large  well-kept  gardens,  and  last,  but 
not  least,  the  well-dressed  men  and  women  in 
the  streets,  were  signs  that  we  had  done  with 
sombre,  sad  Siberia  for  good  and  all.  Ekaterin- 
burg was  the  first  really  civilized  place  we  had  seen 
since  leaving  Shanghai,  it  seemed  ages  ago,  and 
here  for  the  first  time  since  leaving  Pekin  we 
enjoyed  the  unwonted  luxuries  of  a  real  bath,  and  a 
clean  bed  with  sheets  and  pillow-cases. 


620  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

The  neighbourhood  of  Ekaterinburg,  which  has  a 
population  of  twenty-five  thousand  inhabitants,  is 
rich  in  minerals  and  precious  stones.  Among  the 
former  iron  preponderates ;  and  there  are  many 
Englishmen  settled  here  working  it.  It  seemed 
strange  to  hear  one's  own  tongue  again  spoken 
in  the  streets  and  hotels,  and  to  read  in  many 
cases  the  names  of  the  latter  and  of  shopkeepers 
written  in  French  over  their  doors.  The  jewellers 
were  almost  as  wearying  and  importunate  as  the 
Cinghalese  sapphire-sellers  at  Colombo.  We  had 
scarcely  been  in  our  room  at  the  hotel  half  an 
hour  before  we  were  assailed  by  a  crowd  of  cla- 
mouring dealers,  who  would  not  be  denied  ;  but 
insisted,  though  we  were  performing  our  ablu- 
tions in  a  state  of  nudity,  in  laying  out  their  wares 
on  the  floor,  till  the  drugget  was  covered  with  a 
glittering  mass  of  gems,  among  which  were  beryls, 
topaz,  aquamarines,  and  chrysolites.  Amongst 
them  were  also  one  or  two  Alexandrites,  the  recently 
discovered  stone  which  shows  two  colours,  crimson 
and  green,  the  former  by  night,  and  the  latter  by  day. 
It  derives  its  name  from  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
and  has  also  been  found  in  Ceylon  of  late  years. 
The  stones  were  of  moderate  prices,  but  our  funds 


TOMSK.  621 

were  too  low  to  permit  of  our  making  any  invest- 
ments, perhaps  luckilj  for  ourselves,  for  here,  as  in 
Colombo,  there  are  many  worthless  imitations. 

We  left  Ekaterinburg"  on  the  afternoon  of  the  30th 
of  September  for  Perm,  whence  we  were  to  take  the 
steamer  down  the  Kama  and  Volga  rivers  to  Nijni 
Novgorod.  Though  tlie  railway  between  the  two 
cities  is  worked  by  a  different  company  to  that  we 
had  come  by  from  Tinmen,  we  found  the  comfort  in 
every  respect  as  great  as  on  the  other  line.  Each 
car  had  its  lavatory,  heating  apparatus,  and  comfort- 
able sleeping  fauteuils.  At  e?ery  third  or  fouiih 
station  we  found  an  excellent  buffet,  open  throughout 
the  night.  At  one  of  them,  Nijni  Tagilsk,  where 
we  stopped  to  dine,  the  dining-room  of  the  station 
would  not  have  disgraced  a  first-class  hotel  in 
Paris  or  London.  Down  the  centre  of  the 
brilliantly  lighted  room  ran  a  long  table,  covered 
with  snowy  table-cloth,  and  glittering  with  silver 
plate  and  glass.  The  waiters  were  all  in  even- 
ing dress,  with  spotless  shirt  fronts  and  white 
ties,  and  as  they  served  one  with  an  excellent 
dinner  of  four  courses  and  dessert,  it  was  difficult 
indeed  to  realize  that  one  was  yet  but  a  few  miles 
out  of  Asia.     It  was  the  same  everywhere.     There 


622  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

are  twenty  odd  stations  between  Ekaterinburg  and 
Perm,  at  every  one  of  which  was  laid  out,  no  matter 
what  hour  of  the  day  or  night,  a  cold,  if  not  hot, 
meal,  or  towards  the  chilly  morning  hours  steaming 
bowls  of  cafe-an-lait  or  tea,  with  dainty  rolls  and 
tiny  glasses  of  vodka  and  cognac  to  cheer  the  inner 
man.  We  passed  Neviansk  towards  sunset,  a  pic- 
turesque village  embowered  in  pine  forest,  and  sur- 
rounded by  three  large  lakes,  about  two  hours  out 
of  Ekaterinburg.  Neviansk  is  used  as  a  summer 
resort  and  watering-place  by  the  inhabitants  of 
the  city,  when,  during  June  and  July  the  heat  and 
dust  become  unbearable. 

On  the  1st  of  October,  towards  6  a.m.,  we  woke 
and  looked  out  of  the  frost-dimmed  windows,  to 
find  ourselves  in  a  new  world.  Wooden  rails  and 
enclosures  had  given  way  to  thick-set  hedges  and 
small  fields,  plank  huts  to  stoue  houses  with  cor- 
rugated iron  roofs,  a  mineral,  in  this  district,  as 
cheap  as  pine  or  fir.  The  pine  and  birch  forests 
had  entirely  disappeared.  We  were  now  passing 
large  plains  of  cultivated  land,  neat  farm  build- 
ings surrounded  by  gardens  and  orchards,  and 
occasionally  a  village  or  town,  approached  by  a 
poplar-lined   road,   winding   through   the  deserted 


TOMSK.  G23 

fields.  The  landscape  between  Nijiii  Tagilsk  and 
Perm  miglit  well  be  mistaken  for  that  lying  between 
Boulogne  and  Amiens  on  the  Chemin  de  Per  du 
Nord. 

The  Oaral  trains  are  as  punctual  as  they  are 
comfortable,  and  we  reached  Perm  to  the  minute 
at  the  appointed  time,  9  a.m.  The  scene  at  the 
station  was  all  confusion.  The  boat  was  only 
advertised  to  leave  at  noon,  and  the  scurry  and 
excitement  to  get  on  board  seemed  very  un- 
necessary. "We  here  had  to  encounter  an  unex- 
pected difficulty.  Men  were  rushing  about  the 
platform  with  pink  and  yellow  handbills,  each 
advertising  a  steamer  bound  for  Nijni  Novgorod, 
both  boats  to  leave  at  the  same  hour — noon.  The 
question  was  which  to  go  by,  for  both,  outwardly, 
looked  exactly  the  same,  though  flying  different  com- 
pany flags.  There  was  no  one  to  help  us,  and  my 
small  stock  of  Russian  was  absolutely  useless  in 
the  uproar.  In  vain  I  button-holed  policemen, 
railway  porters,  soldiers — in  vain  gesticulated 
and  shouted,  "  Loutchshi  parohode  ?  "  (Best  boat  ?) 
It  was  no  use,  so  we  determined  to  do  as  we  had 
always  done  in  the  event  of  uncertainty,  toss  up. 
The  steamer  Perm  was  the  one  our  coin  settled  on. 


264  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

and,  fortunately  for  us,  the  right  one.  The  other 
boat,  the  Nljnl  Novgorod,  was  a  wretched  tub, 
and  arrived  at  its  destination  only  five  days  after 
us,  when  we  were  already  comfortably  settled  in 
Moscow. 

Perm  is  not  a  prepossessing  city,  though  the 
day  we  saw  it  was  perhaps  not  a  favourable  one. 
A  dense  fog  shrouded  everything  in  damp  white 
mist,  through  which  loomed  the  dome  of  the  cathe- 
dral, and  great,  gaunt  warehouses  lining  the  banks 
of  the  river.  A  steady  drizzle,  which  had  com- 
nienced  on  our  arrival  and  continued  ever  since 
with  steady  persistency,  extinguished  all  our  hopes 
of  visiting  the  town,  and  we  were  glad  to  take 
refuge  out  of  the  cold  and  fog  in  the  brilliantly 
lighted  though  somewhat  stuffy  saloon  of  the 
steamer,  where  several  of  the  passengers  (of  which 
there  were  about  a  hundred)  had  already  settled 
down  to  a  good  square  meal  of  stchi  (cabbage  soup), 
sterlet,  and  beefsteak.  A  somewhat  substantial 
menu  for  nine  in  the  morning  ! 

It  was  a  relief  to  find  that,  by  paying  a 
few  roubles  extra,  we  could  secure  a  cabin  to 
ourselves,  and  one  considerably  roomier  than 
those    generally   met    with    in    ocean-going     ships. 


TOMSK.  625 

At  mid-day,  punctual  to  the  minute,  the  bell  was 
rung,  tlie  whistle  sounded,  and  in  less  than  ten 
minutes  the  city  of  Perm  was  lost  in  a  shroud  of 
mist,  and  we  were  steadily  ploughing  our  way 
through  the  broad  yellow  stream  to  the  last  stage 
of  our  homeward  journey,  Nijni  Novgorod. 


B    S 


CHAPTER  XII. 

PEEM   TO    CALAIS. 

The  Perm  was  a  large  and  comfortable  vessel,  replete 
with  every  modern  appliance,  even  to  a  piano  and 
electric  bells,  and  I  doubt  whether  one  would  have 
found  a  better  cuisine  on  a  Cunarder  or  "White 
Star  Liner.  But,  despite  her  gorgeous  fittings,  she 
was  filthily  dirty,  and  her  cabins  infested  with 
vermin,  so  much  so,  that  sleep  at  night  was  out  of 
the  question.  This  was  probably  due  to  the  large 
number  of  deck  passengers  she  carried,  among  them 
a  large  number  of  Kirghiz  Tartars,  fine,  well-built 
fellows, and  a  striking  contrast  to  their  squat,  stumpy 
brothers  in  Mongolia.  Many  wore  the  native  dress  : 
a  kind  of  woollen  night-cap,  which  can  be  pulled 
down  over  the  ears  and  neck  in  cold  weather,  and 
loose  baggy  trousers,  stuffed  into  short  butcher-boots. 
A  loose  coat  worn  over  the  shirt,  open  at  the  neck 
and  wide  at  the  sleeves,  with  a  belt  round  the  waist, 
completed  the  costume.     In  winter  a  short  pelisse 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  627 

of  sheep's  wool  (called  Poloushouba),  is  also  worn, 
the  wool  iawards.  The  Kirghiz  Tartars  are  Maho- 
metans, and  their  grave,  reserved  demeanour  was  a 
strange  contrast  to  the  buffoonery  and  skylarking 
proclivities  of  our  merry  little  friends  of  the  Gobi 
Desert. 

The  ordinary  daily  life  of  the  Kirghiz,  however, 
differs  but  little  from  that  of  the  latter.  The  tents 
of  the  former  are  exactly  the  same  shape,  and  of 
the  same  material,  as  those  we  saw  in  Mongolia. 
The  Kirghiz,  too,  is  quite  as  gluttonous  and  filthy 
in  his  habits  as  the  Mongolian  Tartar,  and,  unlike 
most  Mahometans,  is  given  to  getting  drunk 
on  the  sly.  In  one  point  only  do  they  differ :  the 
zealous  and.  watchful  eye  that  a  Kirghiz  keeps  upon 
his  womankind  would  be  ridiculed  by  the  happy-go- 
lucky,  trusting  Mongol,  and  yet  I  fancy,  with  all 
his  care,  that  the  wife,  or  wives,  of  the  former 
are  really  not  a  whit  more  virtuous  than  the  ladies 
of  Mongolia,  for  all  their  yashmaks  and  assumed 
modesty. 

We  experienced  cold  and  rainy  weather  all  the 
way  to  Kazan,  which  was  reached  on  the  3rd  of 
October. 

The  scenery  of  the  Kama  and  Volga  rivers  differs 
s  s  2 


628  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

little  from  that  of  the  Obi,  and  though  the  latter 
would  be  called  a  fine  river  in  Europe,  it  appeared 
dwarfed,  in  our  eyes,  into  insignificance  after  the  huge 
lake-like  Yenisei  and  Obi.  The  navigation  of  the 
Volga  is  in  parts  extremely  dangerous,  but  the  risk 
small,  for  dangerous  channels  are  well  marked 
with  buoys,  and  after  dark  by  barges,  on  board  of 
which  huge  bonfires  are  kept  blazing  all  night. 
On  clear  nights  this  had  a  pretty  effect,  and  the 
avenues  of  tire  reflected  in  the  dark  water,  the  green 
and  red  lights  of  passing  steamers,  towing  huge, 
shadowy  lighters  up  or  down  stream,  the  dark, 
starlit  sky,  and  voices  of  distant  boatmen,  as  they 
trolled  out  some  river-song,  was  impressive  and 
picturesque.  But  the  nights  were  getting  very 
cold,  and  we  did  not  spend  much  of  our  time  on 
deck,  preferring  even  the  stuffy  saloon,  with  its 
smoky  atmosphere  and  smell  of  stale  food,  to  the 
cutting  north-easter  outside. 

We  stayed  at  Kazan  six  hours.  This  city,  which 
may  be  called  the  true  boundary  between  European 
and  Asiatic  Russia,  is  about  seven  versts  from  the 
landing-stage,  with  which  there  is  communication 
by  tramway.  As  a  town,  Kazan  is  unique.  The 
ancient    Tartar    capital,   it  has  outwardly  kept  up 


PERM    TO   CALAIS.  629 

many  of  its  oriental  customs  and  all  its  Eastern 
appearance.  The  veiled  faces  of  tlie  women,  the 
fierce,  swarthy  Tartars  in  wild,  barbaric  costume, 
bristling  with  daggers  and  cartridge-belts,  the 
mosques,  minarets,  and  oriental-looking  houses, 
mingling  in  strange  incongruity  with  the  modern 
stone  houses  of  the  Russian  population,  a  la  mode 
de  Paris,  four  stories  high,  with  balconies,  porte 
cocheres,  and  carved  fa9ades,  made  one  almost 
wonder  whether  the  long  journey  from  China  had 
not  turned  one's  head  and  indelibly  mixed  Europe 
and  Asia  in  our  minds,  even  to  the  objects  around 
us.  But  the  streets  of  Kazan  are,  notwithstanding 
their  varied  architecture,  regular,  well-built,  and 
gas-lit.  There  is  not  much  trade,  the  exports  being 
principally  hides,  tallow,  and  iron.  Costly  weapons 
are  made  by  the  Tartars,  swords,  pistols,  and 
scimitars,  with  hilts  and  barrels  inlaid  with  gold 
and  silver. 

The  best  society  in  Kazan  is  equal  to  that 
of  Moscow  or  Petersburg,  some  Russian  families 
having  settled  here  since  the  days  of  the 
expulsion    of   the    Tartar    dynasty.     A    charming 

person,  Madame ,  who  was  proceeding  to  Vienna 

on  a  visit  to   her  sister,  joined  us   here.     She  had 


630  FEOM    PEKTN   TO    CALAIS    BY   LAND. 

been  married  four  years,  and  had  during  tliat  time 
only  once  left  her  husband's  chateau  in  the 
environs  of  Kazan. 

Madame was  a  native  of   Moscow,   spoke 

French  like  a  Parisian,  and  sang  like  an  angel. 
From  this  point  to  ISTijni  Novgorod  was  pleasant 
enough,  for  we  managed,  by  dint  of  bribery,  to  get 
the  piano  removed  from  the  crowded  saloon  to  a 
smaller  cabin  on  the  lower  deck,  and  had  a  couple 
of  pleasant  musical  soirees  together,  the  quartette 
consisting  of  our  three  selves  and  the  captain,  who 
sang  Volga  boat-songs  in  a  sweet  tenor  voice,  and 
was,  though  Siberian,  a  charming  and  well-educated 

man.     Madame ,  though  she  had  been  banished 

for  so  long  from  the  civilized  world,  was  a  delightful 
companion.  Her  knowledge  of  England  and  English 
literature  was,  however,  somewhat  limited.  I 
asked  her,  on  one  occasion,  if  she  liked  English 
authors  as  well  as  French,  "  No,"  she  replied,  "  I 
can't  say  I  do.  There  is  such  a  sameness  about 
English  writing ;  though  it  is  true,  I  have  only 
read  two  English  books."  On  askmg  her  which, 
she  replied,  " '  The  London  Journal '  and  '  Bow 
Bells ' ! ''  No  wonder  she  had  not  the  highest 
opinion  of  British  authorship  ! 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  631 

I  was  quite  sorry,  when  we  reached  Nijni 
Novgorod,  to  bid  the  little  lady  adieu.  One  is 
not  often  blessed  with  such  a  pleasant  travelling 
companion  in  civilized  regions,  much  less  in  these 
unfrequented  byways  of  Europe.  Nor  did  she 
seem  the  least  dismayed  at  the  long  journey  before 
her  alone  and  unprotected ;  but  Russian  women  are 
the  best  travellers  in  the  world. 

We  passed,  just  before  reaching  Nijni  Novgorod, 
a  large  white  paddle-steamer,  built  on  the  American 
principle,  bound  for  Astrakhan,  on  the  Caspian. 
She  was  going  full-  seventeen  knots  an  hour,  and 
churning  up  the  muddy  water  in  a  way  that  made 
the  Perm  roll  uncomfortably  till  she  was  far  astern 
of  us.  We  also  passed  at  least  fifty  barges  between 
Kazan  and  Nijni,  laden  with  petroleum,  from  the 
Baku  oil-wells  on  the  Caspian. 

The  Great  Fair  *  was  just  over  at  Nijni  Novgorod, 
and  we  had  no  difficulty  in  getting  rooms  at  the 
Hotel  de  la  Poste,  an  excellent  inn,  which  but  ten 
days  before  had  been  crammed  from  basement 
to  attic  with  tourists  from  Moscow  and  Peters- 
burg. 

*  The  transactions  at  the  fair  of   Nijni  Novgorod  are   said  to 
amount  yearly  to  over  four  millions  sterling. 


632  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Tlie  city  stands  on  a  high  hill,  at  the  confluence 
of  the  Volga  and  Oka  rivers,  and  in  fair  time 
presents  a  strange  and  unique  spectacle.  The  fair 
is  held  on  the  left-hand  bank  of  the  Oka  river, 
being  connected  with  the  town  by  a  long  floating 
bridge,  but  at  this  season  the  river  itself  is  so 
covered  with  boats  and  barges,  anchored  for  the 
sale  of  goods,  as  to  look  like  dry  land. 

"  The  scene  from  the  town  heights  opposite," 
says  an  eye-witness,  "  is  at  the  time  of  the 
fair  indescribable."  There,  embraced  within  the 
compass  of  a  glance,  is  the  great  fair  of  Nijni 
Novgorod.  A  huge  flat  sandy  plain,  flanked  by 
two  great  rivers,  is  covered  over  with  houses  of 
different  colours,  mostly  red  and  yellow,  made  of 
brick,  wood,  and  matting ;  millions  of  this  world's 
richest  merchandise,  stored  or  strewn  in  every 
direction ;  churches,  mosques,  and  theatres,  rising  in 
their  midst,  three  hundred  thousand  human  beings 
more  or  less  engaged  in  buying,  selling,  trafficking, 
pushing,  jolting,  hurrying  in  every  direction  ;  barges 
warped  along  the  quays  of  two  rivers,  still  busily 
engaged  in  unloading  their  exhaustless  cargoes.  The 
river  at  your  base  is  the  Oka,  and  running  at  right 
angles  to  it,  at  the  point  exactly  opposite  to  where 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  633 

you  arc,  the  still  miglitier  Volga  mixes  its  waters 
with  it.  On  reaching  the  quays  below  U  low 
wooden  bridge,  very  much  like  that  which  spans 
the  Rhine  at  Mayence,  crosses  the  Oka  at  a  point 
about  a  verst  distant  from  its  embouchure.  This 
is  the  only  means  of  communication,  except  by 
water,  between  the  town  and  the  fair.  Behold 
crowds  on  foot,  in  carriages,  and  on  horseback ; 
droves  of  bewildered  cattle  driven  by  bearded,  wild- 
looking  men  in  gaudy  coloured  barbaric  dress, 
carts  heavily  laden  with  jars,  casks,  sacks,  boxes, 
and  unwieldy  lengths  of  timber;  grave-looking 
orientals  with  flowing  robes  and  Astrakhan  liats, 
alone  imperturbable  in  the  midst  of  the  thronging 
crowd  ;  the  din,  the  trampling,  the  confusion,  all 
vastly  aggravated  by  the  mounted  Cossacks,  who, 
placed  at  intervals  along  the  line  on  their  restive 
little  horses  to  keep  order,  add  greatly  to  the 
general  confusion.  Add  to  all  this  that  after  it  has 
been  raining  all  day — and  it  often  does  rain  at 
Nijni  Novgorod — the  roads  are  not  ankle  deep 
nor  knee  deep,  but  hip  and  thigh  deep  in  slush  and 
mud,  and  a  picture  of  this  strange  city  during  fair- 
time  is  before  you. 

"  I  was  struck,"  says  the  same  writer,  "  with  the 


034  FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

number  of  '  Traktirs '  or  eating-houses  of  the 
poorer  sort.  It  is  no  light  matter  to  supply  the 
daily  wants  of  two  to  three  hundred  thousand 
people.  Formerly  this  was  left  to  private  enter- 
prise, but  whilst  the  caterers  grew  rich,  the  people 
suffered.  Not  a  year  passed  without  an  epidemic 
of  some  sort  breaking  out  among  the  throng  which 
attended  the  fair.  This  was  owing  partly  to  the 
food,  which  was  notoriously  bad,  and  partly  to  the 
air,  which  in  the  absence  of  drainage  or  any 
sanitary  arrangements  was  pestilential.  The 
Russian  Government  grappled  boldly  with  this 
double  evil.  To  meet  the  danger  of  unwholesome 
food,  they  established  in  different  parts  of  the  fair 
cheap  eating-houses,  where  for  the  sum  of  eight 
kopeks  (about  twopence  three  farthings)  the  poorer 
classes  could  obtain  a  substantial  meal,  consisting 
of  *  Shtchi '  or  cabbage  soup,  black  bread  ad 
libif/um,  and  a  favourite  porridge  called  '  Kasche.' 
They  can  also  obtain  for  three  kopeks  (about  a 
penny)  enough  tea  to  give  them  half  a  dozen  cups 
of  that  national  beverage  and  three  pieces  of  sugar. 
Since  these  precautions  have  been  taken,  no  serious 
epidemic  has  broken  out  at  the  Nijni  '  Yar- 
mark.' 


PERM   TO    CALAIS.  6S5 

"  Althougli  one  can  scarcely  mention  an  article 
great  or  small,  European  or  Asiatic,  that  may  not 
be  purchased  at  Nijni  Novgorod  during  the  months 
of  August  and  September,  the  staple  commerce  is 
in  tea,  sugar,  iron,  cotton,  silk,  and  furs  of  all 
kinds.  Most  of  the  tea  sold  at  Nijni  is  black  tea, 
yellow  and  white  teas  are  also  sold,  but  in  retail, 
and  an  enormous  quantity  of  brick  tea  is  also 
annually  imported.  This  is  called  '  Kirpitchni ' 
and  is  largely  drunk  by  the  Kalmuks  and  Kir- 
ghiz. The  duty  on  Canton  tea  is  heavier  than 
that  on  Kiakhta  or  '  overland '  tea  by  a  consider- 
able amount.  Probably  if  it  were  not  for  the 
popular  prejudice  that  sea-transported  tea  loses  its 
flavour,  the  amount  of  overland  tea  would  be 
considerably  less  than  it  is.  With  reference  to  this 
opinion  the  following  is  the  current  doctrine  held 
by  the  most  experienced  Russian  merchants  on  the 
subject.  They  hold  not  exactly  that  the  sea  voyage 
injures  the  tea,  but  that  the  preparation  of  the  tea 
for  the  voyage,  viz.,  the  extra  drying  and  exposure 
to  the  air  which  it  has  to  undergo  in  order  that  it 
may  not  be  deteriorated  by  the  damp  atmosphere, 
does  undoubtedly  affect  its  flavour,  so  that  indirectly 
it  comes  to  the  same  thing.     "  The  tea  depot,"  says 


636  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

Mr. ,  "  is  certainly  the  most  picturesque  part  of 

the  fair ;  it  would  be  still  more  so  if  the  Chinaman 
with  his  pigtail  could  be  seen.  But  there  are  no  China- 
men at  Nijni;  the  tea  and  the  Chinamen  part  company 
at  Maimachin,  near  Kiakhta,  and  from  that  point  the 
trade  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  Russians." 

The  fur  quarter  is  perhaps  the  next  most  interest- 
ing part  of  the  fair,  long  galleries  of  booths,  where 
miles  of  bear  skins,  wolf  skins,  fox  skins,  beaver 
skins,  and  even  sheep  skins  hangup  on  either  side  of 
your  passage.  The  more  valuable  skins  and  furs 
are  carefully  packed  away  in  drawers  and  not 
exposed  to  the  vulgar  gaze.  Among  these  are  the 
beautiful  blue  and  silver  fox  and  beaver.  The 
silver  fox  so  called  because  its  coat  is  sprinkled  with 
white  silvery  hairs,  is,  next  the  beaver  and  sable,  the 
most  costly  fur  that  can  be  bought.  A  single 
perfect  belly  of  the  silver  fox  will  fetch  (at  Nijni) 
as  much  as  one  hundred  roubles.  Among  the 
skins  sold  for  warmth  and  not  show,  that  of 
the  reindeer  is  perhaps  the  most  popular.  They 
are  brought  mostly  from  the  northern  districts  of 
Vologda  and  Archangel,  and  are  of  three  degrees 
of  merit  and  value.  The  "  Pijick,"  or  skin  of  the 
animal  at  one  month  old,  is  the  best;  that  of  the 


TERM    TO    CALAIS.  637 

''Oleni,"  above  nine  months  old,  is  the  least 
valuable. 

Two  other  fairs  are  held  at  Nijni  Novgorod,  but 
they  are  small  and  uninteresting.  The  one  held  in 
the  month  of  January,  on  the  ice,  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Oka  river,  is  devoted  to  the  selling  and  buying 
of  wooden  wares,  such  as  toys  and  boxes.  Great 
numbers  come  in-  on  this  occasion  from  the 
neighbouring  villages,  and  it  is  looked  upon  by  the 
peasants  more  as  an  occasion  of  feasting  and 
merry-making,  than  one  of  business.  In  1864  the 
ice  on  which  the  booths  and  "  Traktirs  "  were  con- 
structed, gave  way,  and  a  number  of  men,  women, 
and  children,  and  horses  were  drowned.  The  other 
fair  is  held  on  the  6th  of  July,  and  is  exclusively 
for  the  sale  of  horses. 

In  May,  the  Volga  frequently  overflows  its  banks 
to  a  depth  of  several  feet,  and  covers  the  site  of  the 
fair,  in  anticipation  of  which  the  lower  storeys  of 
the  warehouses  and  buildings  are  cleared,  and  to 
cleanse  them  before  July  is  one  of  the  first  things 
to  be  done  by  the  owners.  This  may  account  for  a 
good  deal  of  the  sickness  that  exists  in  a  very  hot 
summer  or  early  autumn.  The  fine  for  smoking 
in   the    streets,     during   fair    time,    is    twenty-five 


638  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

roubles.  This  is  rigidly  enforced,  and  a  second 
offence  means  imprisonment  without  the  option. 
The  arrangements  for  protection  against  fire  are 
excellent.  Not  only  on  land,  but  on  the  river  also, 
powerful  fire-engines  are  stationed,  and  numerous 
little  hand-engines  are  posted  at  the  most  inflam- 
matory quarters.  In  case  of  fire,  within  three  minutes 
of  the  alarm-bell,  a  dozen  large  engines  could  be  on 
the  spot  at  any  part  of  the  fair,  and  being  surrounded 
by  the  Volga  and  Oka  rivers,  there  is  no  lack  of 
water. 

The  town  of  Nijni  itself  is  well  built,  and  its 
broad,  steep  streets  paved  with  asphalte  in  many 
places.  They  are  lit  by  gas,  and  some  of  the  prin- 
cipal thoroughfares  by  electric  light.  Altogether, 
we  were  well  pleased  with  the  city,  the  first  we  had 
yet  seen  without  a  single  wooden  building  to  mar 
the  beauty  of  stone  buildings,  that  would  not  have 
disgraced  London  or  Paris,  and  yet  forty  years  ago 
there  were  scarcely  a  dozen  stone  houses  in  the  place ! 

Leaving  Nijni  Novgorod  on  the  evening  of  the 
5th  October,  the  following  morning  saw  us  in 
Moscow,  and  comfortably  installed  at  that  luxu- 
rious but  expensive  hotel,  the  "  Slavenski  Bazar," 
an  establishment  almost  equal  in  comfort   to  the 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  G39 

Hotel  Bristol  in  Paris,  but  about  twice  as  dear  in 
its  charges.  The  restaurant  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the 
finest  in  the  world.  In  the  centre  of  the  latter  is 
a  large  round  tank  covered  with  white  water-lilies, 
and  fringed  by  reeds  and  riverside  flowers,  in 
which  swim  lazily  to  and  fro  huge  sturgeon  and 
sterlet,  brought  daily  from  the  Volga,  and  which 
are  chosen  and  picked  out  by  divers  with  a  small 
net  a  couple  of  hours  before  they  are  eaten,  thus 
ensuring  perfect  freshness. 

The  plan  or  general  panorama  of  Moscow  is  not 
unlike  that  of  Paris,  the  city  having  its  nucleus  in 
the  celebrated  "  Kremlin,"  which  I  was  somewhat 
disappointed  in,  perhaps  because  it  had  so  often 
been  thrust  down  one's  throat  as  a  beautiful  sigfht. 
The  word  "  Kremlin"  is  derived  from  the  Tartar 
language,  in  which  it  means  "  fortress,"  every  town 
of  importance  in  Russia  having  its  "  Kremlin,"  great 
or  small.  The  walls  of  the  Moscow  Kremlin  are 
about  seven  thousand  three  hundred  feet  in  circum- 
ference, and  enclose  the  Imperial  palace,  arsenal, 
and  treasury,  besides  three  cathedrals,  a  monastery, 
a  convent,  and  the  tower  of  Ivan  the  Great,  which 
latter  is  about  three  hundred  feet  in  height,  and 
commands,  on  a  clear  day,  one  of  the  finest  views 


640  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

in  the  world.  At  the  foot  of  the  tower  stands  the 
"Tsar  Kolokol,"  or  "king  of  bells,"  which  weighs 
nearly  two  hundred  tons,  stands  twenty-six  feet  high, 
and  has  a  circumference  of  sixty-eight  feet.  This 
bell  dates  back  as  far  as  the  year  1674,  when  it  was 
suspended  from  a  wooden  beam  at  the  foot  of  the 
tower,  from  which  during  a  fire  it  fell  in  1706. 
Its  fragments  lay  on  the  ground  until  the  reign  of 
the  Empress  Anne,  by  whose  orders  it  was  again 
recast  in  1 733.  By  the  falling  of  some  heavy  rafters 
during  another  fire,  in  1737,  or,  according  to  some 
accounts,  owing  to  an  imperfection  in  the  casting 
caused  by  jewels  and  other  treasures  having 
been  thrown  into  the  liquid  metal  by  the  ladies  of 
Moscow,  a  piece  in  the  side  was  knocked  out ;  and 
the  bell  remained  buried  till  the  year  1886,  when  it 
was  placed  on  its  present  pedestal  by  order  of 
Mcholas  I.  Moscow  is  essentially  a  city  of  bells 
and  churches.  Among  the  former  are  some  of  the 
sweetest  toned  ones  I  have  ever  heard.  This  is 
due  in  a  great  measure  to  the  large  amount  of  gold 
and  silver  used  in  the  alloy.  Morning,  noon,  and 
night  the  bells  of  Moscow  are  never  silent.  Wake 
up  at  four  in  the  morning,  and  you  will  hear 
at   least  a   dozen   churches    (there   are   over   four 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  641 

liundred)    tolling   for   some  religious  service,  or  the 
repose  of  a  soul. 

There  are  three  cathedrals  within  the  Kremlin : 
the  Annunciation,  where  the  Czars  are  baptized 
and  married  ;  the  Assumption,  where  they  are 
crowned ;  and  the  Archangel  Michael,  where  they 
are  interred.  The  latter  is,  perhaps,  though  not 
the  richest,  the  most  curious,  for  it  contains, 
ranged  round  the  walls,  the  coffins  of  all  the 
Czars  reigning  between  1333  and  1696.  Enter- 
ing suddenly  from  the  sunshine,  it  was  some  time 
before  we  discovered  that  we  were  surrounded 
by  some  forty  coffins,  each  covered  with  a  dark 
crimson  velvet  pall,  bearing  a  gold  embroidered 
cross.  Near  the  centre  altar  stood  the  bier  of  little 
Prince  Dimitri,  murdered  by  order  of  the  Czar  Boris. 
Part  of  the  face,  which  looks  of  the  consistency  of 
dark  leather,  is  exposed,  and  this  is  kissed  daily  by 
many  thousands  of  the  faithful.  A  service  was 
going  on,  at  one  of  the  smaller  chapels,  the  bright 
gleam  of  light  around  the  Ikonostase  and  white  and 
gold  vestments  throwing  the  rest  of  the  building  into 
deeper  gloom,  while  the  melancholy  dirge  which  the 
priests  were  droning  out  for  the  repose  of  some  dead 
monarch,  heightened  the  effect  of  the  gloomy  scene. 

T   t 


642  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

The  richest  church  in  Moscow,  if  not  the 
handsomest,  is  the  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption, 
which  dates  from  a.d.  1479.  This  cathedral  was 
pillaged  by  the  French  in  1812.  It  still  contains, 
notwithstanding,  treasure  and  relics  of  fabulous 
wealth.  Some  of  the  pictures  are  literally  covered 
with  diamonds  and  other  precious  stones;  one,  a 
picture  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  having  attached  to  it 
jewels  worth  thirty  million  roubles.  Among  the 
relics  is  one  of  the  nails  used  at  the  crucifixion, 
and  a  portion  of  the  garment  worn  by  our  Saviour. 

The  Kremlin  may  be  described  as  a  town  within 
a  city,  and  a  very  quiet  dull  town,  for  there  is  but 
little  life  or  movement  in  its  cobbled  grass-grown 
streets.  To  a  student  of  architecture,  however,  it 
must  be  interesting,  for  the  Byzantine,  Gothic, 
Arab,  and  even  Chinese  styles  are  there  mixed  in 
glorious  confusion.  The  palace,  though  it  contains 
magnificent  reception-rooms,  and  millions  of  roubles 
have  been  spent  on  its  restoration,  is  an  ugly, 
commonplace  building,  and  detracts  a  good  deal 
from  the  picturesque  appearance  of  the  churches 
and  buildings  around  it,  while  the  arsenal  and 
treasury  are  positively  hideous.  Ranged  along  the 
walls  of  the  former  are  the  cannon  taken  from  the 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  643 

French.  There  are  eight  hundred  and  seventy-five 
pieces  in  all,  each  bearing  a  name  upon  their  breech 
thus  :  "  Le  Valliant,"  "  La  Ravissante,"  "L'Eclair," 
&:c.  It  was  then,  apparently,  customary  to  christen 
cannon  like  ships  in  the  present  day. 

On  leaving  or  entering  the  Kremlin  by  the  Spas- 
skoi  Gate,  every  one  must  uncover.  The  Russians 
are  tetchy  on  this  point,  and  a  stranger  infringing 
the  rule  would  have  a  bad  time  of  it.  The  legend 
runs  that  Napoleon  I.  is  the  only  man  that  ever 
dared  ride  through  the  gate  with  his  hat  on ; 
but  that,  even  in  his  case,  a  gust  of  wind  sent  it 
flying  before  he  was  well  through,  much  to  the  rage 
and  discomfiture  of  "  Le  Petit  Caporal." 

The  name  of  the  latter  is,  strange  to  say,  revered 
by  all,  and  loved  by  some  in  the  Holy  City,  and  it 
is  rare  to  hear  a  Russian  display  animosity  towards 
France.  There  is  rather  a  feeling  of  pity  for  the 
thousands  of  unhappy  soldiers  who  perished,  frozen 
to  death,  on  the  bleak  plains  around  Moscow, 
during  the  retreat  from  that  city,  a  disaster  that 
gave  rise  to  the  Russian  expression,  "  I  feel  as  cold 
as  a  Frenchman  !  "  The  Muscovite  excels  even  the 
Parisian  in  politeness.  No  one  ever  dreams  of 
entering  a  shop  or  restaurant  covered,  and  the  very 

T  t  2 


644  FKOM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BY    LAND. 

beggars  in  the  streets  salute  each  other  with  the 
air  of  nobles.  On  the  whole  I  have  seldom  seen  a 
city  I  liked  more  on  a  short  acquaintance  than 
Moscow,  perhaps  for  the  reason  that  it  is  utterly 
unlike  any  other  I  have  ever  beheld.  It  is  fairl}^ 
clean,  for  Russia,  but  although  the  two  principal 
thoroughfares  are  asphalte-paved,  the  smaller  streets 
would  disgrace  a  third-rate  country  town  in  England, 
and  are  in  summer  ankle  deep  in  dust,  in  winter  a 
sea  of  mud  and  mire. 

But  although  this  city  is,  next  to  Constantinople, 
the  earthly  paradise  of  the  sight-seer,  I  will  not 
trouble  the  reader  with  our  peregrinations  round  a 
city  which  has  been  so  often  and  so  graphically  de- 
scribed. It  may  be  heresy  to  say  so,  but  I  must 
confess  that  the  sight  which  impressed  me  most  was 
the  poorly  furnished  room,  with  its  camp-bedstead 
and  two  rough  wooden  chairs,  in  the  hotel,  where 
brave  Skobeleff  breathed  his  last,  and  under  what 
deplorable  circumstances ! 

We  were  not  anxious  to  prolong  our  stay,  for 
winter  arrived  with  unpleasant  suddenness,  on 
the  10th  of  October.  The  barometer,  which  had  at 
2  p.m.  been  up  to  70°,  had  sunk  at  7  p.m.  to  only 
two    degrees    above    zero,    and    by    nine    o'clock 


PERM    TO    CALAIS.  645 

snow  was  falling  in  thin  white  flakes.  The  next 
morning  it  was  nine  or  ten  inches  deep,  and  gangs 
of  men  were  at  work  in  the  streets  flattening  it  down 
for  sledge  traffic. 

I  look  back  on  "Warsaw  as  the  one  bright  spot 
in  our  journey.  It  will  be  long  ere  I  forget 
the  bright  sunny  morning  that  we  came  upon  its 
white  palaces  and  gardens,  its  squares  and  boule- 
vards, after  a  tedious  railway  journey  from  Moscow. 
Apart  from  the  cheerful  look  of  the  town  and  popu- 
lation, one  felt  one  had  reached  Europe  at  last. 
The  first  thing  that  strikes  one  on  arriving  at  this 
so-called  down-trodden  city  is  the  preponderance 
of  the  female  element ;  the  second,  how  unusually 
good-looking  that  element  is.  I  think  one  sees 
more  pretty  women  in  five  minutes  in  Warsaw  than 
in  half-an-hour  in  any  other  European  capital, 
London  thrown  in.  An  ill-dressed  Warsaw  woman 
is  an  anomaly.  Even  the  lower  orders  seemed 
to  know  how  to  put  their  clothes  on,  for  the 
Polish  woman  has  a  cachet  of  her  own;  has  the 
"  chic "  of  a  Parisienne,  with  the  beauty  of  a 
Viennese,  for  nearly  all  are  tall  and  well-made, 
with  good  figures  and  graceful  carriage.  It  is 
apparently  the  fashion  among  the  "  smart  "  ladies 


646  FROM    PEKIN    TO    CALAIS    BV    LAND. 

ofWarsawto  let  small  pieces  of  metal  into  the  heels 
of  their  boots,  which  make  a  clear  ringing  sound  as 
they  walk,  and  the  effect  (on  a  pretty  woman)  is 
not  unpleasing. 

As  Moscow  follows  Petersburg^  in  fashions  and 
customs,  so  does  Warsaw  Vienna.  The  Russian 
tonofue  in  Warsaw  is  seldom  heard.  No  lono-er  is 
the  sacred  ilcon  seen  in  apartments  and  bedrooms. 
Tea  is  drunk  in  cups,  7iot  glasses ;  but  coffee  is 
the  favourite  beverage  of  all  classes.  We  had 
evidently  done  with  Russia  for  good,  though  the 
town  swarmed  with  the  Czar's  troops  in  their  ugly 
pea-soup-coloured  coats  and  white  caps.  Here, 
unlike  most  Russian  and  Siberian  towns,  the  soldiers 
are  encouraged  to  walk  about  and  show  themselves, 
but  I  do  not  think  I  saw  a  dozen  uniforms  the 
whole  time  I  was  in  Moscow. 

Reaching  Vienna  the  17th  of  October,  ten  days 
later  sees  us  rattling  along  in  the  eleven  o'clock  train 
from  Paris  for  Loudon,  via  Calais.  A  thick  haze 
hangs  over  the  Channel  as  we  approach  the  coast- 
The  sea  is  of  a  dirty  grey,  and  presents  a  very 
different  appearance  to  when  we  last  saw  it,  blue 
and  sparkling,  in  the  Gulf  of  Pechili !  It  is  with  a 
queer  but  pleasant  feeling  of  rest  and  relief  that  we 


TEEM   TO    CALAIS.  64 7 

leave  laud  at  last  to  step  on  to  the  broad  white  deck 
of  the  steamer  Victoria,  at  Calais.. 

"  Would  YOU  care  to  do  it  again?"  says  a  casual 
acquaiutauce  to  whom  we  have  narrated  our  adven- 
tures, if  such  they  may  be  called. 

"Not  for  ten  thousand  pounds,"  says  Lancaster, 
emphatically.  And  yet,  as  a  ray  of  sun  shines  out 
of  the  mist,  lighting  up  the  white  cliffs  of  England, 
brio^ht  augj'ur  of  the  comfort  and  civilization  we  are 
nearing,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  to  experience 
such  a  moment  as  this  is  well  worth  even  the 
discomfort  and  privations  that  have  attended  our 
long,  weary  voyage  from  Peldn  to  Calais  by  land. 


THE    END 


10 


N-^::-. 


40 


20  30°    ^40°      50   (50°    70°    80°  90    100°  110       120°    130      140        150°  U>() 

■  '  '  7 

/ 


Jl!031   I'KlvIN   TO  CALAIS 
15Y  LAM) 


■■>!  li..Ut.-  tl,Uy 


r  ..^r: 


■^kj, 


Omsk  i 


%         \ 


c 


re/ 


^1 


^ 


Ki\s  11  o  1  a  i-sV     . 
K/atisk 
Abak.-inKk-^iiiiie  IJcUiisW 


^T^?*- 


Tislit  oi..i 


f*  rf/ 


^^f-^^tiV 


-;:/^.*^^. 


t* 


. -^  -^  t;  ' 


iGeog-raphicalMilf 


I  English    Sl«t.>nle 


_j  RubbJAii  A't  rsts 
Fr<-jich  KUuinV 


30 


40' 


50 


GO 


70 


'\ 


)^0° 


90° 


INDEX. 


Abusansk,  360. 

Airak,  197. 

Alexandi-ites  (precious  stones),  620. 

Amherst  in  China,  Lord,  91. 

Amur,  steamer  on  the,  106. 

Angara   River,    the ;    its   current, 

367  ;  its  breadth,  481. 
Antelope,  the  Gobi,  219. 
Army,  the  Chinese,  75,  117. 
Atchinsk,  561 ;    its  cheerful  look, 

562 ;    the   blacksmiths'   quarter, 

563. 
Atkinson,  the    English    traveller, 

369. 
Axle,  a  broken,  558. 

"  Babington's  Curse,"  204. 
Baikal,  Lake,  362  ;  the  Holy  Sea, 

366 ;     hurricanes,    368 ;     steam 

communication,  370. 
Bain-Gol  Pass,  the,  301. 
Balanska3'a ;  the  axle  on  fire,  551. 
Bandits,  Siberian,  459  to  4t)3  ;  484 

to  486. 
Barge,  a  Prison,  614. 
Batouyeff,  M.,  145. 
Beetles,  edible,  168,  203. 
Beggars,  Chinese,  52,  53. 
"  Bell  with  the  ear  torn  off,"  the,  at 

Tobolsk,  606. 
Bell  of  Moscow,  the  Great,  640. 
Bell,  John,  the  English  traveller, 

2,  368. 
Berries,  Siberian,  as  food,  497. 
Birioubinsk,  discovery  of  gold  near, 

540. 


Black  Nihilists,  363,  404. 

Bogdanovitch,  M.,  his  collection  iu 
the  Irkoutsk  Museum,  426. 

Bogotolsk,  the  boundary  between 
Eastern  and  Western  Siberia, 
564. 

Bokovskaya,  post-station,  477. 

Bolshoi-Kosoul,  the  boundary  be- 
tween Eastern  and  Western 
Siberia,  564. 

Boris  Godorinoff,  the  Czar,  606  ; 
the  iron  exile,  608. 

Botolskaya,  post-station,  552. 

Boundary  between  Inner  and 
Outer  Mongolia,  217;  between 
Eastern  and  Western  Siberia, 
564  ;  between  Europe  and  Asia, 
618. 

Bouriattes,  the,  442  ;  their  civiliza- 
tion, religion  and  language, 
443  ;  conquered  by  the  Cossacks, 
603. 

Bread,  Siberian,  509. 

Breakfast  in  Siberia,  a,  349. 

Brick  tea,  151,  191,  298,  635 ;  see 
Tea. 

"  Brousniki,"  a  kind  of  bilberry, 
498,  594. 

Burroughe's  Straits,  in  the  Frozen 
Ocean,  465. 

"  Cage,"  the  Chinese  punishment 
of  the,  49. 

Cairo,  9. 

"  Called  Back,''  Siberia  as  de- 
scribed in,  387,  491. 


650 


INDEX. 


Camel,  the  Mongolian,  23,  221, 
223,  250,  301. 

Canal,  a  leviathan,  464 ;  M.  Sibera- 
koff,  465  ;  the  railway  as  a  rival, 
466. 

"  Cangue,"  the,  a  Chinese  punish- 
ment, 49. 

Caviare,  fresh,  575. 

Chaman  religion,  the,  429,  440, 
444. 

Champagne  in  Siberia,  sweet, 
414. 

Chang-Chia-Kow,  see  Kalgan. 

Chefoo,  a  Chinese  watering-place, 
25. 

Cherkoff,  Captain,  of  the  Cossacks, 
335. 

Chiarini's  travelling  circus  at 
Tientsin,  31. 

China,  1;  a  tea-garden,  20; 
fortune-telling,  22 ;  salt-mills, 
27  ;  coal-mines,  28,  141  ;  life  on 
a  house-boat,  31  to  40  ;  popula- 
tion, 38;  an  execution,  47;  pun- 
ishments, 49  ;  beggars,  52  ;  road.^ 
64,  93,  120 ;  examinations,  74 
the  arm}^,  75, 117  ;  a  funeral,  78 
the  women,  80 ;  pigtails,  81 
coinage,  82;  intoxication,  83 
food,  84;  gambling,  84 ;  cricket 
fighting,  85 ;  a  doctor,  85 ;  a 
medical  prescription,  86;  porce- 
lain, 86 ;  the  Emperor,  88 ;  the 
Queen  Eegent,  89;  the  Great 
Audience  Question,  91;  the 
Imperial  harem,  92 ;  a  railway, 
95;"  the  Great  Wall,  110,  126, 
144,  14S,  169;  amnle  Ht<-er,  115; 
an  inn,  121  ;  a  stove-bed,  122 ; 
irrigation,  125 ;  an  open-air 
theatre,  127 ;  poppies ;  140 ; 
religions,  159  ;  see  Pekin,  Shang- 
hai. 

Ching-Ming-Ting,  140. 

"Chow''  dogs,  84. 

Chukchee  tribe,  the,  434. 

Chulim  Eiver,  the ;  Siberakoff's 
waterway,  465. 

Cigarettes,  Russian,  598. 

Circus,  a  travelling,  31. 

Clocks,  sham,  in  Siberia  477. 


Coal-mines,  Chinese,  28,  141. 

Coinage,  Chinese,  82. 

Confucius,  the  temple  of,  at  Mai- 
machin,  296. 

"  Conversation  Siberienne,"    594. 

Convicts  in  Siberia,  363  ;  political 
prisoners  worse  off  than  crimi- 
nals, 364,  406, 408,  448.  449,  556  ; 
a  convict  barge,  371,  614  to 
616 ;  criminals  from  all  parts, 
372  ;  a  forger,  373  ;  prison  songs, 
374,  532 ;  a  remarkable  story, 
379 ;  a  dangerous  character, 
380;  a  Polish  exile,  401,  553; 
fixing  dates  of  past  events,  402  ; 
letters  for  Europe,  403 ;  the 
English  idea  of  Siberia,  404, 
406;  the  mines,  404,  405,  412, 
454,  540;  a  convoy,  406,  408, 
411,452,532.  559;  prisons,  363, 
409,  447,  449,  488,  491,  492; 
no  chance  of  escape,  410, 
489;  widl  treated,  411;  food, 
412,447;  costume.  412;  punish 
ment,  413  ;  a  dreadeil  spot,  436, 
609  ;  comparative  liberty,  448 ; 
female  exiles,  450,  452,  453, 
532,  559,  660,  592;  pioneers 
and  colonizers,  451 ;  "  exile 
by  administrative  process," 
453;  runaway  convicts,  459 
to  462,  480,  485,  507,  511, 
517;  Katorgi,^0\  a  prisoner's 
wife,  534, 1 536,  539;  a  sad  story, 
536  to  539. 

Cossacks,  the,  130,  263,  264,  346, 
407,  424,  428,  532. 

Courier,  a  Russian  Government, 
130,  362. 

Cricket-match  in  Shanghai,  a,  15. 

Cricket-fighting,  84. 

Custom  House,  a  Siberian,  375. 

Czar,  a  courier  of  the,  130. 


Da-Hux-Go,  179. 

Death  Lamas,  292. 

De  Staal,  M.,  3. 

Dickens,   the  works     of    Charles, 

157. 
Dimitri,  Prince,  606,  608,  641. 


INDEX. 


651 


Dinner  party  in   Siberia,  a,   8;>5, 

337,  399. 
Doctor,  a  Chinese,  85. 
Dogs,  edible,  84;  Mongolian,  206  ; 

wild   dogs  of   Kamchatka,  433, 

Ostiak,  586. 
Dombrowski,  M.,  a   Polish   exile, 

553. 
"  Droshki,"  a,  416,  577. 

Eclipse  of  the  sun,  an,  422. 

Eggs,  stale,  414. 

Ekaterinburg,  619;  minerals,  620. 

Evening  party  in  Sibei-ia,  an,  335, 
399,  549. 

Executions  in  China,  47  ;  a  "  sub- 
stitute,'' 49. 

"  Exile  by  administrative  pro- 
cess," 453. 

Exiles,  Siberian,  see  Convicts. 

Feet  of  Chinese  women,  the,  80. 
Ferry   over  the    Tola,    263 ;    the 

Iml,    317 ;    the     Selcnga,   355 ; 

the   Oka,   505  ;  the  Uda,    627 ; 

driving  on  board,  545. 
Flogging ;     the       "  knout ''     and 

"  plete,"  412,  413. 
Fortune-telling  in  China,  22. 
Fruit-growing  soil,  a,  364. 
Funeral,  a  Chinese,  78. 
Fungus,  an  intoxicating,  431. 
Furs ;  463,  636. 

Gadolovitch,  M.,  the  Whiteley  of 
Siberia,  557. 

Globe  Trotters,  4,  109. 

Gobi  Desert,  tbe  Great,  i.  22 
"  Shamo,''186  ;  scarcity  of  water 
188 ;  monotony,  193 ;  sheep 
202  ;  rats,  203  ;  mole-hills,  204 
the  Russian  mail,  204  ;  a  Lama 
206,  255 ;  the  Mongol  tongue 
208;  the  snnff  bottle,  210 
Mongol  tea,  211 ;  a  souvenir, 
213;  Mongol  women,  214,  257 
horsemanship,  216 ;  the  boun 
dary,  217;  sand  grouse,  218 
antelope,  219 ;  sport,  220 ;  death 
of  a   camel,    221 ;    thirst,    224 


sunstroke,  225;  a  sandstorm, 
229 ;  lost,  235 ;  transparent 
stones,  238 ;  a  freak  of  nature, 
241  to  244  ;  a  storm,  246  ;  a  run- 
away camel,  250 ;  palmistry, 
256;  beautiful  scenery,  262;  a 
land  of  milk  and  honey,  263 ; 
we  reach  Ourga,  267. 

Gold  in  Siberia,  396  ;  540. 

Great  fair  at  Nijui  Novgorod,  the, 
632  to  636. 

Great  Wall  of  China,  the,  110; 
offshoot  at  Nankow,  126 ;  at 
Kalgan,  144, 148  ;  its  dilapidated 
appearance,  169. 

Gribooshin,  M.,  tea-merchant,  324. 

Haiecutter,  a  juvenile,  425. 
Haldieva,  post-station,  567. 
Hares,  enormous,  310,  482. 
Heart-rending    story,    a,    536    to 

.>40. 
Honeymoon  in  Siberia,  a,  483,  499. 
Hong  Kong,  12. 
Honour  amongst  escaped  convicts, 

a  point  of,  518. 
Horsemanship,  Mongol,  216. 
Hotel  bill,  a  monstrous,  579. 
House-boat,  a  Chinese,  31 ;  nearly 

upset,  35 ;  our  crew,  36 ;  rats  and 

cockroaches,  37 ;  a  thunderstorm, 

40. 

Ignatiepf,  General ;  Governor  of 
E.  Siberia,  386,  552. 

the  Countess,  502. 

Ilinskaya,  wheel  on  fire  at,  543. 

Inn,  a  Chinese,  121  to  124. 

Irkoutsk,    385 ;    the    Government, 
386 ;  the  climate,  387 ;  the  "  Mos- 
kovskaya  Podovorie,"  388,  393 
the  streets  and  pavements,  389 
the  shops,   390;    costume,  391 
the    ladies,    392,  400;    military 
band,  393  ;  rudeness  and  vulgar- 
ity, 394;    the  gold-mining  mil- 
lionaires, 395 ;  the  trade-people, 
400;    the   Jeunesse    Doree,  402; 
the    svatchinen,    403 ;     evening 
amusements,  414;  the    market- 
place, 415  ;  the  "  droshki,"  416  ; 


652 


INDEX. 


the  boulevard,  417  ;  the  eclipse  of 
the  sun,  422  ;  a  barber's,  425  ; 
the  Museum,  426 ;  a  custom  of 
the  country,  455 ;  police  magis- 
trates, 456  ;  morals,  457  ;  the 
Opera,  468  ;  moderate  hotel  bill, 
469. 

"  Iron  exile  of  Boglitch,"  the,  608. 

Irtish,  the  river  ;  dangerous  navi- 
gation, 595 ;  desolate  scenery, 
596 ;  landslips,  599. 

Irul,  the  river,  301,  313. 

Ivan  II.,  the  conquests  of,  600. 

Ivanoff,  M.,  tea-planter,  145. 

"  Kalatchi,"  oatmeal  cakes,  582. 

Kalgan,  144;  Eussian  hospitality, 
146 ;  comfort,  148 ;  caravans, 
1-50 ;  resembles  an  Arab  town, 
152 ;  a  street  scene,  155 ;  the 
mission,  157  ;  locked  in,  161 ; 
partridge  shooting,  166  ;  wolves, 
175. 

"  Kamaoulie  Koloko,''  the,  606. 

Kamchatdales,  the,  429  to  431. 

Kamchatka,  426  to  428, 

Kansk,  447 ,  549. 

Karra,  363,  436. 

"  Kasche  ''  porridge,  634. 

Katorgi,  see  Convicts. 

Kazan,  627 ;  boundary  between 
European  and  Asiatic  Russia, 
628;  its  Eastern  appearance,  629. 

Kazanetse,  the,  580,  582. 

Kharra,  the  river,  301,  305. 

Kiakhta,  320  ;  the  inn,  322  ;  the 
town,  325;  the  bells,  326;  the 
college,  331 ;  the  cathedral,  332  ; 
tea-mercliants,  333 ;  gambling, 
334;  a  dmner  party,  336;  the 
market,  344;  the  barracks,  349; 
drink,  352. 

Kirghiz  Tartars,  the,  526. 

"  Kirpitchni,"  brick-tea,  635. 
Kluchevski,    Mount,    the    highest 

volcano  in  Kamchatka,  427. 
"  Klysti,"  or  Flagellants,  the,  419. 

"Knout,"  abolition  of  the,  412. 
Kolestnikoff,    M.,    postmaster    at 

Kalgan,  166. 
Kooash,  the  village  of,  120  to  125. 


Kootchoom  Khan,  600,  601. 

"  Koo-Too,"  the,  52. 

Kootookta,  the,  187,  268,  270,  285, 

288. 
Koriaks,  the,  429  to  432. 
Koumiss,  294. 
KoutouUk,  a  pleasant  evening  at, 

482  ;  the  ostrog,  493. 
Krasnoiarsk,  447 ;  red  cliffs,  556  ; 

fire  brigade,  557  ;  founded  by  the 

Cossacks,  603. 
Kremlin  of  Moscow,  the,  639  ;  the 

cathedrals,     641 ;     architecture, 

642 ;  cannon,  643. 
Kuriles,  the,  432 ;  queer  customs, 

433. 
Kwang-Su,  the  Emperor,  88. 
Kwi  La  Shai,  132. 

Ladt  Missionaries  in  China,  157. 

Lama,  a,  206  to  209,  255. 

Land.slips  in  Tobolsk,  599. 

Langtry,  a  portrait  of  Mrs.,  in  a 
Siberian  jDost-house,  359. 

Lassa,  the  capital  of  Tibet,  270. 

Lemmings,  a  migration  of,  434. 

Lew  Buah,  Captain,  163;  his  ad- 
ventures, 164 ;  we  say  good-bye, 
178. 

"  Ling  Chi,''  death  by  the,  47. 

List  of  post  -  stations  between 
Irkoutsk  and  Tomsk,  571. 

Listvenitz,  a  port  on  Lake  Baikal, 
362  ;  the  Custom  House,  375  ;  a 
watering-place,  378. 

Listvinskaya,  post-station,  507. 

Malta,  8. 

Maudlin  Tartars,  the,  76. 

"  Michel  Strogoff,"  2,  387.  _ 

"  Midshipman  Easy,"  the  triangular 

duel,  339. 
Missionaries  in   China,   ladies  as, 

1.57. 
Mole  hills,  204. 
"  Molokani "  or  milk-drinkers,  the 

sect  of  the,  419. 
Monastery  of  St.  Innocent,  477. 
Mongols,  the,  153 ;  on  a  journey, 

181 ;  population,    187 ;  lazy  and 

tilthy,  194, 198;  the  women,  195, 


INDEX. 


651 


214, 283  ;  a  yourt,  196 ;  t^liittony, 
197  ;  head-dress,  199 ;  dogs,  206  ; 
a  Lama,  207,  255 ;  the  language, 
208 ;  interior  of  a  tent,  209  ;  the 
snufP-bottle,  210 ;  a  cup  of  real 
Mongol  tea,  211 ;  a  conversation, 
212;  asupei-stition,213;  wooden 
guiding  rods,  224 ;  revolting 
specimens,  240 ;  tobacco,  248 ; 
cleaner  and  better  mannered, 
252;  a  belle,  257;  disposal  of 
the  dead,  259,  290;  "Moo-moo," 
260;  fear  of  death,  261;  few 
people  know  anything  of  the 
Mongols,  266;  in  Ourga,  282; 
grotesque  appeai-ance,  283 ; 
Golgotha,  290 ;  our  new  drivers, 
302;  wakeful  at  night,  304; 
water-supply,  306 ;  a  contented 
race,  SO-^. 

Monshafskaya,  the  village  of,  363; 
wild  fruit,  364. 

Moonlight  target-practice  of  the 
Russian  troops,  346. 

Moscow,  638 ;  the  "  Slavenski 
Bazar,"  639 ;  the  "  King  of  bells," 
640  ;  the  cathedrals,  641 ;  the 
Kremlin,  642 ;  politeness,  643 ; 
the  room  where  Skobeleff  died, 
644 ;  snow,  645. 

"  Moskovskava  Podovoi^ie,"  the,  at 
Irkoutsk,  388,  468. 

Mosquitoes,  304,  314,  436,  530. 

Mount  Lavinia,  11. 

Mule-litter,  a  Chinese,  115,  190. 

Music,  Siberian,  495. 

Musketry  by  moonlight,  346. 

Nankow,  125, 128. 
"  Napoleonists,"  the  sect  of,  418. 
Navigation  of  the  River  Irti-^h,  595. 
Nempshinof's  mausoleum,  333. 
Nertchinsk  gold-mines,  363. 
Neviansk,   the   watering-place    of 

Ekaterinburg,  622. 
Nicolaievsk  to  Tashkent,  a  journey 

from,  521. 
Nihilists,  see  Convicts. 
Nijni  Novgorod,  630;  Hotel  de  la 

Poste,  631 ;  the  Great  Fair,  632  ; 

eating-houses,  634;  overlaadtea, 


635 ;    furs,    636 ;     two     smaller 

fairs,  687 ;  fire  engines,  638. 
Nijni  Tagilsk,  diniuij-room  at  the 

railway  station,  621. 
Nijni  Udinsk,  447  ;  the  post-house, 

527  ;  the  town,  529. 

Obdorsk,  the  canal  to,  465. 

Obi  river,  the,  581  to  594. 

Oka,  toe  river,  504 ;  the  ferry,  505. 

Okhotsk,  "the  end  of  the  world," 
435. 

"  Oleni,"  the  skin  of  the  reindeer 
above  nine  months  old,  637. 

Ostiaks,  the,  AA%  585. 

Ostrogs,  363,  409,  447,  488  to  493. 

Oural  Mountains,  the,  618. 

Ourga,  267  ;  the  Mecca  of  Mon- 
golia, 269;  the  Russian  Con- 
sulate, 271 ;  the  European 
cemetery,  277;  depression,  280; 
Mongol  women,  282 ;  dogs  and 
beggars,  284;  a  Buddhist  temple, 
285 ;  the  huge  figure  of  Buddha, 
286;  Golgotha,  290;  the  death- 
chamber,  292;  Maimachin,  295; 
the  Temple  of  Confucius,  296. 

Ourouni,  213. 

Outfit,  our,  4. 

"  Palikao,"  the  bridge  of,  46. 

Palmistry  in  the  Desert,  256. 

Partridge  shootinsr,  167. 

Peiho,  the  river,  26  ;  landslips,  37  ; 
a  thunderstorm,  40. 

Pekin,  53 ;  dust,  54,  65 ;  we  lose 
ourselves,  55 ;  insolence  of  the 
Pekinese,  57,  83  ;  the  "  Legation 
de  France,''  58 ;  the  Hotel,  58 ; 
the  capital  of  China,  60;  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church,  62 ; 
the  gates,  63  ;  the  roads,  64,  93  ; 
the  climate,  ^^,  99  ;  smallpox, 
67;  dirt,  68;  the  English 
Embassy,  69,  96 ;  the  Russian 
Minister,  70;  the  Tartar  wall, 
72 ;  the  observatory,  73 ;  the 
Board  of  Examinations,  74; 
Mancha  soldiery,  75 ;  a  native 
cab,  76,  97  ;  a  street  scene,  77  ; 
a  funeral,  78;  the  Pekin  Gazette, 


654 


INDEX. 


79  ;  the  women,  80 ;  the  coinage, 
82  ;  the  "  Jeunesse  Doree,"  83  ; 
cricket-fightiug,  84 ;  a  doctor's 
shop,  85 ;  the  porcelain  shops, 
86  ;  the  Summer  Palace,  87  ;  the 
dogs,  97  ;  no  insect  pests,  97  ; 
the  European  population,  98 ; 
Jubilee  Day,  100  ;  a  disappoint- 
ment, 104  ;  our  departure,  113. 

Penang,  12. 

Perm,  623. 

Perm,  the,  623,  626. 

Petchora  River,  the ;  Siberakoff's 
canal,  465. 

Petrolf,  Colonel,  278,  280. 

Petropaulosk,  earthquakes  at,  428. 

Philipitch,  founder  of  the  Fla- 
gellants, 419. 

Photography  in  Siberia,  579. 

Piatko,  at  the  junction  of  the  Obi 
and  Chulim  rivers,  465. 

Pigtails,  81. 

"  Pijick,"  the  skin  of  the  reindeer 
at  one  mouth  old,  636. 

Pike,  the  Siberian,  278. 

"  Plete,"  punishment  by  the,  413. 

Podarojna,  a,  445. 

Poll-tax,  a,  496. 

Polovilnaya,  post-station,  482. 

Poloushouba,  the,  a  pelisse  of 
sheep's  woo],  627. 

Ponies,  Mongolian,  102,  118,  139, 
154,  199,201,216,  234. 

"  Poorgas,"  or  Kamchatka  snow- 
storms, 428. 

Poppies,  140. 

Porcelain,  Chinese,  86. 

Port  Said,  9. 

Posting  in  Siberia,  353 ;  our 
"Troika,"  354;  a  sti'ain  on  the 
nerves,  355 ;  a  ferry,  356 ;  in- 
adequate number  of  horses,  524; 
the  post-horses,  346. 

Postmaster,  a  Siberian,  348,  475. 

Prayer-wheels,  209,  281,  287,  385. 

Prescription,  a  Chinese,  86. 

Prisons,  see  Ostrogs,  Convicts, 
&c. 

"  Privatne,"  or  ordinary  podarojna, 
the,  446. 

Punishments,  Chinese,  49,  50. 


"  QuASs,"  323,  495. 
Quicksilver    in    Siberia,  mines  of, 
405. 

"  Eabchtck,"  the,  a  Russian  par- 
tridge, 593. 

Radovitch,  M.,  360,  376. 

Railways  in  China,  95  ;  in  Siberia, 
466,  575,  612;  in  Russia,  621, 
623. 

Rasgonnaia,  ostrog  at,  492. 

Rats,  edible,  84;  Gobi,  203; 
Lemmings,  434 ;  Siberia,  501. 

Red  Sea,  the,  10. 

Reiff  s  Russian  Grammar,  463. 

Reindeer  skins,  636. 

Renter II,  the,  597. 

Ribinskaya,  post-station,  551. 

Koute,  our,  3 ;  an  alternative,  105. 

Russian  language,  the,  463. 

Russians,  the,  145,  146,  294,  300. 

"Russians  of  To-day,"  the,  406, 
491. 

Sakhaliex,  the  most  dreaded  pri- 
son in  Siberia,  363 ;  convicts 
sent  by  sea,  409;  formerly  be- 
longed to  Japan,  429 ;  climate, 
436. 

Salt,  Ostiak  hatred  of,  588. 

Salt-mills,  (^"hinese,  27. 

Samoyedes,  the,  442,  588. 

Sand-flies,  304,  314. 

Sand-grouse,  218. 

Sand-storm,  a,  229. 

"  Scotch  woodcock,"  165. 

Seals  in  Lake  Baikal,  368. 

Sects,  religious,  in  Siberia,  418. 

Selenga  river,  the  ferry  over  the, 
355,  357. 

Shanghai,  12  ;  the  club,  14  ;  sport, 
15;  hospitality,  16;  the  bund, 
17,18;  the  electric  light,  IS;  the 
native  city,  19 ;  a  tea-garden,  20, 
21 ;  fortune-telling,  22. 

Sheep,  Gobi,  202. 

Shishmaroff,  M.,  264,  275,  278. 

"  Shtchi,"  or  cabbage  soup,  624, 
634. 

Siberakoff,  M.,  144;  his  waterway, 
145. 


INDEX. 


655 


Siberia,  33,  70,  322 ;  a  dinner  party, 
335  ;  a  tarantass,  341  ;  a  post- 
master, S4S,  475  ;  breakfast  in 
barracks,  349;  a  farewell,  351; 
posting,  353,  524,  540  ;  a  ferry, 
355,  5u5,  527,  545 ;  crimiaals, 
exiles,  &c.,  364,  401,  448, 488,  493, 
617,  530,  560 ;  discomfort,  383 ; 
climate,  385 ;  books  of  travel, 
387 ;  wealthy  gold-miners,  391 
to  397;  dress,  391  ;  washing 
appliances,  392,  576  ;  gold,  396, 
540;  the  ladies,  400 ;  champagne, 
414  ;  eggs,  414  ;  religious  sects, 
418;  tribes,  426,  444;  bandits, 
459  to  486;  scenery,  471;  post- 
houses,  474,  500,  566;  tele- 
graphs, 476;  sham  clocks,  477; 
a  supper  in  the  wilds,  483 ; 
village  prisons,  363,  488 ;  eter- 
nal delay,  493,  525  ;  monotony, 
498,  625,  564;  a  cottage,  494 ;  a 
swinging  cradle,  495 ;  music, 
495 ;  berries,  497 ;  a  honey- 
moon, 499 ;  rats  and  vermin, 
501 ;  lady  travellers,  502 ;  our 
troubles  commence,  503 ;  time- 
keeping extraordinary,  508 ; 
bread,  509 ;  refreshment  for 
escaped  convicts,  517 ;  wild 
flowers,  629 ;  gold  and  silver, 
540 ;  reckless  apathy,  565 ; 
posting  a  letter,  574 ;  photo- 
graphy, 579 ;  the  steamer  on 
the  Obi,  580 ;  the  eternal  menu, 
593  ;  "  Conversation  Siberienne,'' 
594 ;  meals,  598  ;  Ivan  II.,  600 ; 
conquest,  601  to  603. 

Silver  Fox,  the,  636. 

Singapore,  12. 

Skobeleffs  room,  644. 

Skopti,  the,  418. 

Small  feet  of  the  Chinese  women, 
>"0. 

Smallpox,  67,  439,  516,  609. 

Snuff-bottle,  the,  210. 

Soldiers,  Chinese,  75,  117. 

SourikoflF,  M.,  the  painter,  590,  619. 

Sport ;  partridges,  165,  167  ;  ante- 
lope, 220;  wildfowl,  302,  314,  589, 
610. 


Squirrels,  586. 

Staal,  M.  de,  3. 

Stanley,  reported    murder  of  the 

explorer,  469. 
Sterlet,  575. 
Stone   pillar  near  Ekaterinaberg, 

the,  618. 
Stove-bed,  a  Chinese,  122. 
"  Substitute,"  a,  49. 
Subterranean  passages  at  Tobolsk, 

609. 
Summer  Palace  at  Pekin,  the,  87. 
Sun,  an  eclipse  of  the,  422. 
Sunstroke,  a,  225. 


Taku,  26 ;  the  forts,  27. 

"  Tamerlau,  the  Target  of,"  179. 

Taoutinsk,  post-station,  660. 

Tarantass,  a,  342,  561. 

Target  jjractice  by  moonlight,  340. 

Tasmania,  the  wreck  of  the,  10. 

Tchuan-Ha-Ho,  139. 

Tea,  29,  45,  160,  211,  326,493,  543, 
575,  635. 

Telegrams,  low  tariff  in  Siberia  for, 
345. 

"  Teliatina,"  593. 

Theatre,  an  open-air,  127. 

Thunderstorm  on  the  Peiho  river, 
a,  40. 

Tielminskaya,  the  waiting-room  at, 
478. 

Tientsin,  28  ;  trade,  29  ;  the  hotel, 
30. 

Timoffeef,  Yermak,  601  to  604. 

Tiretskaya,  post-station,  503. 

Tiumen,  6ll  ;  the  railway  station, 
612;  the  town,  613;  a  convict 
barge,  614 ;  a  cheap  place  to  live 
in,  617.  i 

Tobolsk,  599;  the  province,  600; 
monument  to  Yermak,  603  ;  the 
city,  604;  precautions  against 
fire,  605  ;  the  "  Kamaoulie  Kolo- 
ko,''  606  to  608 ;  very  unhealthy, 
609  ;  subterranean  passages,  609. 

Tola,  the  river,  263,  278,  297. 

Tomsk,  570,  573;  cheerless  appear- 
ance, 574;  the  Hotel  d'Europc, 
576  ;    washing  appliances,  576  ; 


656 


INDEX. 


carriages  and  horses,  577;  smart 
gowns,  578 ;  hotel  bill,  579. 

Toogoorook.  214. 

Tornado  in  the  Gobi,  229. 

Toiiloung,  adventures  at,  508  to 
522. 

"  Tow-ists."  the  sect  of  the,  159. 

"  Traktirs,''  or  eating-houses  at  the 
Great  Fair,  634. 

Trapeznikoff,  M.,  a  millionaire  of 
Irkoutsk,  397. 

Triangular  duel  in  "  Mr.  Midship- 
man Easy,"  339. 

Troitzkoaavsk,  a  suburl)  of  Kiakh- 
ta,  325  ;  see  Kiakhta. 

Trout-fishing,  297. 

"  Tsar  Kolokol,"  the  King  of  Bells, 
640. 

Tsiang-Shai-Poo,  141 ;  the  women, 
142  ;  Kentish  scenery,  143. 

Tungchow,  42. 

Tungclioii\  the,  24. 

"  Tungouses,"  the,  441. 

"  Tutinza,"  the  Cave  Town,  178. 

Uda,  the  river,  527. 
Urga,  187;  see  Ourga. 

Valentine's  meat  juice,  192. 
Vegetation  of  the  Gobi,  204. 
Verne,  Jules,  2,  463. 
Vultures,  enormous,  246,  284. 

Wall  of  China,  the  Great,  110,  126, 

144,  148,  169. 
Warsaw,  645. 


Washing    appliances    in  Siberian 

hotels,  392,  576. 
Watches,    the   Emperor  of  China 

and  his  tutor's,  90. 
Watchman,  a  Siberian,  402. 
Waterway,    between     Petersburg 

and  Irkoutsk,  464. 
Wheat  in  Tinmen,  price  of,  617. 
"  White  Doves,"   the  sect  of  the, 

419. 
Wiggins,  Captain,  arctic  explorer, 

558. 
Wild  dogs  of  Kara<"hatka,  433. 
Wild  flowers,  204,  320,  415,  530. 
Wild  fowl,  302,  314,  589,  611. 
"  Wire  shirt,"  the  punishment  of 

the,  50. 
Women  ;  Chinese,  80  ;  Mongolian, 

19.5,    214,    283;    Koriaks,   431: 

Kuriles,     433;     Siberian,    496; 

Kirghiz,  627. 
Wormoff,  Professor,  334. 

Yakouts.  the,  435  to  438. 

Yakoutsk,  436,  603. 

Yellow  tiles,  the  Imperial,  62. 

Yemstchiks,  354  to  356,  416,  545, 
548,  569. 

Yeneseisk,  founded  by  the  Cos- 
sacks in  1619,  603. 

Yenisei,  the  river,  552,  527. 

YermakTimo^eef.  601  to  604. 

"Yourt,"a,  193.    206,  256. 

Yurakis,  the,  442. 

Zalarinsk,  post-station,  496. 
Ziminskaya,  post-station,  507' 


GltBEBTAND  EIVINGTOSf,  LIMrrED,  ST.   JOHN  S    HOT;sE,  CLEKKESWELL  BOAD,   LONDON. 


//,  //EyRiETTA  Street,  Covent  Garden,   IV. C. 

April,  iSSg. 


€atdar(ue  of  ^ook 


c^ 


PUBLISHED    BY 


CHAPMAN  &  HALL, 

LI. MIXED. 

FOR 

Drawing    Examples,   Diagrams,   IVIodels,  Instruments,   etc,, 

ISSUED    UNDER    THE    AUTHORITY    OF 

THE     SCIENCE     AND     ART     DEPARTMENT, 
SOUTH     KENSINGTON, 

fOR    THE    USE     OF    SCHOOLS    AND    ART    AND    SCIENCE    CLASSES, 
See  separate  Tllustratel  Catalogue, 


NEW    BOOKS     FOR    APRIL. 


TEN  YEARS'  TVILD  SPORTS   IN   FOREIGN  LANDS  ; 

Or,  Travels  in  the  Eighties.     I)v  H.  W.  Seton-Kakr,  F.R.G.S.,  etc.     Demy  Svo. 

MADAME  DE  STABL :  Her  Friends,  and  Her  Influence 

in  PoUtics  and  Literature.      By  L.\dy  Elennerhassett.     With  a  Portrait.      3  vols. 
Demy  Svo,  36s. 

HISTORY    OF    THE    PEOPLE    OP     ISRAEL.      From 

the  Reign  of  David  up  to  the    Capti.re  of  Samaria.      By  Ernest   Renan.     Second 
Division.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 

FROM  PEKIN  TO  CALAIS  BY  LAND.    By  H.  de  Wint.t. 

With  numerous  Illustrations  by  C.  E.   Fritp  from  Sketches  by  the  Author.     Demy  Svo, 


THE     HISTORY    OF    ANCIENT    CIVILISATION.      A 

Handbook  based  upon  M.  Gustave  Ducoudray's  "  Histoire  Sommaire  de  la  Civilisation." 
Edited  by  Rev.  J.  Verschovle,  M.A.     With  Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  Cs. 

HALF    A     CENTURY     OF     MUSIC     IN     ENGLAND. 

1837—1887.      By  F.   HuEFFER,   Author  of  "Richard  Vv'agner  and   the  jNIusic  of  the 
Future."     Demy  Svo. 

THE    MARRIAGES    OF    THE    BOURBONS.     I!y  Capt. 

THE  Hon.  D.  a.  Bixgham.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo. 

GALILEO    AND    HIS    JUDGES.     By  F.  R.  Wegg-Brosser. 

Demy  Svo,  5s. 

THE  LIFE  OP  THE  RIGHT  HON.  W.  E.   FORSTBR. 

By  T.  Wemvss  Reid.     Fifth  Edition.     In  i  vol.     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 

GIBRALTAR.      By  ITexry  M.   Field.     With  numerous  Illustrations 

Demy  Svo. 

THE  SALMON  AND  ITS  HABITS.     By  Major  Traherne. 

Crown  Svo. 

A     SUBURB      OP      YEDQ.       By  T.  A.  r.      With    Illustrations. 
Crown  Svo. 


BOOKS 

PUBLISHED    BY 

CHAPMAN     &     HALL,    LIMITED. 


A B LETT  (T.  R.)— 

WRITTEN  DESIGN.     Oblong,  sewed,  6d. 

ABOUT  [EDMOND)— 

HANDBOOK    OF    SOCIAL    ECONOMY;    OR,    THE 

WORKER'S  A  B  C.  From  the  French.  With  a  Biographical  and  Critica) 
Introduction  by  W.  Fraser  Rae.     Second  Edition,  revised.     Crown  8vo,  4s. 

AFRICAN    FARM,    STORY   OF   AN.     By  Olive  Schreiner 

(Ralph  Iron).     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  is.  ;  in  cloth,  2S. 
ANDERSON  [ANDREW  A.)— 

TWENTY-FIVE   YEARS    IN    A    W.^GGON    IN    THE 

GOLD  REGIONS  OF  AFRICA.  With  Illustrations  and  Map.  Second  Edition, 
Demy  Svo,  12s. 

AGRICULTURAL     SCIENCE     (LECTURES      ON),     and 

OTHER  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  AGRICULTURE, 
SOUTH    KENSINGTON,  1883-4.     Crown  Svo,  sewed,  2S. 

AVELING  (EDWARD),   D.Sc,  Fellow  of  University  College,  London— 

MECHANICS     AND      EXPERIMENTAL     SCIENCE. 

As  required  for  the  Matriculation  E.\amination  of  the  University  of  London. 
MECHANICS.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Key  to  Problems  in  ditto,  crown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 
CHEMISTRY.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
M.^GNETISM     AND     ELECTRICITY.      With   Numerous  Woodcuts- 

Crown  Svo.     f  s. 
LIGHT  AND   HEAT.    With  Numerous  Woodcuts.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
Keys  to  above  volumes  in  the  Pre:S. 

BADEN-POWELL  [GEORGE]— 

STATE    AID    AND  STATE  INTERFERENCE.     Illus- 

trated  by  Results  in  Commerce  and  Industry.     Crown  Svo,  gs. 
BAILEY  [JOHN  BURN)— 

MODERN     METHU5ELAHS;     or,    Short    Biographical 

Sketches  of  a  few  advanced  Nonagenarians  or  actual  Centenarians  who  were 
distinguished  in  Art,  Science,  or  Philanthropy.  Also  brief  notices  of  some 
individuals  remarkable  chiefly  for  their  longevity.  Wiih  aa  Introductory  Chapter 
on  "Long-Lasting."     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 

BARKER   (a  F.    RUSSELL)   and  DAUGLISH  (.1/.   C),  of  Lincoln's  Inn, 
Barristers-ai-  Law — 

HISTORICAL  AND  POLITICAL  HANDBOOK.  Second 

Edition.     Crown  Svo,  2S.  6d. 

A    2 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  B  Y 


BARTLEY  (G.  C.  T.)— 

A  HANDY  BOOK  FOR  GUARDIANS  OF  THE  POOR. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3s. 

BAYARD:     HISTORY    OF    THE     GOOD     CHEVALIER, 

SANS  PEUR  ET  SANS  REPROCHE.  Compiled  by  the  Loyal  Serviteur. 
With  over  200  Illustrations.     Royal  8vo,  21s. 

B£A  T  T  Y- KINGS  TON  { I V.  )— 

A  WANDERER'S  NOTES.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  24s. 
MONARCHS   I   HAVE  MET.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  24s. 
MUSIC   AND    MANNERS  :    Personal  Reminiscences  and 

Sletches  of  Character.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  30s. 
BELL  (JAMES,  Ph.D.,  S:'c.),  Prirtri pal  of  the  Somerset  House  Laboratory— 

THE    CHEMISTRY    OF    FOODS.       With    Microscopic 

Illustration=;. 

Part  I.     TEA,  COFFEE.  COCOA,  SUGAR,  Etc.      Large  crown  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
Part  IL        MILK,      BUTTER,      CHEESE,      CEREALS.      PREPARED 
STARCHES,  Etc.     Large  crown  Svo,  3s. 

BENSON  (W.)— 

UNIVERSAL  PHONOGRAPHY.    To  classify  sounds  of 

Human  Speech,  and  to  denote  them  by  one  set  of  Symbols  for  easy  Writing  and 
Printing.     Svo,  sewed,  is. 

MANUAL  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  COLOUR.     Coloured 

Frontispiece  and  Illustrations,     ismo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 

PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  COLOUR.     Small 

4to,  cloth,  15s. 

GHAM  (CAPT.    THE  HON.   D.]— 

A      SELECTION      FROM      THE      LETTERS      AND 

DESPATCHES  OF  THE  FIKST  NAPOLEON.  With  E.xplanatory  Notes. 
3  vols.     Demy  Svo,  £2  2s. 

THE  BASTILLE.     With  Illustrations.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo, 
32s. 

THE    MARRIAGES    OF    THE    BOURBONS.      2  vols. 

Demy  Svo.  [In  the  Press. 

/BIRDWOOD  [SIR  GEORGE  C.  M.),  C.S.I.— 

THE  INDUSTRIAL  ARTS  OF  INDIA.     With  Map  and 

174  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 
.BLACKIE  [JOHN  STUART),  F.R.S.E.— 

THE  SCOTTISH  HIGHLANDERS  AND  THE  LAND 

LAWS.     Demy  Svo,  gs. 

ALTAVONA :  FACT  AND  FICTION  FROM  MY  LIFE 

IN  THE  HIGHLANDS.     Third  Edition.     Crawn  Svo,  6s. 
BLA  THER  WICK  ( CHARLES)— 

PERSONAL  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  PETER  STONNOR, 

Esq.  With  Illustrations  by  James  Guthrie  and  A.  S.  BovD.  Large  crown  Svo,  6s. 

BLOOMFIELD'S    (BENJAMIN    LORD),    MEMOIR    OF— 

MISSION  TO  THE  COURT  OF  BERNADOTTE.  Edited  by  Georgiana, 
Baroness  Bloomfield,  .Author  of  "Reminiscences  of  Court  and  Diplomatic  Life." 
With  Portraits.    2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  2Ss. 


CHAPMAN  &-  HALL,  LIMITED. 


BLENNERHASSETT   (LADY)  - 

MADAME    DE   STAEL :    Her  Friends,  and  Her  Influence 

in  Politics  and  Literature.     With  a  Portrait.     3  vols.     Demy  Svo,  365. 
BONVALOT  (GABRIEL)— 

THROUGH    THE    HEART    OF   ASIA    OVER    THE 

PAMIR   TO    INDIA.     Translated  frjm  the    p-rench  by  C.  V..  Pitmak.     With 
250  Illustrations  by  Albert  Pemn.     Ro/al  Svo,  3-js. 

BOULGER  (DEMETRIUS  C.)~- 

GENERAL      GORDON'S     LETTERS      FROM      THE 

CRIMEA.,  THE  DANUBE,  AND  ARMENIA.    2nd  Edition.    Crown  Svo,  5s. 
BO  HERS   (G.)— 

HUNTING     IN     HARD    TIMES.       AViih    6i     coloured 

Illustrations.     Oblong  410,  12s. 
BRACKENBURY  (COL.   C.  B.)— 

FREDERICK  THE  GREAT.       With  Maps  and  Portrait, 

Large  crown  Svo,  4s. 
BRADLEY  (THOMAS),  of  the  Royal  Military  Academy,  Woolwich— 

ELEMENTS  OF  GEOMETRICAL  DRAWING.     In  Two 

Parts,  with  Sixty  Plates.     Oblong  folio,  half  bound,  each  Part  16s. 


MRS.  BRAY'S  NOVELS  AND  ROMANCES. 

New  and  Revised  Editions,  7uilii  Frontispieces.     3^.  6/.  each. 

THE    WHITE    HOODS;    a   Romance  of    I     IHE  TALBA  ;  or,  The  Moor  of  Porti:g&l. 
Flanders.  THE  PROTESTANT;  aTaleofthelimcs 

DE  FOIX  ;  a  Romance  of  Beam.  |        of  y  ueen  Mary. 

NOVELS    FOUNDED    ON    TRADITIONS    OF    DEVON    AND 
CORNWALL. 
FITZ  OF  FITZFORD;  a  Tale  of  Destiny.    I     WAKLEIGH  ;  or.  The  Fatal  Oak. 
HENRY  DE  POMEROY;  or,  the  Eveof   |    COURi'ENAY    OF    WALREDDON  ;    a 

St.  John.  I        Romance  of  the  West. 

TRELAWNY   OF    TRELAWNE ;   or,    a         HARLLAND     FOREST    AND     ROSE- 

Roraance  of  the  West.  I         lE.AGUE. 

MISCELLANEOUS  TALES. 
A  FATHER'S  CURSE  AND  A  DAUGHTER'S  SACRIFICE. 
TRIALS  OF  THE  HEART. 


BRITISH  ARMY,  THE.     By  the  Author  of  "Greater  Britain," 

"  The  Present  Position  of  European  Politics,"  etc.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 
BROAD  LEY  (A.  ;!/.)  — 

HOW  WE  DEFENDED  ARABI  AND  HIS  FRIENDS. 

A  Story  of  Egypt  and  the    Egyptians.      Illustrated  by  Frederick   Villiek.s. 
Demy  8vo,  12s. 

BROMLEY-DAVENPORT  (the  late  IF.),  M.P.—  _ 

SPORT  :  Fox   Hunting,  Sahiion  Fishing,  Covert  Sliooting, 

Deer    Stalking.      With    numerous    Illustrations    by    General    Crealock,    C. B. 
New  Cheap  Edition.     Post  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

Small  4to,  21s. 

B  UCKLAND  (FRANK)— 

LOG-BOOK   OF  A  FISHERMAN  AND   ZOOLOGIST. 

With  numerous  Illustrations.     Fifth  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


BROWN  [J.   MORAY)  — 

POWDER,    SPEAR,    AND    SPUR:   A  Sporting  Medley. 

With  Illustrations  by  G.  D.  Giles  and  Edgar  Giderne  from  Sketches  by  the 

Author.     Crown  Svo,  los.  fid. 

BURCHETT  (/?.)  — 

DEFINITIONS  OF  GEOMETRY.    New  Edition.     24mo, 

cloth,  5d. 

LINEAR  PERSPECTIVE,  for  the  Use  of  Schools  of  Art. 

New  Edition.     With  Illustrations.     Post  Svo,  cloth,  7s. 

PRACTICAL  GEOMETRY:  The  Course  of  Construction 

of  Plane  Geometrical  Figures.  With  137  Diagrams.  Eighteenth  Edition.  Post 
Svo,  cloth,  5s. 

BURGESS  [EDWARD)— 

ENGLISH    AND    AMERICAN    YACHTS.      Illustrating 

and  Describing  the  most  famous  Yachts  now  sailing  in  English  and  American 
Waters.  With  a  treatise  upon  Yachts  and  Yachting.  Illustrated  with  50  Beautiful 
Photogravure  Engravings.     Oblong  folio,  423. 

BUTLER  [A.  y.)— 

COURT  LIFE  IN  EGYPT.    Second  Edition.    Illustrated. 

Large  crown  Svo,  12s. 
CARLYLE  [THOMAS),    WORKS  BY.— See  pages  ag  and  ^o. 

THE    CARLYLE  BIRTHDAY  BOOK.     Compiled,  with 

the  permission  of  Mr.  Thomas  Carlyle,  bj'  C.  N.  Williamson.  Second  Edition. 
Small  fcap.  Svo,  3s. 

CHALDEAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ART— 

A  HISTORY  OF  ART  IN  CHALD^A  AND  ASSYRIA. 

By  Georges  Perrot  and  Charles  Chipiez.  Translated  by  Walter  Armstrong, 
B.A.  Oxon.     With  452  Illustrations.    2  vols.     Imperial  Svo,  42s. 

CHARNA  Y  [DESIRE)— 

THE   ANCIENT   CITIES    OF   THE    NEW    WORLD. 

Being  Travels  and  Explorations  in  Mexico  and  Central  America,  1857 — 1S82. 
Translated  from  the  French  by  J.  Gonino  and  Helen  S.  Conant.  With  upwards  of 
200  Illustrations.     Super  Royal  Svo,  31s.  fid. 

CHURCH  [PROFESSOR  A.  H.),  M.A.  Oxon.— 

FOOD  GRAINS  OF  INDIA.     With  numerous  Woodcuts. 

Small  4to,  6s. 

ENGLISH    PORCELAIN.      A  Handbook   to   the   China 

made  in  England  during  the  Eighteenth  Centurj',  as  illustrated  by  Specimens 
chiefly  in  the  National  Collection.  With  numerous  Woodcuts.  Large  crown 
Svo,  3s. 

ENGLISH    EARTHENWARE.      A    Handbook    to    the 

Wares  made  in  England  during  the  17th  and  iSth  Centuries,  as  illustrated  by 
Specimens  in  the  National  Collections.  With  numerous  Woodcuts.  Large  crown 
Svo,  3s. 

PLAIN  WORDS  ABOUT  WATER.     Illustrated.    Crown 

8vo,  sewed,  fid. 


CIJAPMAX  vSr*  HALL,  LIMITED. 


CHURCH  [PROFESSOR  A.  //.).,  M.A.  Oxon.  {Continued)— 

FOOD  :    Some  Account  of  its  Sources,   Constituents,  and 

Uses.     Sixth  Thousand.     Large  crown  8vo,  cloth,  3s. 

PRECIOUS   STONES  :  considered  in  their  Scientific  and 

ArtisticRelations.  With  a  Catalogue  of  tne  TownsenJ  Collection  of  Gems  in  the 
South  Kensington  iluseura.  With  a  Coloured  Plate  and  Woodcuts.  Large  crown 
8vo,  2S.  6d. 

CLINTON  (R.  H.)— 

A  COMPENDIUM  OF  ENGLISH  HISTORY,  from  the 

Earliest  Times  to  a.d.  1872.  With  Copious  Quotations  on  the  Leading  Events  and 
the  Constitutional  History,  together  with  Appendices.     Post  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

COBDEN,  RICHARD,  LIFE  OF.     By  the  Right  Hon.  John 

MoKi.EY,  ^LP.     With  Portrait.     New  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

Popular  Edition,  with  Portrait,  4to,  sewed,  is.;  cloth,  2S. 

COOKER Y— 

THE   PYTCHLEY  BOOK  OF   REFINED    COOKERY 

AND  BILLS  OF  FARE.     By  Major  L .  Second  Edition.  Large  crown  Bvo, 

8s. 

BREAKFASTS,  LUNCHEONS,  AND  BALL  SUPPERS. 

By  Major  L .     Crown  8vo.  4s. 

OFFICIAL      HANDBOOK     OF      THE      NATIONAL 

TRAINING  SCHOOL  FOR  COOKERY.  Containing  Lessons  on  Cookery; 
forming  the  Course  of  Instruction  in  the  School.  Compiled  by  "  R.  O.  C." 
Eighteenth  Thousand.     Large  crown  8vo,  6s. 

BREAKFAST  AND  SAVOURY  DISHES.  By  "R.  O.  C." 

Seventh  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  is. 

HOW    TO    COOK    FISH.      Compiled   by   "R.    O.    C." 

Crown  Svo,  sewed,  3d. 

SICK-ROOM    COOKERY.      Compiled   by   '-'R.    O.    C." 

Crown  Svo,  sewed,  6d. 

THE    ROYAL  CONFECTIONER  :  English  and  Foreign. 

A  Practical  Treatise.  By  C.  E.  Fran'CATELLI.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Fifth  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

THE    KINGSWOOD    COOKERY    BOOK.     By   H.    F. 

WICKEN.     Crown  Svo,  2s. 
COOPER-KING  [LT.-COL.)— 

GEORGE    WASHINGTON.       Large   crown    Svo.      With 

Portrait  and  Maps.  [/«  t/ie  Press. 

COURTNEY  (  W.  L.),  M.A.,  LL.D.,  of  New  College,  Oxford— 

STUDIES  NEW  AND  OLD.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
CONSTRUCTIVE  ETHICS  :  A  Review  of  Modern  Philo- 

sophy  and  its  Three  Stages  of  Interpretation,  Criticism,  and  Reconstruction. 
Demy  Svo,  12s. 

CRAIK  [GEORGE  LILLIE)  — 

ENGLISH  OF  SHAKESPEARE.     Illustrated  in  a  Philo- 

logical  Commentarj-  on  his  "Julius  Ciesar."   Seventh  Edition.   Post  Svo,  cloth,  5s. 

OUTLINES  OF  THK  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH 

LANGUAGE.     Tenth  Ediiion.     Post  Svo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 


£00 AS  rUBLlSIJED  BY 


CRAWFURD  [OSWALD)— 

BEYOND  THE  SEAS;  being  the  surprising  Adventures 

and  ingenious  Opinions  of  Ralph,  Lord  St.  Keyne,  told  by  his  kinsman,  Humphrey 
St.  K^;yne.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d. 

CRIPPS  [WILFRED  JOSEPH),   Xf.A.,  F.S.A.— 

COLLEGE  AND  CORPORATION  PLATE.  A  Hand- 

book  for  the  Reproduction  of  Silver  Plate.  [In  ike  South  Kensington  Mi.seuiit, 
from  celebrated  En^iish  colkctions.\  \\  ith  numerous  Illustrations.  Large  crows 
8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

DAIRY  FARMING— 

DAIRY   FAR^HNG.     To  which  is  added  a  Description  of 

the  Chief  Continental  Systems.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  By  James  Lonc 
Crown  Svo,  gs. 

DAIRY   FARMING,   ^lANAGEMENT   OF    COWS,  &c. 

By  Arthur  Roland.     Edited  by  William  Ablett.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 
DALY  [J.  B.),  LED.— 

IRELAND  IN  THE  DAYS  OF  DEAN  SWIFT.    Crown 

Svo,  5S. 
DAUBOURG  [E.)— 

INTERIOR  ARCHITECTURE.     Doors,  Vestibules,  Stair- 

cases,  Anterooms,  Drawing,  Dining,  and  Bed  Rooms,  Libraries,  Bank  and  New.-.- 
paper  Offices,   Shop  Fronts  and  Interiors.     Half-imperial,  cloth,  £,■2.  12s.  6d. 

DAVIDSON  [ELLIS  A.)— 

PRETTY     ARTS     FOR     THE     EMPLOYMENT     OF 

LEISURE  HOURS.     A  Book  for  Ladies.     With  Illustrations.     Demy  Svo,  6s. 
DA  VI TT  [MICHAEL)— 

LEAVES    FROM    A    PRISON    DIARY;    or,    Lectures 

to  a  Solitary  Audience.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
Cheap  Edition.     Ninth  Thousand.    Crown  Svo,  sewed,  is.  6d. 

DA  Y  [  WILLIAM)— 

THE    RACEHORSE     IN    TRAINING,  with    Hints    on 

Racing  and  Racing  Reform,  to  which  is  added  a  Chapter  on  Shoeing.  Sixth 
Edition.     Demy  Svo,  gs. 

DAS  [DEVENDRA  A')— 

SKETCHES    OF   HINDOO    LIFE.     Crown  Svo,   5s. 

DE  AINSLIE  [GENERAL)— 

A     HISTORY    OF     THE     ROYAL    REGIMENT     OF 

DRAGOONS.  From  its  Formation  in  i66i  to  the  Present  Day.  With  lUu.strations. 
Demy  Svo,  21s. 

DE   CHAMPEA  UX  [ALFRED)— 

TAPESTRY.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Cloth,  2S.  6d. 

DE  FALLOUX  [THE   COUNT)  — 

MEMOIRS   OF   A   ROYALIST.    Edited  by  C.  B.  Pitman. 

2  vols.     With  Portraits.     Demy  Svo.  32s. 
D  'HA  USSON VILLE  [  VICOMTE)— 

SALON  OF  MADAIME  NECKER.     Translated  by  H.  M. 

TROLLOtE.     2  vols.     Crown  Svo,  18s. 


CHAPMAN  6-  HALL,  LIMITED. 


DE  KONINCK  (L.  L.)  nud  DIETZ  (E.)— 

PRACTICAL  MANUAL  OF  CHEMICAL   ASSAYING, 

as  applied  to  the  Manufacture  of  Iron.     Edited,  with  notes,  by  Robert  Mallet. 
Post  8vo,  cloth,  6s. 

DE  LESSEES  [FERDINAND)— 

RECOLLECTIONS    OF    FORTY   YEARS.      Translated 

from  the  French  by  C.  B.  Pitman.     2  vols.     Demy  8vo,  2^s. 

DE   LISLE   (MEMOIR    OF    LIEUTENANT    RUDOLPH), 

R.N.,  of  the  Naval   Brigfade.     By  the  Kev.  H.   N.  Oxe.nham,  M.A,      Third 
Edition.     Crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

DE  MANDAT-GRANCEY  [BARON  E.)~ 

PADDY   AT   HOME;   or,  Ireland   and   the   Irish  at 

THE  Present  Time,  as  seen  by  a  Frenchman.     Translated  from  the  French. 
Fourth  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  2s. 

DE  STAEL  [MADAME)— 

MADAME    DE   STAEL  :    Her  Friends,  and  Her  Influence 

in  Politics  and  Literature.    By  Ladv  Blennekhassett.    With  a  Portrait.   3  vols. 
Demy  Svo,  36s. 

DE    WINDT  [H.)— 

FROM    PEKIN   TO    CALAIS    BY  LAND.     With  nume- 

rous  Illustrations  by  C.  E.  Fripp  from  Sketches  by  the  Author.    Demy  Svo,  20s. 
DICKENS  [CHARLES),    WORKS  BY— See  pages  ^i-yj. 

THE     LETTERS    OF    CHARLES     DICKENS.      Two 

vols,  uniform  with  "The  Charles  Dickens  Edition  "  of  his  Works.     Crown  Svo,  8s. 

THE   LIFE   OF   CHARLES   DICKENS— 6'6r  "  Forster." 
THE     CHARLES     DICKENS      BIRTHDAY     BOOK. 

With  Five  Illustrations.     In  a  handsome  fcap.  4to  volume,  12s. 

THE     HUMOUR     AND      PATHOS     OF     CHARLES 

DICKENS.     By  Charles  Kent.     With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
DILKE   [LADY)— 

ART    IN    THE    MODERN    STATE.        With    Facsimile. 

Demy  Svo,  gs. 
DOUGLAS  [JOHN)— 

SKETCH  OF  THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  PHYSIO- 

GRAPHY.     With  Maps  and  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

DOWN    WITH    ENGLAND.      Translated    from    the    French. 

With  Maps.     Crown  Svo,  is. 
DRAYSON  [MAJOR-GENERAL  A.    W.),  Late  R. A..  F.R.A.S.— 

THIRTY   THOUSAND   YEARS    OF   THE    EARTH'S 

PAST   HISTORY.     Large  Crowa  Svo,  5s. 

EXPERIENCES     OF    A    WOOLWICH     PROFESSOR 

during  Fifteen  Years  at  the  Royal  Military  Academy.     Demy  £vo,  8s. 

THE  CAUSE  OF  THE  SUPPOSED  PROPER  MOTION 

OF    THE    FIXED   STARS.     Demy  Svo,  cloth,  10s. 

PRACTICAL     MILITARY     SURVEYING     AND 

SKETCHING.     Fifth  Edition.     Post  Svo,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

B 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


DREAMS  BY  A  FRENCH  FIRESIDE.     Translated  from  the 

German  by  Marv  O'Callaghan.     Illustratai  by  Fred  Roe.     Crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 
DUCO UDRA  Y  [GUST A  VE)  — 

THE   HISTORY   OF   ANCIENT   CIVILISATION.     A 

Handbook  based  upon  M.  Gustave  Ducoudray's  "Histoire  Sommaire  de  la 
Civilisation."  Edited  by  Rev.  J.  Verschovle,  M.A.  With  Illustrations.  Large 
crown  8vo,  6s. 

DUFFY  [SIR  CHARLES  GAVAN),  K.C.M.G.— 

THE  LEAGUE  OF  NORTH  AND  SOUTH.    An  Episode 

in  Irish  History',  1 850-1854.     Crown  Svo,  8s. 
DYCE  [WILLIAM),  R.A.— 

DRAWING-BOOK  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  SCHOOL 

OF  DESIGN  ;  OR,  ELEMENTARY  OUTLINES  OF  ORNAMENT.  Fifty 
selected  Plates.     Folio,  sewed,  5s.  ;    mounted,  i8s. 

ELEMENTARY  OUTLINES  OF  ORNAMENT.  Plates  I. 

to  XXII.,  containing  97  Examples,  adapted  for  Practice  of  Standards  I.  to  IV. 
Small  folio,  sewed,  2s.  6d. 

SELECTION      FROM     DYCE'S     DRAWING     BOOK. 

15  Plates,  sewed,  is.  6d.;  mounted  on  cardboard,  6s.  6d. 

TEXT   TO    ABOVE.     Crown  Svo,  sewed,  6d. 

EDWARDS  (H.   SUTHERLAND)— 

FAMOUS  FIRST  REPRESENTATIONS.    Crown  Svo,  6s. 

EGYPTIAN  ART— 

A    HISTORY    OF    ART    IN    ANCIENT    EGYPT.     By 

G.  Perrot  and  C.  Chipiez.  Translated  by  Walter  Armstrong.  With  over 
600  Illustrations.     2  vols.     Imperial  8vo,  £2  2s. 

ELLIS  {A.  B.,  Major  \st  West  India  Regiment) — 

WEST    AFRICAN    STORIES.     Crown  Svo. 

THE   TSHI-SPEAKING    PEOPLES   OF    THE    GOLD 

COAST  OF  WEST  AFRICA:  their  Religion,  Manners,  Customs,  Laws, 
Language,  &c.     With  Map.     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 

SOUTH    AFRICAN    SKETCHES.     Crown  Svo,  63. 

WEST  AFRICAN   ISLANDS.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 

THE    HISTORY    OF     THE     WEST     INDIA     REGI- 

MENT.    With  Maps  and  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  Title-page.     Demy  Svo,  i8s. 

THE   LAND    OF   FETISH.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 

EN  GEL  (CARL)— 

MUSICAL   INSTRUMENTS.     With  numerous  Woodcuts. 

Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 
ESCOTT  [T.  H.  S.)— 

POLITICS   AND    LETTERS.     Demy  Svo,  9s. 
ENGLAND.    ITS  PEOPLE,  POLITY,  and  PURSUITS. 

New  and  Revised  Edition.     Sixth  Thousand.     Svo,  8s. 

EUROPEAN   POLITICS,  THE  PRESENT  POSITION  OF. 

By  the  Author  of  "Greater  Britain."     Demy  8vo,  12s. 
FANE  [VIOLET)— 

QUEEN  OF  THE  FAIRIES  (A  Village  Story),  and  other 

Poems.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

ANTHONY  BABINGTON :  a  Drama.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


CHAPMAN  &^  HALL,  LIMITED. 


FARR  [WILLIAM)  and  THRUPP  (GEORGE  A.)— 

COACH  TRIMMING.     With  60  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo, 
2s.  ed. 

riELD  (HEiXRY  M.)- 

GIBRALTAR.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Demy  8vo, 

7s.  6d. 
FIFE-COOh'SON  (LIEUT-COL.  J.   C)— 

TIGER-SHOOTING   IN   THE   BOON  AND   ULWAR, 

AND  LIFE  IN  INDIA.  With  numerous  Illustrations  by  E.  Hobday,  R.H.A. 
Large  crown  Svo,  los.  6d. 

FITZGERALD  (PERCY),  E\S.A.— 

THE    CHRONICLES    OF    BOW    STREET    POLICE 

OFFICE,  with  an  Account  of  the  Magistrates,  "Runners,"  and  Police;  and  a 
Select-on  of  the  most  interesting  Cases.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
Demy  Svo,  21s. 

FLEMI.XG  (GEORGE).  F.R.CS.— 

ANIMAL   PLAGUES:   THEIR   LIISTORY,   NATURE, 

AND  PREVENTION.     Svo,  cloth,  15s. 

PRACTICAL  HORSE-SHOEING.    With  37  Illustrations. 

Fifth  Edition,  enlarged.     Svo,  sewed,  2S. 

RABIES  AND  HYDROPHOBIA:   THEIR   HISTORY, 

N.-\TURE,  CAUSES,  SYMPTOMS.  AND  PREVENTION.  With  S  Illustra- 
tions.    Svo,  cloth,  15s. 

FLOYER   (A.  M.)— 

EVOLUTION  OF  ANCIENT  HINDUISM.    Crown  Svo, 

2^.  6J. 
FORSTER  (JOHX)— 

THE    LIFE    OF  CHARLES    DICKENS.     Uniform  with 

the  Illustrated  Library  Edition  of  Dickens's  Works.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  20s. 

THE   LIFE   OF  CHARLES   DICKENS.     Uniform  with 

the  Library  Edition.     Post  Svo,  los.  6d. 

THE   LIFE   OF   CHARLES   DICKENS.     Uniform  with 

the  "C.  D."  Edition.     With  Numerous  Illustrations.     2  vols.     7s. 

THE   LIFE   OF  CHARLES    DICKENS.     Uniform  with 

the  Household  Edition.    With  Illustrations  by  F.  Barnard.   Crown  4to,  cloth,  5s. 

WALTER  SAVAGE  LANDOR  :  a  Biography,  1775-1864. 

With  Portrait.     A  New  and  Revised  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 

FORSTER,    THE   LIFE   OF   THE   RIGHT    HON.   W.    E. 

By  T.  Wemvss  Reid.  With  Portraits.  Fourth  Edition.  2  vols.  Demy  Svo,  32s. 
Fifth    edition,  in  one  volume,  with  new  Portrait.     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 

FORTESCUE  (THE  HON.  JOHN)— 

RECORDS  OF  STAG-HUNTING  ON  EXMOOR.    With 

14  full  page  Illustrations  by  Edgar  Gibekne.     Large  crown  Svo,  i6s. 
FORTNIGHTL  Y  RE  VIE  W— 

FORTNIGHTLY  REVIEW.— First  Series,  May,  1865,  to 

Dec.  1S66.     6  vols.     Cloth,  13s.  each. 

New  Series,  1867  to  1872.     In  Half-yearly  Volumes.    Cloth, 

13s.  each. 

From  January,   1873,  to   the    present   time,   in    Half-yearly 

Volumes.     Cloth,  i6s.  each. 

CONTENTS    OF    FORTNIGHTLY    REVIEW.      From 

the  commencement  to  end  of  1878.     Sewed,  2s. 

B   2 


BOOKS  FUBLISHED  BY 


FORTNUM  [C.  D.  £.).  F.S.A.— 

MAIOLICA.     With    numerous    Woodcuts.     Large    crown 

8vo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 

BRONZES.       With    numerous    Woodcuts.       Large    crown 

8vo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 
FOUQUE  (DE  LA  MOTTE)— 

UNDINE  :  a  Romance  translated  from  the  German.     With 

:in   Introduction  by  Julia  Cartwright.      Illustrated   by   Hevwood  Sumner. 
Crown  4to.     5s. 

FRANCATELLI  [C.  £.)— 

THE  ROYAL  CONFECTIONER  :    English  and  Foreign. 

A  Practical  Treatise.     With  Illustrations.     Fifth  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  5s. 
FRANCIS  [FRANCIS],  JUNR. 

SADDLE  AND  MOCASSIN.     8vo,  12s. 

FRANKS  [A.    W.)— 

JAPANESE  POTTERY.     Being  a  Native  Report,  with  an 

Introduction   and   Catalogue.    With  numerous  Illustrations  and   Marks.     Large 
crown  8vo,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 

FROBEL,  FRIEDRICH ;  a  Short  Sketch  of  his  Life,  including 

Frubel's  Letters  from  Dresden  and  Leipzig  to  his  Wife,  now  first  Translated  into 
English.     By  Emily  Shikreff.     Crown  8vo,  2S. 

GALILEO   AND    HIS    JUDGES.     By  F.  R.  Wegg-Prosser. 

Demy  8vo,  5s. 
GALLENGA  [ANTONIO)— 

ITALY:  PRESENT  AND  FUTURE.  2 vols.  Dmy.8vo,2is. 
EPISODES  OF  MY  SECOND  LIFE.  2vols.  Dmy.8vo,2Ss. 
IBERIAN    REMINISCENCES.     Fifteen  Years'  Travelling 

Impressions  of  Spain  and  Portugal.     With  a  Map.     2  vols.     Demy  8vo,  32s. 
GASNA  ULT  [PA  UL)  .md  GARNI ER  [ED.]— 

FRENCH    POTLERY.     With    Illustrations    and    Marks. 

Large  crown  £vo,  3s. 
GILLMORE  [PARKER]  — 

THE    HUNTER'S  ARCADIA.     With  numerous    lllustra- 

tions.     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 

GIRL'S  LIFE  EIGHTY  YEARS   AGO   (A).     Selections  from 

the  LeUers  of  Eliza  Southgate  Bowne,  with  an  Introduction  by  Clarence  Cook. 
Illustrated  with  Portraits  and  Views.     Crown  4to,  12s. 
GLEICHEN  [COUNT],   Grenadier  Guards— 

WITH   THE  CAMEL  CORPS   UP  THE  NILE.     W'ith 

numerous  Sketches  by  the  Author.     Ihird  Edition.     Large  crown  Svo,  9s. 
GORDON  [GENERAL]— 

LETTERS    FROM    THE    CRIMEA,    THE   DANUBE, 

AND    ARMENIA.    Edited   by  Demetrius   C.   Boulger.     Second   Edition. 

Crown  Svo,  5s. 

GORST  [SIR  J.  E.),  Q.C.,  .U.P.— 

An  ELECTION  MANUAL.    Containing  the  Parliamentary 

Elections  (Corrupt  and  Illegal  Practices)  Act,  1SS3,  w  iih  Notes.     Third  Edition. 
Crown  Svo,  is.  6d. 
GOWFR  [A.  R.],  Royal  School  0/ Mines— 

PRACTICAL  METALLURGY.  With  Illustrations.  Crown 


GRAHAM  [SIR  GERALD],    V.C,  K.C.B.— 

LAST  AVORDS  WITH  GORDON. 


Crown  Svo,  cloth,  is. 


CHAPMAN  6-  HALL,  LLMITED.  13 


GRESWEI.L  [WILLIAM).  M.A.,  F.R.C.I.— 

OUR  SOUTH  AFRICAN  EMPIRE.    With  Map.    2  vols. 

Crown  Svo,  21s. 
GREVILLE  {LADY   VIOLET)— 

MONTROSE.      With   an    Introduction    by   the   Earl   of 

AsHBiRNHAM.     With  Portralls.     Large  crown  Svo,  7s.  Cd. 
GRIFFIX  {SIR  LEPEL  HENRY),  K. C.S.I. — 

THE  GREAT  REPUBLIC.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Svo, 

4s.  6d. 
GRIFFITHS  {MAJOR  ARTHUR),  H.M.  Inspector  of  Prisons— 

FRENCH     REVOLUTIONARY     GENERALS.       Large 

crown  Svo.  [hi  tke  Press. 

CHRONICLES     OF     NEWGATE.       Illustrated.       New 

Edition.     Demy  8vc,  i6s. 

MEMORIALS    OF   MILLBANK:  or,  Chapters  in  Prison 

Historj-.    With  Illustrations  by  R.  GofT  and  Author.     New  Edition.     Demy  Svo, 

I2S. 

GRIMBLE  {AUGUSTUS)— 

DEER-S  TALKING.    A  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 

Imperial  410.     With  18  Full-page  Illustrations. 

HALL  {SIDNEY]— 

A  TRAVELLING  ATLAS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  COUN- 

TIES.     Fifty  Maps,  coloured.     New  Edition,  including  the  Railways,  corrected 
up  to  the  present  date.     Demy  Svo,  in  roan  tuck,  los.  6a. 

H ALTON  {JOSEPH)  and  HARVEY  {REV.   ^/.)— 

NEWFOUNDLAND.      The    Oldest    British   Colony.      Its 

Historj-,  Past  and   Present,  and  its  Prospects  in   the  Future.     Illustrated  from 
Photographs  and  Sketches  specially  made  for  this  work.    Demy  Svo,  iSs. 

HAWKINS  {FREDERICK)— 

THE     FRENCH    STAGE    IN    THE    EIGHTEENTH 

CENTURV.     With  Portraits.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  30s. 

ANNALS    OF   THE    FRENCH    STAGE:    FROM    ITS 

ORIGIN  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  RACINE.     4  Portraits.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo, 

2Ss. 

HILDEDRAND  (HANS),  Royal  Aniiquarv  of  Sweden- 

INDUSTRIAL    ARTS    OF    SCANDINAVIA   IN   THE 

PAGAN  TIME.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 
HILL  [MISS  0.)- 

THE  PLEASURES  AND  PROFITS  OF  OUR  LITTLE 

POULTRY  FARM.     Small  Svo,  3s. 
HOLBE/N— 

TWELVE  HEADS  AFTER   HOLBEIN.     Selected  from 

Drawings  in  Her  Majesty's  Collection  at  Windsor.     Reproduced  in  Autotj-pe,  in 
portfolio.     £1  16s. 

HOLLINGSHEAD  {JOHN)— 

FOOTLIGHTS.     Crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

HOLMES    [GEORGE    C.    V.).  Secretary  of  the  Institutiofi  of  Naval  Architects, 
Whitworth  Scholar — 

MARINE    ENGINES  AND   BOILERS.     With  Si.xty-nine 

Woodcuts.     Lar^e  crown  Svo,  3s. 


14  BOOKS  rUBLISIlED  BY 


HOPE  [ANDREE)— 

CHRONICLES    OF   AN   OLD    INN;  or,   a  Few  Words 

about  Gray's  Inn.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 
HOVELACQUE  {ABEL)— 

THE    SCIENCE    OF     LANGUAGE:     LINGUISTICS, 

PHILOLOGY,  AND  ETYMOLOGY.    Wuh  Maps.    Large  crown  8vo,  cloth,  55. 
HOZIER  (H.  M.)— 

TURENNE.     With  Portrait  and  Two  Maps.     Large  crown 

8vo,  4s. 
HUEFFER  {F.)— 

HALF    A    CENTURY    OF    MUSIC    IX    ENGLAND. 

1837 — 3ES7.     Demy  Svo. 
HUMPHRIS  (H.D.)— 

PRINCIPLES    OF    PERSPECTIVE.       Illustrated    in    a 

Series  of  Examples.     Oblong  folio,  half-bound,  and  Text  Svo,  cloth,  £1  is. 
HUNTL  Y  ( MARQ  UIS  OF)— 

TRAVELS,  SPORTS,  AND  POLITICS  IN  THE  EAST 

OF  EUROPE.  AVith  Illustrations  by  the  Marchioness  of  Huntly.  Large 
Crown  Svo,  12s. 

INDUSTRIAL   ARTS:    Historical   Sketches.     With  numerous 

Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  3s. 

INTERNATIONAL  POLICY:  Essay  on  the  Foreign  Relations 

of  England.  By  Frederic  Harrison,  Prof.  Beeslev,  Richard  Congreve, 
and  others.     New  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

IRELAND  IN  THE  DAYS  OF  DEAN  SWIFT.      By  J,  B. 

Dalv,  LL.D.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

IRISH    ART    OF   LACEMAKING,    A   RENASCENCE   OF 

THE.  Illustrated  by  Photographic  Reproductions  of  Irish  Laces,  made  from 
new  and  specially  designed  Patterns.  Introductory  Notes  and  Dcscripticns.  By 
A.  S.  C.     Demy  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

IRON  [RALPH),  [OLIVE  SCHREINER)— 

THE  STORY  OF  AN  AFRICAN  FARM.    New  Edition. 

Crown  Svo,  is. ;  in  cloth,  2s. 
JACKSON  [FRANK  G. ),  Master  in  the  Birmingham  Municipal  School  of  Art— 

DECORATIVE    DESIGN.     An  Elementary  Text  Book  of 

Principles  and  Practice.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 
JAMES  {HENRY  A.)— 

HANDBOOK  TO  PERSPECTI^^E.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

JARRY  [GENERAL)- 

OUTPOST  DUTY.      Translated,  with  TREATISES   ON 

MILITARY  RECONNAISSANCE  AND  ON  ROAD-MAKING.  By  Major- 
Gen.  ^V.  C.  E.  Napier,     'ihird  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

JEANS  [W.  T.)— 

CREATORS    OF  THE  AGE   OF  STEEL.      Memoirs  of 

Sir  W.  Siemens,  Sir  H.  Bessemer,  Sir  J.  Whitworth,  Sir  J.  Brown,  and  other 
Inventors.     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

JOHNSON  {DR.  SAMUEL)— 

LIFE    AND    CONVERSATIONS    OF    DR.    SAMUEL 

JOHNSON.     By  A.  Main.     Crown  Svo,  10s.  6d. 


CHAPMAN  ^^  HALL,  LIMITED.  15 


JONES  {CAPTAIN  DOUGLAS),  P.A.— 

NOTES  ON  ^IILITARY  LAW.     Crown  8vo,  4s. 
JONES.      HANDBOOK   OF   THE   JONES   COLLECTION 

IN  THE   SOUTH    KENSINGTON    MUSEUM.     With  Portrait  and  Wood- 
cuts.    Large  crown  Svo,  2S.  6d. 

KENNARD  [EDWARD)— 

NORWEGIAN  SKETCHES  :    FISHING  IN  STRANGE 

WATERS.     Illustrated  with  30  beautiful   Sketches  printed   by  The  Automatic 
Engraving  Co.,  and  descriptive  letterpress.     Second  Edition.    Oblong  folio,  21s. 
A  Set  of  Six  Hand-coloured  Plates,  21s.  ;  in  Oak  Frames,  42s. 
KENT  (CHARLES)— 

HUMOUR  AND  PATHOS  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS. 

Crown  Svo,  6s. 
KLACZKO  (.1/.  JULIAN)  — 

TWO  CHANCELLORS  :  PRINCE  GORTCHAKOF  and 

PRINCE  BISMARCK.   Translated  by  Mrs.  Tait.    New  and  cheaper  Edition,  6s. 
KNOLLYS  [MAJOR  HENRY),    R.A.— 

SKETCHES   OF  LIFE    IN  JAPAN.     With  Illustrations. 

Large  crown  Svo   12s. 

LACEMAKING,     A     RENASCENCE     OF     THE     IRISH 

ART  OF.     Illustrated  by  Photographic  Reproductions  of  Irish  Laces,  made  from 
new  and  specially  designed  patterns.     Demy  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

LACORDAIRE'S  JESUS  CHRIST;  GOD;  AND  GOD  AND 

MAN.      Conferences     delivered    at     Notre  Dame    in    Paris.        New   Edition. 
Crown  Svo,  6s. 
LAING  [S.)— 

MODERN    SCIENCE    AND    MODERN    THOUGHT. 

With  a  Supplementary  Chapter  on  Gladstone's  "  Dawn  of  Creation"  and  Drummond's 
■'Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World."     Si.xth  Thousand.     Demy  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

LA  VELE  YE  [EMILE  DE)— 

THE      ELEMENTS      OF      POLITICAL     ECONOMY. 

Translated  by  W.  Pollard,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Oxford.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
LAN  DOR  [W.  S.)— 

LIFE  AND  WORKS.     8  vols. 

Vol.  I.     WALTER  SAVAGE  LANDOR.     A  Biography  in  Eight  Books.     By 

John  Forster.     Demy  Svo,  12s, 
Vol.  2.    Out  of  print. 
Vol.  3.     CONVERSATIONS  OF  SOVEREIGNS  AND  STATESMEN,  AND 

FIVE    DIALOGUES     OF    BOCCACCIO    AND     PETRARCA. 

Demy  Svo,  14s. 
Vol.  4.     DIALOGUES  OF  LITERARY  MEN.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 
Vol.  ^.     DIALOGUES    OF     LITERARY     MEN     {continued).       FAMOUS 

WOMEN.     LETTERS   OF   PERICLES  AND   ASPASIA.    And 

Minor  Prose  Pieces.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 
Vol.  6.     MISCELLANEOUS  CONVERSATIONS.      Demy  Svo,  14s. 
Vol.  7.     GEBIR,    ACTS    AND     SCENES    AND    HELLENICS.      Poems. 

Demy  Svo,  14s; 
Vol.8.    MISCELLANEOUS   POEMS   AND    CRITICISMS    ON    THEO- 
CRITUS, CATULLUS,  AND  PETRARCH.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 
LE  CONTE  [JOSEPH),  Professor  of  Geology  and  Natural  History  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  California— 

EVOLUTION  AND  ITS  RELATIONS  TO  RELIGIOUS 

THOUGHT.      Crown  Svo,  6s. 


1 6  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


LEFHVKE  {ANDRE)— 

PHILOSOPHY,  Historical  and  Critical.     Translated,  with 

an  Introduction,  by  A.  W.  Keane,  B.A.     Large  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 
LESLIE  [R.  C.  )— 

LIFE  ABOARD  A  BRITISH    PRIVATEER    IN  THE 

TIME  OF  QUEEN  ANNE.  Beinir  the  Journals  of  Captain  Woodes  Rogers, 
Master  Mariner.  With  Notes  and  Illustrations  by  Robert  C.  Leslie.  Large 
crown  Svo,  9s. 

A  SEA  PAINTER'S  LOG.    With  12  Full-page  Illustrations 

by  the  Author.     Large  crown  Svo,  12s. 
LETOURNEAU  [DR.  CHARLES)— 

SOCIOLOGY.      Based   upon    Ethnolog}-.       Large     crown 

Svo.  los. 

BIOLOGY.    Translated  by  William  MacCall.    With  lUus- 

trations.     Large  crown  Svo,  6s. 
LILLY  (IV.  S.)— 

CHAPTERS    ON    EUROPEAN    HISTORY.      With   an 

Introductory  Dialogue  on  the  Philosophy  of  Historj'.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo,  21s. 

ANCIENT    RELIGION  AND   MODERN  THOUGHT. 

Third  Edition,  revised,  with  additions.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 
LITTLE  [THE  REV.    CANON  KNO.\)— 

THE    CHILD    OF    STAFFERTON :   A  Chapter  from  a 

Farailj-  Chronicle.     Tenth  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

THE    BROKEN   VOW.     A  Story  of  Here  and  Hereafter. 

Tenth  Thcusand.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

LLOYD  [COLONEL  E.M.),  R.E.,  laic  Professor  of  Foriification  at  the  Royal 
Military  Acadeiny,   Woolwich — 

VAUBAN,  MONTALEMBERT,  CARNOT  :  ENGINEER 

STUDIES.     With  Portraits.     Crown  Svo,  5s 
LONG  [JAMES)— 

DAIRY  FARMING.     To  which  is  added  a  Description  of 

the  Chief  Continental  Systems.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo,  gs. 
LOW  [C.  R.)— 

SOLDIERS  OF  THE  VICTORIAN  AGE.    2  vols.    Demy 

Svo,  £,1.  los. 
LOW  [WILLI A  XL)- 

TABLE    DECORATION.      With    19    Full    Illustrations. 

Demy  Svo,  6s. 
LYTTON  [ROBERT.  EARL)— 

POETICAL  WORKS- 
FABLES  IN  SONG.    2  vols.     Fcap.  Svo,  12s. 
THE  WANDERER.     Fcap.  Svo,  6s. 
POEMS,  HISTORICAL  AND  CHARACTERISTIC.     Fcap.  6s. 


CHAPMAN  ^  HALL,  LIMITED.  17 


MACDONALD  (FREDERIKA)— 

PUCK   AND   PEARL :  the  Wanderings  and  Wonder- 

iNGs  OF  Two    English    Children    in    India.     By  Frederika    Macdonai.d. 
With  Illustrations  by  Mrs.  Irving  Graham.     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

MALLESON  (COL.   G.  B.),  C.S.L— 

PRINCE    EUGENE   OF   SAVOY.      With   Portrait   and 

Maps.     Large  crown  Svo,  6s. 

LOUDON.      A   Sketch   of    the   Military   Life   of  Gideon 

Ernest,  Freicherr  von  Loudon,  sometime  Generalissimo  of  the  Austrian  Forces. 
With  Portrait  and  Maps.     Large  crown  Svo,  4s. 

MALLET  (ROBERT)— 

PRACTICAL  MANUAL  OF  CHEMICAL  ASSAYING, 

as  applied  to  the  Manufacture  of  Iron.     By  L.  L.  De  Koninck  and  E.  Dietz. 
Edited,  with  notes,  by  Robert  Mallet.     Post  Svo,  cloth,  6s. 

MASKELL  (ALFRED)— 

RUSSIAN    ART   AND   ART    OBJECTS    IN    RUSSIA. 

A  Handbook  to  the  Reproduction  of  Goldsmiths'  Work  and  other  Art  Treasures. 
With  Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

MASKELL  (  WILLIAM)— 

IVORIES :  ANCIENT  AND  MEDIEVAL.     With  nume- 

rous  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  fid. 

HANDBOOK  TO  THE  DYCE  AND  FORSTER  Col- 
lections.   With  Illustrations.    Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

MA  UDSLA  V  (A  THOL)— 

HIGHWAYS    AND    HORSES.     With  numerous  lUustra- 

tions.   Demy  Svo,  21s. 
MECHELIN  (SENATOR  L.)— 

FINLAND   AND    ITS   PUBLIC    LAW.      Translated   by 

Charles  J.  Cooke,  British  Vice-Consul  at  Helsingfors.    Crown  Svo,  2s.  fid. 


GEORGE    MEREDITH'S    WORKS. 

A  New  and  Uniform  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  3^.  6d.  each. 

DIANA   OF   THE  CROSSWAYS. 

EVAN    HARRINGTON. 

THE    ORDEAL    OF    RICHARD    FEVEREL. 

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  HARRY  RICHMOND. 

SANDRA   BELLONI. 

VITTORIA. 

RHODA  FLEMING. 

BEAUCHAMP'S   CAREER. 

THE   EGOIST. 

THE   SHAVING  OF  SHAGPAT;  and   FARINA. 


I8  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


MERIVALE  (HERMAN  CHARLES)— 

BINKO'S   BLUES.     A  Tale  for  Children  of  all  Growths. 

Illustrated  by  Edgar  Giberne,    Small  crown  Svo,  5s. 

THE  WHITE  PILGRIM,  and  other  Poems.  Crown  Svo,  9s. 

AIOLES  WORTH  {  W.  NASSAU)— 

HISTORY  OF   ENGLAND   FROM   THE   YEAR    1830 

TO  THE   RESIGNATION    OF    THE    GLADSTONE    MINISTRY,    1874- 
Twelfth  Thousand.     3  vols.     Crown  Svo,  i8s. 

ABRIDGED    EDITION.     Large  crown,  7s.  6d. 

MOLTKE  [FIELD-MARSHAL  COUNT  VON)— 

POLAND  :  AN  HISTORICAL  SKETCH.  An  Authorised 

Translation,  with  Biographical  Notice  by  E.  S.  Buchheim.    Crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

MORLEY  {THE  RIGHT  HON.   JOHN),  ALP.— 

RICHARD     COBDEN'S     LIFE    AND     CORRESPON- 

DENCE.     Crown  Svo,  with  Portrait,  7s.  6d. 

Popular  Edition.    With  Portrait.    4to,  sewed,  is.     Cloth,  2S. 

MUNTZ  (EUGENE)— 

RAPHAEL :  his  Life,  Works,  and  Times.     Illustrated  with 

about  200  Engravings.     A  new  Edition,  revised  from  the  Second  French  Edition 
by  W.  Armstrong,  B.A.  Oxoq.    Imperial  Svo,  25s. 

MURRAY  [ANDREW),  F.L.S.— 

ECONOMIC    ENTOMOLOGY.      Aptera.     With    nume- 

rous  Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

NAPIER  [MAJ.-GEN.  W.  C.  E.)~ 

TRANSLATION  OF  GEN.  JARRY'S  OUTPOST  DUTY. 

With    TREATISES    ON     MILITARY    RECONNAISSANCE    AND     ON 
ROAD-MAKING.     Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  5s, 

NAPOLEON.     A  Selection  from  the  Letters  and  Despatches  of 

the  First  Napoleon.   With  Explanatory  Notes  by  Captain  the  Hon.  D.  Bingham. 
3  vols.     Demy  Svo,  £2  2S. 

NECKER  [MADAME)— 

THE  SALON  OF  MADAME   NECKER.      By  Vicomte 

d'Haussonville.     2  vols.     Crown  Svo,  iSs. 

NESBITT  [ALEXANDER)— 

GLASS.     With   numerous   Woodcuts.      Large   crown   Svo, 

cloth,  2S.  6d. 
NEVINSON  [HENR  Y)— 

A  SKETCH   OF  HERDER  AND  HIS  TIMES.     With 

a  Portrait.     Demy  Svo,  143. 


CI/APMAN  &>  HALL,  LIMITED.  19 


NEWTON  {E.   TULLEY),  F.G.S.— 

THE  TYPICAL    PARTS   IN  THE   SKELETONS   OF 

A  CAT,  DUCK,  AND  CODFISH,  being  a  Catalogue  with  Comparative 
Descripuon  arranged  in  a  Tabular  form.    Demy  8vo,  cloth,  3s. 

NILSEN  (CAPTAIN)— 

LEAVES  FROM  THE  LOG  OF  THE  "  HOMEWARD 

BOUND"  ;  or,  Eleven  Months  at  Sea  in  an  Open  Boat.     Crown  8vo,  is. 
NORMAN  (C.  B.)— 

TONKIN;  or,  FRANCE  IN  THE  FAR  EAST.      With 

Maps.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 
Q- GRADY  (STANDISH)— 

TORYISM   AND   THE  TORY  DEMOCRACY.     Crown 

8vo,  5s. 
OLIVER  (PROFESSOR),  F.R.S.,  &'c.— 

ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  NATURAL 

ORDERS  OF  THE  VEGETABLE  KINGDOM,  PREPARED  FOR  THE 
SCIENCE  AND  ART  DEPARTMENT,  SOUTH  KENSINGTON.  With 
109  Plates.     Oblong  Svo,  plain,  i6s. ;  coloured,  £1  6s. 

OXENHAM  (REV.  H.  N.)— 

MEMOIR  OF  LIEUTENANT  RUDOLPH  DE  LISLE, 

R.N.,  OF  THE  NAVAL  BRIGADE.  Third  Edition,  with  Illustrations. 
Crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

SHORT    STUDIES,    ETHICAL    AND     RELIGIOUS. 

Demy  Svo,  12s. 

SHORT    STUDIES   IN  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY 

AND   BIOGRAPHY.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 
PAYTON  (E.    IV.)— 

ROUND  ABOUT   NEW  ZEALAND.     Being  Notes  from 

a  Journal  of  Three  Years'  Wandering  in  the  Antipodes.  With  Twenty  Original 
Illustrations  by  the  Author.     Large  crown  Svo.     12s. 

PERROT  (GEORGES)  and  CHIPIEZ  (CHARLES)— 

A   HISTORY    OF   ANCIENT    ART    IN    PHCENICIA 

AND  ITS  DEPENDENCIES.  Translated  from  the  French  by  Walter 
Armstrong.  B.A.  Oxon.  Containing  644  Illustrations  in  the  text,  and  10  Steel 
and  Coloured  Plates.     2  vols.     Imperial  Svo,  42s. 

A  HISTORY  OF  ART  IN  CHALD^A  AND  ASSYRIA. 

Translated  by  Walter  Armstrong,  B.A.  Oxon.  With  452  Illustrations.  2  vols. 
Imperial  Svo,  42s. 

A  HISTORY  OF  ART  IN  ANCIENT  EGYPT.     Trans- 

lated  from  the  French  by  W.  Armstrong,  B.-A..  Oxon.  With  over  600  Illustra- 
tions.    2  vols.  Imperial  Svo,  4?s. 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


PETERBOROUGH  {THE  EARL  OF)— 

THE    EARL    OF    PETERBOROUGH     AND     MON- 

MOUTH  (Charles  Rlordaunt) :  A  Memoir.  By  Colonel  Frank  Russell,  Royal 
Dragoons.    With  Illustrations.    2  vols,  demy  8vo.    32s. 

PHCENICIAN  ART— 

A    HISTORY   OF   ANCIENT    ART    IN    PHOENICIA 

AND  ITS  DEPENDENCIES.  By  Georges  Perrot  and  Charles  Chipiez. 
Translated  from  the  French  by  Walter  Armstrong,  B.A.  Oxon.  Containing 
644  Illustrations  in  the  text,  and  10  Steel  and  Coloured  Plates.  2  vols.  Imperial 
8vo,  42s. 

PITT   TAYLOR  [FRANK)— 

THE  CANTERBURY  TALES.    Selections  from  the  Tales 

of  Geoffrey  Chaucer  rendered  into  Modem  English,  with  close  adherence 
to  the  language  of  the  Poet.     With  Frontispiece.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 

POLLEN  {J.  H.)— 

GOLD  AND  SILVER  SMITH'S  WORK.     With  nume- 

rous  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

ANCIENT     AND     MODERN     FURNITURE     AND 

WOODWORK.    With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
POOLE   [STANLEY  LANE),  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.— 

THE  ART  OF   THE    SARACENS    IN    EGYPT.     Pub- 

lished  for  the  Committee  of  Council  on  Education.  With  loS  Woodcuts.  Large 
crown  Svo,  4s. 

POYNTER  [E.  J.),  R.A.— 

TEN    LECTURES    ON    ART.      Third   Edition.      Large 

crowTi  Svo,  gs. 
PRINSEP  ( VAL),  A.R.A.— 

IMPERIAL   INDIA.      Containing  numerous   Illustrations 

and  Maps.     Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  £1  is. 

RADICAL    PROGRAMME,    THE.      From    the    Fortnightly 

Review,  with  additions.  With  a  Preface  by  the  Right  Hon.  J.  Chamberlain, 
M.P.     Thirteenth  Thousand.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

RAE  [W.    ERASER)— 

AUSTRIAN  HEALTH  RESORTS:  and  the  Bitter  Waters 

of  Hungary.     Cro\vn  Svo,  5s. 
RAMSDEN  [LAD  Y  G  WENDOLEN)— 

A  BIRTHDAY  BOQK.    Illustrated.   Containing  46  Illustra- 

tions  from  Original  Drawings,  and  numerous  other  Illustrations.    Royal  Svo,  21s. 


CHAPMAN  &>  //ALL,  L/M/TED. 


RAPHAEL :  his  Life,  Works,  and  Times.     By  Eugene  Muntz. 

Illustrated  with  about  200  Engravings.     A  New  Edition,  revised  from  the  Second 
French  Edition.    By  W.  Armstrong,  B.A.    Imperial  8vo,  25s. 

REDGRAVE  (GILBERT)— 

OUTLINES  OF  HISTORIC  ORNAMENT.     Translated 

from  the  German.    Edited  by  Gilbert  Redgrave.    With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Crown  Svo,  4s. 

REDGRA  VE  {GILBERT  R.)~ 

MANUAL  OF  DESIGN,  compiled  from  the  Writings  and 

Addresses  of  Richard  Redgrave,  R.  A.  With  Woodcuts.    Large  crown  Svo,  cloth, 
2s.  6d. 

REDGRAVE  (RICHARD)— 

ELEMENTARY     MANUAL     OF     COLOUR,     with    a 

Catechism  on  Colour.     24mo,  cloth,  gd. 
REDGRA  VE  (SAMUEL)— 

A  DESCRIPTIVE  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  His- 
torical COLLECTION  OF  WATER-COLOUR  PAINTINGS  IN  THE 
SOUTH  KENSINGTON  MUSEUM.  With  numerous  Chromo-lithographs  and 
other  Illustrations.     Royal  Svo,  £z  is. 

RE/D  (T.    WEMYSS)— 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  RIGHT  HON.  W.  E.  FORSTER. 

With  Portraits.     Fourth  Edition.     2  vols.    Demy  Svo,  12s. 

FIFTH   EDITION,  in  one  volume,  with  new  Portrait.     Demy  Svo,  los,  6d, 

RENAN  (ERNEST)  — 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  ISRAEL  TILL  THE 

TIME  OF  KING  DAVID.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  ISRAEL.     From  the 

Reign  of  David  up  to  the  Capture  of  Samaria.    Second  Division.    Demy  Svo,  14s. 

RECOLLECTIONS  OF  MY  YOUTH.     Translated  from 

the  original  French,  and  revised  by  Madame  Renan.     Crown  Svo,  Ss. 
REYNARDSON  (C.   T.  S.  BIRCH)— 

SPORTS  AND  ANECDOTES  OF  BYGONE  DAYS 

in  England,   Scotland,  Ireland,   Italy,  and  the  Sunny  South.     With   numerous 
Illustrations  in  Colour.    Second  Edition.    Large  crown  Svo,  12s. 

DOWN    THE    ROAD:    Reminiscences  of  a   Gentleman 

Coachman.    With  Coloured  Illustrations.    Large  crown  Svo,  izs. 
RIANO  (JUAN  F.)— 

THE  INDUSTRIAL  ARTS  IN  SPAIN.    With  numerous 

Woodcuts.    Large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  4s. 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


RIBTON-TURNRR  {C.  J.)~ 

A  HISTORY  OF  VAGRANTS  AND  VAGRANCY  AND 

BEGGARS  AND  BEGGING.    With  Illustrations.    Demy  8vo,  zis. 
ROBINSON  (JAMES  F.)— 

BRITISH   BEE   FARMING.     Its   Profits   and  Pleasures. 

Large  crown  8vo,  ss. 
ROBINSON  iJ.  C.)— 

ITALIAN    SCULPTURE    OF    THE    MIDDLE    AGES 

AND  PERIOD  OF  THE  REVIVAL  OF  ART.  With  20  Engravings.  Royal 
8vo,  cloth,  7s.  6d. 

ROBSON  {GEORGE)— 

ELEMENTARY  BUILDING  CONSTRUCTION.     Illus- 

trated  by  a  Design  for  an  Entrance  Lodge  and  Gate.  15  Plates.  Oblong  folio, 
sewed,  8s. 

ROBSON  (REV.  J.  H.),  M.A.,  LL.M.— 

AN     ELEMENTARY     TREATISE     ON     ALGEBRA. 

Post  8vo,  6s. 
ROCK  (THE  VERY  REV.  CANON),  D.D.— 

TEXTILE  FABRICS.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Large 

crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 
ROGERS  (CAPTAIN    WOODES),  Master  Mariner— 

LIFE   ABOARD   A  BRITISH   PRIVATEER   IN  THE 

TIME  OF  QUEEN  ANNE.  Being  the  Journals  cf  Captain  Woodee  Rogers, 
Master  Mariner.  With  Notes  and  Illustrations  by  Robert  C.  Leslie,  Author 
of  "A  Sea  Painter's  Lor."    Large  crown  Svo,  gs. 

ROOSE  (ROBSON),   M.D.,  F.C.S.— 

THE    WEAR     AND    TEAR     OF     LONDON     LIFE. 

Second  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  sewed,  is. 

INFECTION  AND  DISINFECTION.  Crown Svo,sewed,6d. 

ROLAND  (ARTHUR)— 

FARMING  FOR  PLEASURE  AND   PROFIT.     Edited 

by  William  Ablett.     8  vols.    Crown  Svo,  ss.  each. 
DAIRY-FARMING,  MANAGEMENT  OF  COWS,  &c. 
POULTRY-KEEPING. 

TREE-PLANTING,   FOR  ORNAMENTATION  OR  PROFIT. 
STOCK-KEEPING  AND  CATTLE-REARING. 
DRAINAGE    OF  LAND,   IRRIGATION,   MANURES,  &c. 
ROOT-GROWING,   HOPS,  &c. 
MANAGEMENT    OF    GRASS    LANDS,    LAVING    DOWN    GRASS, 

ARTIFICIAL  GRASSES,  &c. 
MARKET    GARDENING,     HUSBANDRY     FOR     FARMERS     AND 

GENERAL   CULTIVATORS. 


CHAPMAN  vSt-  hall,  LLUITED.  23 


RUSDEN  (G.    IV.),  /or  many  years  Clerk  of  the  Parliament  in  Victoria — 

A  HISTORY  OF  AUSTRALIA.     With  a  Coloured  Map. 

3  vols.     Demy  8vo,  sos. 
RUSSELL  (COLONEL  FRANK),  Royal  Dragoons— 

THE     EARL     OF     PETERBOROUGH     AND     MON- 

MOUTH  (Charles  Mordaunt) :  A  Memoir.   With  Illustrations.   2  vols,  demy  8vo,  32s. 

"RUSSIA'S    HOPE,"     THE;     or,    Britannia    no    longer 

Rules  the  Waves.     Showing  how  the  Muscovite  Bear  got  at  the  British  Whale. 
Translated  from  the  original  Russian  by  Charles  James  Cooke.    Crown  8vo,  is. 

SCIENCE   AND  ART :  a  Journal  for  Teachers  and  Scholars. 

Issued  monthly.     3d.     See  page  39. 
SCOTT  (MAJOR-GENERAL  A.  DE   C),  late  Royal  Engineers— 

LONDON  WATER  :  a  Review  of  the  Present  Condition  and 

Suggested  Improvements  of  the  Metropolitan  Water  Supply.  Crown  Svo,  sewed,  2s. 
SCOTT  (LEADER)— 

THE  RENAISSANCE  OF  ART  IN  ITALY:   an  Illus- 

traied  S.ietch.     With  upwards  of  200  Illustrations.     Medium  quarto,  i8s. 
SCOTT-STEVENSON  (MRS.)— 

ON  SUMMER  SEAS.     Including  the  Mediterranean,  the 

^gean,  the  Ionian,  and  the  Euxine,  and  a  voyage  down  the  Danube.     With  a 
Map.     Demy  Svo,  i6s. 

OUR   HOME   IN   CYPRUS.     With  a  Map  and   Illustra- 

tions.    Third  Edition.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 

OUR   RIDE   THROUGH   ASIA   MINOR.     With  Map. 

Demy  Svo,  iSs. 
SEEM  AN  (O.)— 

THE   MYTHOLOGY  OF  GREECE  AND  ROME,  with 

Special  Reference   to  its  Use  in  Art.     From  the  German.     Edited  by  G.    H. 
BiANCHi.     64  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  55. 

SETON-KARR  (H.    W.),  F.R.G.S.,  etc.— 

TEN  YEARS'  WILD  SPORTS  IN  FOREIGN  LANDS; 

or,  Travels  in  the  Eighties.     Demy  Svo. 
SHEPHERD  (MAJOR),  R.E.— 

PRAIRIE  EXPERIENCES    IN  HANDLING  CATTLE 

AND   SHEEP.     With  Illustrations  and  Map.     Demy  Svo,  los.  6d. 
SHIRREFF  (EMILY)— 

A  SHORT  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  FRIEDRICH 

FROBEL  ;  a  New  Edition,  including  Frobel's  Letters  from  Dresden  and  Leipzig 
to  his  Wife,  now  first  Translated  into  English.    Crown  Svo,  2s. 

HOME     EDUCATION     IN     RELATION     TO     THE 

KINDERGARTEN.     Two  Lectures.     Crown  Svo,  is.  6d. 
SHORE   (ARABELLA)— 

DANTE   FOR   BEGINNERS  :   a  Sketch  of  the  "  Divina 

Commedia."    With  Translations,  Biographical  and  Critical   Notices,  and  Illus- 
trations.    With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


24  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


SIMMONDS  (T.  L.)— 

ANIMAL    PRODUCTS:    their   Preparation,  Commercial 

Uses,  and  Value.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

SINGER'S   STORY,   A.     Related  by  the  Author  of  "  Flitters, 

Tatters,  and  the  Counsellor."    Crown  Svo,  sewed,  is. 
SINNETT  (A.  P.)— 

ESOTERIC   BUDDHISM.     Annotated  and  enlarged  by 

the  Author.     Sixth  and  cheaper  Edition.    Crown  Svo,  4s. 

KARMA.     A  Novel.     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

SINNETT  (AIRS.)— 

THE  PURPOSE  OF  THEOSOPHY.     Crown  Svo,  3s. 

SMITH  [ALEXANDER  SKENE)— 

HOLIDAY    RECREATIONS,  AND    OTHER    POEMS. 

With  a  Preface  by  Rev.  Prinxipal  Cairns,  D.D.     Crown  Svo,  ss. 
SMITH  (MAJOR  R.  MURDOCK),  R.E.— 

PERSIAN  ART.  With  Map  and  Woodcuts.  Second  Edition. 

Large  crown  Svo,  2S. 
STOKES  (MARGARET)— 

EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ART  IN  IRELAND.     With  106 

Woodcuts.     Demy  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

STORY  (W.  W.)— 

ROBA  DI  ROMA.     Seventh  Edition,  with  Additions  and 

Portrait.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

CASTLE    ST.    ANGELO.      With    Illustrations.      Crown 

Svo,  los.  6d. 

A   SUBURB   OF  YEDO.      By  T.  A.  P.     With  Illustrations. 

Crown  Svo. 
SUTCLIFFE  (JOHN)— 

THE    SCULPTOR   AND   ART    STUDENT'S    GUIDE 

to  the  Proportions  of  the  Human  Form,  with  Measurements  in  feet  and  inches  of 
Full-Grown  Figures  of  Both  Sexes  and  of  Various  Ages.  By  Dr.  G.  Schadow, 
Member  of  the  Academies,  Stockholm,  Dresden,  Rome,  &c.  &c.  Translated  by 
J.  J.  Wright.     Plates  reproduced  by  J.  Sutcliffe.    Oblong  folio,  31s.  6d. 

TAINE  (H.  A.)— 

NOTES  ON  ENGLAND.     Translated,  with  Introduction, 

bv  W.  Fraser  Rae.    Eighth  Edition.    With  Portrait.    Crown  Svo,  5s. 
TANNER  (PROFESSOR),  F.C.S.— 

HOLT  CASTLE;  or,  Threefold  Interest  in  Land.     Crown 

Svo,  4s.  6d. 

JACK'S    EDUCATION;     OR,    HOW     HE     LEARNT 

FARMING.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Svo.  ss.  6d. 


CHAPMAN  ^  HALL,  LIMITED.  25 


TEMPLE  {SIR  RICHARD),  BART.,  MP.,   G.C.S.f.— 

COSMOPOLITAN  ESSAYS.   With  Maps.    Demy  8vo,  i6s. 

THRUPP  (GEORGE  A.)  and  FARR  [WILLIAM)^ 

COACH    TRIMMING.      With  60    Illustrations.      Crown 

Svo,  2S.  6d. 
TOPINARD  (DR.  PA  UL)— 

ANTHROPOLOGY.     With  a  Preface  by  Professor  Paul 

Broca.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Large  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 
TOVEY  (LIEUT.-COL.,  R.E.)— 

MARTIAL  LAW  AND  CUSTOM  OF  WAR;  or,  Military 

Law  and  Jurisdiction  in  Troublous  Times.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
TRAHERNE   (MAJOR)— 

THE    HABITS    OF   THE   SALMON.     Crown  Svo. 

TRAILL  (H.  D.)— 

THE  NEW  LUCIAN.     Being  a  Series  of  Dialogues  of  the 

Dead.     Demy  Svo,  12s. 
TROLLOPE  (ANTHONY)— 

THE  CHRONICLES  OF  BARSETSHIRE.     A  Uniform 

Edition,  in  S  vols.,  large   crown   Svo,  handsomely  printed,  each  vol.  containing 
Frontispiece.     6s.  each. 


THE    WARDEN   and   BAR- 
CHESTER  TOWERS.  2  vols. 
DR.   THORNE. 
FRAMLEY   PARSONAGE. 


THE    SMALL    HOUSE    AT 
ALLINGTON.     2  vols. 

LAST    CHRONICLE    OF 
BARSET.     2  vols. 


LIFE   OF   CICERO.     2  vols.     Svo.     £1  4s. 

VERON  (EUGENE)— 

ESTHETICS.     Translated  by  W.  H.  Armstrong.     Large 

crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 
VERSCHOYLE  (REF.  J.),  MA.— 

THE   HISTORY   OF   ANCIENT   CIVILISATION.      A 

Handbook  based  upon  M.  Gustave  Ducoudray's  "  Histoire  Sommaire  de  la 
Civilisation."  Edited  by  Rev.  J.  Yerschovle,  M.A.  With  Illustrations.  Large 
crown  Svo,  63. 

WALE  (REV.  HENRY  JOHN),  M.A.— 

MY  GRANDFATHER'S  POCKET  BOOK,  from  1701  to 

1796.     Author  of  "  Sword  and  Surplice."     Demy  Svo,  12s. 
WALFORD  (MAJOR),  R.A.— 

PARLIAMENTARY    GENERALS    OF    THE    GREAT 

CIVIL  WAR.     With  Maps.     Large  crown  Svo,  4s. 
WALKER  (MRS.)— 

UNTRODDEN    PATHS    IN    ROUMANIA.      With    77 

Illustrations.     Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

EASTERN    LIFE   AND    SCENERY,  with  Excursions  to 

Asia  Minor,  Mitylene,  Crete,  and  Roumania.  z  vols.,  with  Frontispiece  to  each 
vol.     Crown  Svo,  21s. 


26  BOOKS  PUBLISHED    B  Y 

M  'ARING  ( CHA  RLES  )— 

STATE   PURCHASE  OF    RAILWAYS.      Demy  8vo,  5s. 

WA  TSON  ( WILLIAM)— 

LIFE    IN    THE    CONFEDERATE   ARMY:    being   the 

Observations  and  Experiences  of  an  Alien  in  the  South  during  the  American  Civil 
War.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 

WEGG-PROSSER  [F.    R.)— 

GALILEO   AND    HIS   JUDGES.     Demy  8vo,  5s. 

WHITE  {WALTER)— 

A    MONTH    IN    YORKSHIRE.      With   a   Map.      Fifth 

Edition.     Post  8vo,  4s. 

A  LONDONER'S  WALK  TO  THE  LAND'S  END,  AND 

A  TRIP  TO   THE   SCILLY   ISLES.     With  4   Maps.     Third   Edition.    Post 
8vo,  4s. 

WILL-O'-THE-WISPS,    THE.      Translated  from  the  German 

of  Marie  Petersen  by  Charlotte  J.  Hart.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo, 
7S.  6d. 

WORKING   MAN'S   PHILOSOPHY,    A.     By  "  One  of  the 

Crowd."    Crown  Svo,  3s. 
WORNUM  (R.  A'.  )— 

ANALYSIS  OF  ORNAMENT:  THE  CHARACTER- 
ISTICS OF  STYLES.  An  Introduction  to  the  History  of  Ornamental  Art. 
With  many  Illustrations.     Ninth  Edition.     Royal  Svo,  cloth   Ss. 

WRIGHTSON  {PROF.  JOHN),  M.R.A.C.,  F.C.S.,  &=€.;  Examiner  in 
Agriculture  to  the  Science  and  Art  Department ;  Professor  of  Agriculture  in 
the  Normal  School  of  Science  and  Royal  School  of  Mines ;  Presidejit  of  the 
College  of  Agriculture,  Down  ton,  tiear  Salisbury ;  late  Co/nmissioner  for  the 
Royal  Agricultural  Society  of  England,  cr'c,  cfc. 

PRINCIPLES   OF   AGRICULTURAL   PRACTICE   AS 

AN   INSTRUCTIONAL   SUBJECT.     With  Geological  Map.     Crown  Svo,  ss. 

FALLOW     AND     FODDER     CROPS.  [in  the  Press. 

WORSAAE  [J.  7.  A.)— 

INDUSTRIAL   ARTS    OF    DENMARK,  FROM    THE 

EARLIEST   TIMES   TO  THE    DANISH   CONQUEST    OF    ENGLAND. 
With  Maps  and  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

YEO  {DR.  7.  BURNEY)— 

CLIMATE   AND    HEALTH    RESORTS.     New  Edition. 

Crown  Svo,  los.  6d. 
YOUNGE  {C.  D.)— 

PARALLEL    LIVES    OF    ANCIENT   AND    MODERN 

HEROES.     New  Edition.     i2mo,  cloth,  4s.  6d. 
WINDT  {H.  DE)— 

FROM     CALAIS     TO     PEKIN     BY     LAND.       With 

Numerous  Illustrations  by  the  Author.     Demy  Svo. 

YOUNG    OFFICER'S    "DON'T";    or,  Hints   to   Youngsters 

on  Joining.     32mo    is. 


CHAPMAN  ^  llALI,  LIMITED.  27 


SOUTH  KENSINGTON  MUSEUM  SCIENCE  AND  ART 
HANDBOOKS. 

Handsomely    printed    in    large    crovi/n    8vo. 

Published  for  the  Co7nmittee  of  the  Council  on  Education. 

MARINE   ENGINES   AND    BOILERS.      By  George  C.  V. 

Holmes,  Secretary  of  the  Institution  of  Naval  Architects,  Whitworth  Scholar. 
With  Sixtj'-nine  Woodcuts.     Large  crown  8vo,  3s. 

EARLY  CHRISTIAN  ART  IN  IRELAND.     By  Margaret 

Stokes.     With  106  Woodcuts-     Crown  8vo,  4s. 

A  Library  Edition,  demy  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

FOOD  GRAINS  OF  INDIA.     By  Prof.  A.  H.  Church,  M.A., 

F.C.S.,  F.LC.     With  Numerous  Woodcuts.     Small  4to,  6s. 

THE  ART  OF  THE  SARACENS  IN  EGYPT.    By  Stanley 

Lane  Poole,  B.A.,  iNLA.R.S      With  108  Woodcuts.     Crown  8vo,  4s. 

ENGLISH  PORCELAIN  :    A  Handbook  to  the  China  made  in 

England  during  the  18th  Century,  as  illustrated  hy  Specimens  chiefly  in  the 
National  Collections.  By  Prof.  A.  H.  Church,  ALA.  With  numerous  Woodcuts.  3s. 

RUSSIAN    ART   AND    ART    OBJECTS    IN    RUSSIA:    A 

Handbook  to  the  reproduction  of  Goldsmiths'  work  and  other  Art  Treasures  from 
that  country  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum.  By  Alfred  IMaskell.  With 
Illustrations.     4s.  6d. 

FRENCH    POTTERY.      By  Paul   Gasnault   and  Edouard 

Garnier.     With  Illustrations  and  Marks.     3s. 

ENGLISH   EARTHENWARE:    A  Handbook   to   the  Wares 

made  in  England  during  the  17th  and  i8th  Centuries,  as  illustrated  by  Specimens 
in  the  National  Collection.  By  Prof.  A.  H.  Church,  M..A..  With  numerous 
Woodcuts.     3s. 

INDUSTRIAL  ARTS   OF   DENMARK.     From   the    Earliest 

Times  to  the  Danish  Conquest  of  England.  By  J.  J.  A.  Wors.\ae,  Hon.  F.S.A., 
&c.  &c.     With  i>Iap  and  Woodcuts.     3s.  6d. 

INDUSTRIAL  ARTS  OF  SCANDINAVIA  IN  THE  PAGAN 

TIME.  By  Hans  Hiluebrand,  Royal  Antiquary  of  Sweden.  With  numerous 
Woodcuts.     2S.  6d. 

PRECIOUS     STONES:    Considered    in    their   Scientific    and 

Artistic  relations,  with  a  Catalogue  of  the  Townsend  Collection  of  Gems  in  the 
South  Kensington  Museum.  By  Prof.  A.  H.  Church,  ALA.  With  a  Coloured 
Plate  and  Woodcuts.     2s.  6d. 

INDUSTRIAL   ARTS   OF   INDIA.      By   Sir  George  C.  M. 

BiRDWoOD,  C.S.I.,  &c.     With  Map  and  Woodcuts.     Demy  Svo,  14s. 

HANDBOOK  TO  THE  DYCE  AND  FORSTER  COLLEC- 

TIONS  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum.  With  Portraits  and  Facsimiles.    2s.  6d. 

INDUSTRIAL     ARTS     IN    SPAIN.      By   Juan   F.    Riano. 

With  numerous  Woodcuts.     4s. 

GLASS.     By  Alexander  Nesbitt.     With  numerous  Woodcuts. 

2S.  6d. 

GOLD  AND  SILVER  SMITHS'  WORK.     By  John  Hunger- 

FORD  Polle.n',  M.A.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     :5.  6d. 

TAPESTRY.  By  Alfred  de  Champeaux.  With  Woodcuts.  2s.  6d. 
BRONZES.    By  C.  Drury  E.  Fortnum,  F.S.A.    With  numerous 

Woodcuts.    2s.  6d. 


28  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


SOUTH  KENSINGTON  MUSEUM  SCIENCE  &  ART  HANDBOOKS— C(7«//«?<?rf. 

PLAIN  WORDS  ABOUT  WATER.     By  A.  H.  Church,  M.A, 

Oxon.     With  Illustrations.     Sewed,  6d. 

ANIMAL   PRODUCTS  :    their  Preparation,  Commercial  Uses, 

and  Value.     By  T.  L.  Simmonds.     With  Illustrations.     7s.  6d. 

FOOD  :    Some  Account  of  its  Sources,  Constituents,  and  Uses. 

By  Professor  A.  H.  Church,  M.A.  Oxon.     Sixth  Thousand.    3s. 

ECONOMIC  ENTOMOLOGY.     By  Andrew  Murray,  F.L.S. 

Aptera.     With  Illustrations.     7s.  6d. 

JAPANESE   POTTERY.      Being  a  Native   Report.     With  an 

Introduction  and  Catalogue  by  A.  W.  Franks,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.  With 
Illustrations  and  Marks.     2s.  6d. 

HANDBOOK   TO   THE   SPECIAL    LOAN    COLLECTION 

of  Scientific  Apparatus.     3s. 

INDUSTRIAL  ARTS:    Historical  Sketches.     With  Numerous 

Illustrations.     3s. 

TEXTILE   FABRICS.     By  the  Very  Rev.  Daniel  Rock,  D.D. 

With  numerous  Woodcuts.     2S.  6d. 

JONES  COLLECTION    IN  THE   SOUTH    KENSINGTON 

museum.     With  Portrait  and  Woodcuts.     2s.  6d. 

COLLEGE   AND    CORPORATION    PLATE.      A  Handbook 

to  the  Reproductions  of  Silver  Plate  in  the  South  Kensigton  Museum  from 
Celebrated  English  Collections.  By  Wilfred  Josei'H  Cripi'S,  M.A.,  F.S.A. 
With  Illustrations.     2s.  6d. 

IVORIES:    ANCIENT    AND    MEDIEVAL.     By    William 

Maskell.     With  numerous  Woodcuts.     2s.  6d. 

ANCIENT   AND    MODERN    FURNITURE   AND   WOOD- 

WORK.      By  John  Hungerford  Pollbn,  M.A.    With  numerous  Woodcuts. 

2s.  6d. 

MAIOLICA.       By    C.    Drury    E.    Fortnum,    F.S.A.       With 

numerous  Woodcuts.     2s.  6d. 

THE    CHEMISTRY    OF    FOODS.      With  Microscopic  Illus- 

trations.  By  James  Brll,  Ph.D.,  &c. ,  Principal  of  the  Somerset  House  Laboratory'. 

Part  I. — Tea,  Coffee,  Cocoa,  Sugar,  &c.     2s.  6d. 

Part  ii.^Milk,  Butter,  Cheese,  Cereals,  Prepared  Starches,  &c.     3s. 

MUSICAL    INSTRUMENTS.      By  Carl  Engel.      With  nu- 

merous  Woodcuts.      2s.  6d 

MANUAL    OF    DESIGN,    compiled   from    the   Writings   and 

Addresses  of  Richard  Redgrave,  R.A.  By  Gilbert  R.  Redgrave.  With 
Woodcuts.     2S.  6d. 

PERSIAN  ART.     By  Major  R.  Murdock  Smith,  R.E.    With 

Map  and  Woodcuts.     Second  Edition,  enlarged.     2s. 


CHAPMAN  &-  HALL,  LIMITED.  29 


CARLYLE'S  (THOMAS)  WORKS. 


THE     ASHBURTON     EDITION. 

An  entirely  New  Edition,  handsomely  printed,  containing  all  the  Portraits 
and  Illustrations,  in  Seventeen  Volumes,  demy  8vo,  8s.  each. 

THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION  and  PAST  AND  PRESENT.     2  vols. 
SARTOR  RESARTUS;  HEROES  AND  HERO  WORSHIP,     i  vol. 
LIFE  OF  JOHN  STERLING— LIFE  OF  SCHILLER,     i  vol. 

LATTER-DAY     PAMPHLETS— EARLY     KINGS     OF     NORWAY— 

ESSAY  ON  THE  PORTRAIT  OF  JOHN  KNOX,     i  vc.I. 
LETTERS  AND  SPEECHES  OF  OLIVER  CROMWELL.     3  vols. 
HISTORY  OF  FREDERICK  THE  GREAT.     6  vols. 
CRITICAL  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS.     ^  vols. 


LIBRARY     EDITION     COMPLETE. 
Handsomely    printed    in    34    vols.,    demy    8vo,    cloth,    £15    Ss. 

SARTOR    RESARTUS.     With  a  Portrait,  7s.  6d. 

THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION.     A  History.     3  vols.,  each  9s. 

LIFE  OF  FREDERICK  SCHILLER  AND  EXAMINATION 

OF  H  IS  WORKS.     With  Supplement  of  i«72.     Portrait  and  Plates  9S. 

CRITICAL  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS.    With  Portrait. 

6  vols.,  each  gs. 

ON    HEROES,    HERO    WORSHIP,   AND    THE    HEROIC 

IN  HISTORY.     7S.  6d. 

PAST  AND  PRESENT.     9s. 

OLIVER  CROMWELL'S  LETTERS  AND  SPEECHES.    With 

Portraits.     5  vols.,  each  gs. 

LATTER-DAY  PAMPHLETS.     9s. 

LIFE  OF  JOHN  STERLING.     With  Portrait,  9s. 

HISTORY     OF    FREDERICK    THE    SECOND.     10  voL., 

each  9s. 

TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  GERxMAN.     3  vols.,  each  9s. 

EARLY  KINGS  OF  NORWAY;  ESSAY  ON  THE  Por- 
traits OF  JOHN  KNOX;  AND  GENERAL  INDEX.  With  Portrait 
Illustrations.     8vo,  cloth,  qs. 


BOOK'S  PUBLISHED   BY 


CHEAP     AND     UN 
5j  Z'ols.,   Crcnvn  < 
THE  FRE^XH  REVOLUTION  : 

A  Historj'-     2  vols.,  12s. 

OLIVER  CROMWELL'S  LET- 
TERS  AND  SPEECHES,  with  Eluci- 
dations, &c.     3  vols.,  i8s. 

LIVES  OF  SCHILLER  AND 
JOHN  STERLING,    i  vol.,  6s. 

CRITICAL  AND  MISCELLA- 
NEOUS ESSAYS.    4  vols.,  £1  4S. 

SARTOR  RESARTUS  AND 
LECTURES  ON  HEROES,  i  vol.,  6s. 


IFORM     EDITION. 

?z'o,  cloth,  £y  Js. 

LATTER-DAY  PAMPHLETS. 

I  vol.,  6s. 

CHARTISM    AND    PAST    AND 

PRESENT.     I  vol.,  6s. 

TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE 
GERMAN  OF  MUSvEUS,  TIECK, 
AND  RICHTER.     i  vol.,  6s. 

WILHELM  MEISTER,  by  Goethe. 

A  Translation.     2  vols.,  12s. 

HISTORY  OF  FRIEDRICH  THE 
SECOND,  called  Frederick  the  Great. 
7  vols.,  £2  gs. 


37  z'ols. 


PEOPLE'S     EDITION. 

small  crown  8vo,  27^- J   separate  vols.,  \s.  eacJi. 


SARTOR  RESARTUS.  With  Por- 
trait of  Thomas  Carlyle. 

FRENCH     REVOLUTION.        A 

History.    3  vols. 

OLIVER    CROMWELL'S     LET- 

TERS    AND    SPEECHES.      5   vols. 
With  Portrait  of  Oliver  Cromwell. 


ON  HEROES  AND 
WORSHIP,  AND  THE 
IN   HISTORY. 

PAST  AND   PRESENT. 


HERO 

HEROIC 


CRITICAL     AND 
NEOUS  ESSAYS. 


MISCELLA- 
7  vols. 

Sets,  37  vols. 


THE     LIFE     OF     SCHILLER, 

AND     EXAMINATION     OF     HIS 
WORKS.     With  Portrait. 

LATTER-DAY  PAMPHLETS. 
WILHELM   MEISTER.     3  vols. 
LIFE     OF    JOHN     STERLING. 

With  Portrait. 

HISTORY   OF   FREDERICK 
THE   GREAT.     10  vols. 

TRANSLATIONS      FROM 
MUS.EUS,  TIECK,  AND  RICHTER. 

2  vols. 

THE  EARLY  KINGS  OF  NOR- 
WAY;  Essay  on  the  Portraits  of  Kno.v. 

in  18,  37i'. 


With  Portrait. 


CHEAP     ISSUE. 

THE   FRENCH    REVOLUTION.      Complete  in  i  vol. 
Crown  8vo,  2s. 

SARTOR    RESARTUS,    HEROES    AND    HERO   WORSHIP,    PAST 

AND   PRESENT,   AND   CHARTISM.     Complete  in  i  vol.     Crown  8 vo,  2s. 

OLIVER   CROMWELL'S   LETTERS   AND   SPEECHES.     Crown  8vo, 

2S.  6d. 
CRITICAL  AND   MISCELLANEOUS   ESS.WS.     2  vols.     4s. 


SIXPENNY     EDITION. 
4/(7,    seiued. 
SARTOR   RESARTUS.     Eightieth  Thousand. 
HEROES   AND   HERO  WORSHIP. 
ESSAYS :  Burns,  Johnson,  Scott,  The  Diamond  Necklace. 

TTie  above  in  I  vol.,  cloth,  2s.  td. 


CHAPMAN  &.  HALL,  LIMITED.  3 1 

DICKENS'S    (CPIARLES)    WORKS. 

ORIGINAL     KDITIONS, 

In  detny  Svo. 

THE  MYSTERY  OF   EDWIN    DROOD.     With   Illustrations 

by  S.  L.  Fildes,  and  a  Portrait  engraved  by  Baker.     Cloth,  7s.  6d. 

OUR  MUTUAL  FRIEND.     With  Forty  Illustrations  by  Marcus 

Stone.     Cloth,  £\  is. 

THE    PICKWICK   PAPERS.     With   Forty-three   Illustrations 

by  Seymour  and  Phiz.     Cloth,  £,\  is. 

NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY.     With   Forty  Illustrations    by  Phiz. 

Cloth,  £,1  IS. 

SKETCHES  BY  "  BOZ."     With  Forty  Illustrations  by  George 

Cruikshank.     Cloth,  £,1  is. 

MARTIN  CHUZZLEWIT.     With  Forty  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 

Cloth,  £,1  IS. 

DOMBEY    AND    SON.     With    Forty    Illustrations    by    Phiz. 

Cloth,  £,1  IS. 

DAVID  COPPERFIELD.     With    Forty  Illustrations   by  Phiz. 

Cloth,  £-1  IS. 

BLEAK   HOUSE.     With   Forty  Ilhistrations   by  Phiz.     Cloth, 

£\  IS. 

LITTLE  DORRIT.     With  Forty  Illustrations  by  Phiz.     Cloth, 

£\  IS. 

THE    OLD    CURIOSITY    SHOP.     With    Seventy-five    Illus- 

trations  by  George  Cattermole  and  H.  K.  Browne.     A  New  Edition.     Uniform  with 
the  other  volumes,  £\  is. 

BARNABY  RUDGE :  a   Tale  of  the   Riots  of  'Eighty.     With 

Seventy-eight  Illustrations  by  George  Cattermole  and  H.  K.  Browne.     Uniform  with 
the  other  volumes,  £i  is. 

CHRISTMAS    BOOKS  :    Containing— The   Christmas    Carol  ; 

The  Cricket  on  the  Hearth  ;  The  Chimes  ;  The  Battle  of  Life  ;  The  Haunted  House. 
With  all  the  original  Illustrations.     Cloth,  12s. 

OLIVER  TWIST   and    TALE   OF   TWO   CITIES.     In   one 

volume.     Cloth,  £1.  is. 

OLIVER  TWIST.     Separately.     With  Twenty-four  Illustrations 

by  George  Cruikshank.     Cloth,  iis. 

A  TALE  OF  TWO  CITIES.     Separately.     With  Sixteen  Illus- 

trations  by  Phiz.     Cloth,  9s. 

* ^*  The  remainder  of  Dickens's  Works  were  not  originally  printed  in  demy  8vo. 


32 


BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


DICKENS'S  (CHARLES)  W'O^Y^^.— Continued. 


LIBRARY     EDITION. 


In  post  Svo.      With  the  Original  Illustrations,  jo  vols. ,  cloth,  £12. 


s.  d. 

16  o 

16  o 

16  o 

16  o 


PICKWICK  PAPERS 43  Illustrns.,  2  vols. 

NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY         39  ,,         2  vols. 

MAR  I  IN  CHUZZLEWIT       40  ,,         2  vols. 

OLD  CURIOSITY  SHOP  &  REPRINTED  PIECES  36  ,,         2  vols. 

BARNABY  RUDGE  and  HARD  TIMES     36          ,,         2  vols.  16  o 

BLEAK   HOUSE 40          ,.         2  vols.  16  o 

LITTLE   DORRIT         40          ,,         2  vols.  16  o 

DOM  BEY  AND  SON 38         ,,         2  vols.  16  o 

DAVID  COPPERFIELD          38          ,,         2  vols.  16  o 

OUR  MUTUAL  FRIEND       40          ,,         2  vols.  16  o 

SKETCHES  BY  "BOZ"          39          ,,         i  vol.  8  o 

OLIVER  TWLST             24          ,,         i  vol.  8  o 

CHRISTMAS  BOOKS 17          .,         i  vol.  8  o 

A  TALE  OF  TWO  CITIES 16          ,,         1  vol.  8  o 

GREAT  EXPECTATIONS       8          ,,         1  vol.  8  o 

PICTURES  FROM  ITALY  &  AMERICAN  NOTES    8          ,,         i  vol.  8  o 

UNCOMMERCIAL  TRAVELLER 8          „         i  vol.  8  o 

CHILD'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND          8          ,,         i  vol.  8  o 

EDWIN  DROOD  and  MISCELLANIES    12          ,,         i  vol.  8  o 

CHRISTMAS  STORIES  from  "Household  Words."  &c.  14    ,.         i  vol.  8  o 

THE  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS.    ByJoHN  Forster.  With  Illustrations. 

Uniform  with  this  Edition.     los.  6d. 

A    NEW    EDITION    OF    ABOVE,    WITH    THE    ORIGINAL    ILLUSTRA- 
TIONS,    IN     LARGE    CROWN    Svo,    30    VOLS.     IN    SETS    ONLY. 


THE     "CHARLES    DICKENS"    EDITION. 

In    Crowti   Svo.     In   21   vols.,  cloth,   with   Illustrations,   £j   i6s. 

PICKWICK  PAPERS  8  Illustr: 

MARTIN  CHUZZLEWIT 

DOMBEY  AND  SON  

NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY 

DAVID  COPPERFIELD     

BLEAK  HOUSE        

LITILE   DORRIT 

OUR  MUTUAL  FRIEND 

BARNABY  RUDGE 

OLD  CURIOSITY  SHOP 

A  CHILD'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  4 

EDWIN  DROOD  and  OTHER  STORIES      8 

CHRISTMAS  STORIES,  from  "  Household  Words  "  ...     8 

SKETCHES  BY  "BOZ" 8 

AMERICAN  NOTES  and  REPRINTED  PIECES     ...     8 

CHRISTMAS  BOOKS         8 

OLIVER  TWIST        8 

GREAT  EXPECTATIONS 8 

TALE  OF  TWO  CITIES 8 

HARD  TIMES  .ind  PICTURES  FROM  ITALY         ...     8 

UNCOMMERCIAL  TRAVELLER         4 

THE  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS.    Numerous  Lliisirations. 
THE  LETTERS  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS  


s. 

d. 

ions 

■■  4 

0 

■•  4 

0 

••   4 

0 

•-  4 

0 

■•  4 

0 

••   4 

0 

••   4 

0 

..   4 

0 

••  3 

6 

••  3 

6 

■•  3 

6 

••  3 

6 

•■  3 

6 

••  3 

6 

•■  3 

6 

••  3 

6 

••  3 

6 

■■  3 

6 

••  3 

0 

■•  3 

0 

••  3 

0 

2  vol 

s.  7 

0 

2  vol 

s.  7 

0 

CHAPMAN  dr'  HALL,  LIMITED. 


DICKENS'S  (CHARLES)  ySO^YJ$>.— Continued. 

THE     ILLUSTRATED     LIBRARY     EDITION. 
(WITH     LIFE.) 

Complete  inj2  Volumes.     Demy  Svo,  los.  each;  or  set,  £16. 

This  Edition  is  primed  on  a  finer  paper  and  in  a  larger  type  than  has  been 
employed  in  any  previous  edition.  The  type  has  been  cast  especially  for  it,  and 
the  page  is  of  a  size  to  admit  of  the  introduction  of  all  the  original  illustrations. 

No  such  attractive  issue  has  been  made  of  the  writings  of  Mr.  Dickens,  which, 
various  as  have  been  the  forms  of  publication  adapted  to  the  demands  of  an  ever 
widely-increasing  popularity,  have  never  yet  been  worthily  presented  in  a  really 
handsome  library  form. 

The  collection  comprises  all  the  minor  writings  it  was  Mr.  Dickens's  wish  to 
preserve. 

SKETCHES  BY  "  BOZ."     With  40  Illustrations  by  George  Cruikshank. 
PICKWICK  PAPERS.     2  vols.     With  42  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
OLIVER  TWIST.     With  24  Illustrations  by  Cruikshank. 
NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phi/.. 
OLD  CURIOSITY   SHOP  and  REPRINTED  PIECES.     2  vols.     With  Illus- 
trations by  Cattermole,  &c. 
BARNABY    RUDGE    and    HARD    TIMES.      2   vols.     With    Illubirations   by 

Cattermole,  &c. 
MARTIN  CHUZZLEWIT.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
AMERICAN    NOTES    and    PICTURES    FROM    ITALY.        i    vol.       With 

8  Illustrations. 
DOMBEY  AND  SON.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
DAVID  COPPERFIELD.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
BLEAK  HOUSE.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
LITTLE  DORRIT.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
A  TALE  OF  TWO  CITIES.     With  16  Illustrations  by  Phiz. 
THE  UNCOMMERCIAL  TRAVELLER.    With  8  Illustrations  by  Marcus  Stone. 
GREAT  EXPECTATIONS.     With  8  Illustrations  by  Marcus  Stone. 
OUR  MUTUAL  FRIEND.     2  vols.     With  40  Illustrations  by  Marcus  Stone. 
CHRISTMAS    BOOKS.     With   17  Illustrations  by  Sir  Edwin  Landseer,   R.A., 

Maclise,  R.A.,  &c.  &c. 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.     With  8  Illustrations  by  Marcus  Stone. 
CHRISTMAS    STORIES.      (From    "Household   Words "'   and    "All   the   Year 

Round.")     With  14  Illustrations. 
EDWIN     DROOD    AND    OTHER     S10RIES        With    12    Illustrations    by 

S.  L.  Fildes. 
LIFE  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS.     By  John   Forsttr.    With  Portraits.     2  vols. 

(not  separate.) 


34  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 

DICKENS'S   (CHARLES)   W'O^YJS,.— Continued. 

THE    POPULAR  LIBRARY    EDITION 

OF  THE  WORKS  OF 

CHARLES    DICKENS, 

In  30    Vols.,  large  croivn  %vo,  price  £6  ;   separate   Vols.  4J.  each. 

An  Edition  printed  on  good  paper,  each  volume  containing  16  full-page 
Illustrations,  selected  from  the  Household  Edition,  on  Plate  Taper. 

SKETCHES   BY    "BOZ." 

PICKWICK,     2  vols. 

OLIVER   TWIST. 

NICHOLAS   NICKLEBY      2  vols. 

MARTIN    CHUZZLEWIT.      2  vols. 

DOMBEY  AND    SON.      2   vols. 

DAVID    COPPERFIELD.     2  vols. 

CHRISTMAS    BOOKS. 

OUR    MUTUAL    FRIEND.      2  vols. 

CHRISTMAS   STORIES. 

BLEAK   HOUSE.       2  vols. 

LITTLE   DORRIT.      2  vols. 

OLD  CURIOSITY  SHOP  and  REPRINTED  PIECES.      2  vols 

BARNABY   RUDGE.      2  vols. 

UNCOMMERCIAL    TRAVELLER. 

GREAT    EXPECTATIONS. 

TALE   OF   TWO   CITIES. 

CHILD'S   HISTORY   OF   ENGLAND. 

EDWIN   DROOD   and   MISCELLANIES. 

PICTURES  FROM    ITALY  and   AMERICAN    NOTES. 


CHAPMAN  &>  HALL,  LIMITED.  35 

DICKENS'S    (CHARLES)   y^O^YJ$,.— Continued. 

HOUSEHOLD     EDITION. 

(WITH     LIFE.) 

In  22  Voltitnes.      Crcnun  \to,  clolk,  £,^  ^s.  6d. 

MARTIN  CHUZZLEWIT,  with  59  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

DAVID  COPPERFIELD,  with  60  Illustrations  and  a  Portrait,  cloth,  5s, 

BLEAK  HOUSE,  with  61  Illustrations,  cloth,  ss. 

LITTLE  DORRIT,  with  58  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

PICKWICK  PAPERS,  with  56  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

OUR  MUTUAL  FRIEND,  with  58  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

NICHOLAS  NICKLEBY,  with  59  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

DOMBEY  AND  SON,  with  61  Illustrations,  cloth,  5s. 

EDWIN  DROOD  ;  REPRINTED  PIECES  ;  and  other  Stories,  with  30  Illustra- 
tions, cloth,  5s. 

THE  LIFE  OF  DICKENS.    By  John  Forstek.  With  40  Illustrations.   Cloth,  5s. 

BARNABY  RUDGE,  with  46  Illustrations,  cloth,  4s. 

OLD  CURIOSITY  SHOP,  with  32  Illustrations,  cloth,  4s. 

CHRISTMAS  STORIES,  with  23  Illustrations,  cloth,  4s. 

OLIVER  TWIST,  with  28  Illustrations,  cloth.  3s. 

GREAT  EXPECTATIONS,  with  26  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

SKETCHES  BY  "  BOZ,"  with  36  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

UNCOMMERCIAL  TRAVELLER,  with  26  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

CHRISTMAS  BOOKS,  with  28  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  with  15  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

AMERICAN    NOTES  and  PICTURES  FROM   ITALY,  with  18  Illustrations 
cloth,  3s. 

A  TALE  OF  TWO  CITIES,  with  25  Illustrations,  cloth,  3s. 

HARD  TIMES,  with  20  Illustrations,  cloth,  2S.  6d. 


36  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 


DICKENS'S   (CHARLES)   ^^O^YJS^.—Contuiued. 


THE    CABINET    EDITION. 

In  32  vols,  small  fcap.  8vo,  Marble  Paper  Sides,  Cloth  Backs,  with  uncut 
edges,  price  Eighteenpence  each. 

Each  Volume  contains  Eight  Illustrations  reproduced  from  the  Originals. 

CHRISTMAS   BOOKS. 

MARTIN   CHUZZLEWIT,    Two  Vols. 

DAVID    COPPERFIELD,    Two  Vols. 

OLIVER  TWIST. 

GREAT   EXPECTATIONS. 

NICHOLAS    NICKLEBY,   Two  Vols. 

SKETCHES   BY    "BOZ." 

CHRISTMAS   STORIES. 

THE    PICKWICK   PAPERS,    Two  Vols. 

BARNABY    RUDGE,    Two  Voh. 

BLEAK    HOUSE,    Two  Vols. 

AMERICAN   NOTES   and   PICTURES   FROM   ITALY. 

EDWIN    DROOD;    AND   OTHER   STORIES. 

THE   OLD   CURIOSITY   SHOP,    Two  Vols. 

A   CHILD'S    HISTORY    OF    ENGLAND 

DOMBEY   AND    SON,    Two  Vols. 

A   TALE   OF   TWO   CITIES. 

LITTLE    DORRIT,    Two  Vols. 

MUTUAL   FRIEND,    Two  Vols. 

HARD   TIMES. 

UNCOMMERCIAL   TRAVELLER. 

REPRINTED   PIECES. 


NEW  &  CHEAP  ISSUE  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  CHARLES  DICKENS. 

In  Foskct  Voluniis. 

PICKWICK    PAPERS,  with  S  Illustrations,  clcth,  2s. 
NICHOLAS    NICKLEHV,  with  8  Illustrations,  cloth,  2s. 
OLIVER   TWIST,   with  8  lllustraiions,  cloth.js. 
SKETCHES    BY    "  BOZ,"  with  8  Illustrations,  cloth,  is. 
OLD    CURIOSITY    SHOP,   with  8  Illustrations,  cloth,  2s. 
BARXABY    RUDGE,   with  16  Illustrations,  cloth,  2s. 
AMERICAN   NOTES   and   PICTURES   FROM   ITALY,  with 

8  Illustrations,  cloth.  Is.  6d. 
CHRISTMAS    BOOKS,  with  8  Illustrations,  cloth,  is.  6d. 
MARTIN    CHUZZLE^VIT,  with  8  Illustrations,  2s. 


CHAPMAiY  ^  HALL,  LIMITED.  37 


DICKENS'S   (CHARLES)    WORKS.— 0;/^//;^//^^. 
MR.    DICKENS'S     READINGS- 

Fcap.  8f(7,  sewed. 

CHRISTMAS   CAROL   IN    PROSE,     is. 
CRICKET   ON    THE    HEARTH,     is. 
CHIMES:    A   GOBLIN   STORY,     is. 
STORY   OF   LITTLE    DOMBEY.     is. 

POOR    TRAVELLER,    BOOTS   AT    THE    HOLLY-TREE 
INN,   and    INIRS.    GAMP.     is. 


A   CHRISTMAS  CAROL,  with  the  Original  Coloured   Plates. 

Being  a  reprint  of  the  Original  Edition.     With  red  border  lines.     Small  8vo, 
red  cloth,  gilt  edges,  55. 


CHARLES    DICKENS'S    CHRISTMAS    BOOKS. 

REPRINTED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  PLATES. 

Illustrated  by  John  Leech,  D.  Macuse,  R.A.,  R.  Dovle, 
C.  Stanfield,  R.A.,  &c. 

Fcap.  cloth,  IS.  each.      Complete  in  a  case,  js. 

A    CHRISTMAS   CAROL   IN    PROSE. 

THE   CHIMES  :  A  Goblin  Story. 

THE    CRICKET    ON    THE    HEARTH:    A   Fairy   Tale   of 

Home. 

THE  BATTLE  OF  LIFE.     A  Love  Story. 

THE    HAUNTED    MAN    AND    THE    GHOST'S    STORY. 


SIXPENNY    REPRINTS. 
READINGS  FROM  the  WORKS  of  CHARLES  DICKENS. 

As  selected  and  read  by  himself  and  now  published  for  the  first  time.    Illustrated 

A    CHRISTMAS    CAROL,  and    THE    HAUNTED    MAN. 

By  Charles  Dickens.     Illustrated. 
THE    CHIMES:    A   Goblin   Storv,    and   THE    CRICKET 

ON    THE    HEARTH.     Illustrated. 

THE    BATTLE    OF    LIFE:     A    Love    Story,    HUNTED 

DOWN,    AND    A    HOLIDAY    ROMANCE.     Illustrated. 

The  last  Three  Volumes  as  Christmas  Works, 
In  One  Volume,  red  cloth,  2s.  6d. 


38  BOOKS  PUBLISHED  BY 

SCIENCE    AND    ART, 

%  .fTouiual  for  S'fadjcrs  aniJ  ^tuUcnts. 

ISSUED   BY  ^Iessrs.  CHAPMAN   &  HALL,  Limited, 

Agents  for  the  Science  and  Art  Department  of  the  Committee  of 
Council  on  Education. 

MONTHLY,    PRICE    THREEPENCE. 

The  Journal  contains  contributions  by  distinguished  men  ;  short  papers  by  prominent 
teachers  ;  leading  articles  ;  correspondence ;  answers  to  questions  set  at  the  May  Examina- 
tions of  the  Science  and  Art  Department  ;  and  Interesting  news  in  connection  with  the 
scientific  and  artistic  world. 

PRIZE    COMPETITION. 

With  each  issue  of  the  Journal,  papers  or  drawings  are  offered  for  Prize  Competition, 
extending  over  the  range  of  subjects  of  the  Science  and  Art  Department  and  City  and 
Guilds  of  London  Institute. 

There  are  thousands  of  Science  and  Art  Schools  and  Classes  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
but  the  teachers  connected  wiih  these  institutions,  although  engaged  in  the  advancement 
of  identical  objects,  are  seldom  known  to  each  other  except  through  personal  friendship. 
One  object  of  the  new  Journal  is  to  enable  those  engaged  in  this  common  work  to  com- 
municate upon  subjects  of  importance,  with  a  view  to  an  interchange  of  ideas,  and  the 
establishment  of  unity  of  action  in  the  various  centres. 


TERMS  OF  SUBSCRIPTION. 

ONE    YEARS    SUBSCRIPTION 3s.    Od. 

HALF       ,,                          ,,                   Is.    6d. 

SINGLE    COPY 3d. 

POSTAGE  MONTHLY  EXTRA Id. 


Cheques  and  Post  Office  Orders  to  be  made  payable  to 
CHAPMAN  &   HALL,  Limited. 


CHAPMAN  &-  HALL,   LJMITED. 


39 


ANSWERS   TO   QUESTIONS,    1887   and    1888. 

Messrs.  CHAPMAN  e-'  HALL  be^  io  announce  that  Arisiven  to  the  Questions 
[Elementary  and  Advanced)  set  at  the  Examinations  of  the  Science  and  Art 
Department  of  May,  1887  and  1888,  are  published  as  under,  each  subject  bein<r 
kept  distinct,  and  issued  in  pamphlet  Jorm  separately. 

1.  Animal  Physiology  ...     1887  /  By  J.  H,  E.  Brock,  M.D.,  B.S.  (Lo-ul  ), 

..      1888  i  

2.  Building  Construction  1887  [ 
1S8SJ 


3.  Theoretical  Mechanics,  18S7 

188S 

4.  Inorganic  Chemistry  (Theo- ) 

retical).  1SS7  J 

Inorganic  Chemistry  (Theo-  / 

rciical),  1688  \ 

5.  Ditto — Alternative    Course  ) 

1887  ( 

Ditto — Alternative    Course  ( 

1 888) 

6.  Magnetism  and  Electricity  \ 

18S7  r 

Magnetism  and  Electricity  ( 
188S  ) 

7.  Physiography 1887  \ 

,,      1888  j 

8.  Practical  Plane  and  Solid  \ 

Geometry     1887  r 

Practical  Plane  and  Solid  i 
...     iSisSl 


Grade. 


Geometry 
9.  Art — Third 
sprctive 
Art— Third    Grade, 
spective 
ID.  Pure  Mathematics  . 


Pek-1 
1SS7/ 
Per-  \ 
1888  J 
1887 
1888 

11.  Machine  Construction  and  \ 

Drawing       1887  f 

Machine  Construction  anu  ( 
Drawing       1888) 

12.  Principles   of  Agriculture  ) 

1887  r 

Principles  of  Agriculture  ( 
1888) 

13.  Sound,  Light,  AND  Heat,  1887  i 

„      1888/ 

14.  Hygiene  1887  \ 

1888/ 

15.  Inorganic  Chemistry  (Prac-  \ 

tical)     1887  I 

Inorganic    Chemistry  (Prac-  f 
tical)     iSSSj 

16.  Applied  Mechanics  ...     1888 


F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),D.P.H.  (Lend.) 

H.  Adams,  C.E.,  M.I.M.E. 

J.  C.  Fell,  M.I.M.E. 
E.  Pillow,  M.I.M.E. 

Rev.  F.  W.  Harnett,  M.A. 

J.     J.      Pillcy,      Ph.D.,      F.C.S., 
F.R.M.S. 

J.  Howard,  F.C.S. 

W.  Hibbert,  F.I.C,  A.I.E.E. 
W.  Rheam,  B.Sc. 
H.  Aneel. 


A. 


Fisher. 

Fisher  and  S.  Beale. 


A 

R.  R.  Steel,  F.C.S. 
H.  Carter,  B.A. 

H.  Adams,  C.E.,  M.I.M.E. 


Dr.  H.  J.  Webb,  B.Sc. 


C.  A.  Stevens. 

J.     J.      Pilley, 
F.K.M.S. 


Ph.D.,      F.C.S., 


J.  Howard,  F.C.S. 


C.  B.  Outon,  Wh.Sc. 


The  price  of  each  Painphlet  [dealing  with  both  Elementary  and  Advanced 
papers)  will  be  2d.  net,  postage  included.  Special  terms  will  be  given  if  quantities 
are  ordered. 


40 


CHAPMAN  b'   HALL,   LIMITED. 


THE    FORTNIGHTLY    REVIEW. 

Edited    by    FRANK    HARRIS. 

THE  FORTNIGHTLY  REVIEW  is  published  on  the  ist  of 
every  month,  and  a  Volume  is  completed  every  Six  Months. 
The  following  are  among  the  ContHbtttors : — 
ADMIRAL  LORD  ALCESTER. 


GRANT  ALLEN. 

SIR  RUTHERFORD  ALCOCK. 

AUTHOR  OF  "GREATER  BRITAIN. 

PROFESSOR  BAIN. 

SIR   SAMUEL   BAKER. 

PROFESSOR  BEESLY. 

PAUL   BOURGET. 

BARON   GEORGE   VON    BUNSEN. 

DR.  BRIDGES. 

HON.  GEORGE  C.  BRODRICK. 

JAMES   ERYCE,  M.P. 

THOMAS    BURT,   M.P. 

SIR  GEORGE  CAMPBELL,  M.P. 

THE   EARL  OF  CARNARVON. 

EMILIO   CASTELAR. 

RT.  HON.  J.  CHAMBERLAIN,  M.P. 

PROFESSOR  SIDNEY  COLVIN. 

THE   EARL   COMPTON. 

MONTAGUE  COOKSON,  Q.C. 

L.  H.  COURTNEY,  M.P. 

G.  H.  DAR^VIN. 

SIR  GEORGE  ^V.  DASENT. 

PROFESSOR  A.  V.  DICEY. 

PROFESSOR  DOWDEN. 

RT.   HON.  M.  E.  GRANT  DUFF. 

RIGHT  HON.  H.   F.\WCETT,  M.P. 

ARCHDEACON  F.\RRAR. 

EDWARD  A.  FREEMAN. 

J.  A.  FROUDE. 

MRS.  GARRET-ANDERSON. 

J.  W.  L.  GLAISHER,  F.R.S. 

SIR  J.  E.  GORST,  Q.C,  M.P. 

EDMUND  GOSSE. 

THOMAS  HARE. 

FREDERIC  HARRISON. 

ADMIRAL   SIR  O.  P.  HORNBY. 

LORD  HOUGHTON. 

PROFESSOR  HUXLEY. 

PROFESSOR   R.  C.  JEBB. 

ANDREW   LANG. 

FMILE  DE  LAVELEYE. 

T.  E.  CLIFFE  LESLIE. 

W.  S.  LILLY. 

MARQUIS  OF  LORNE. 


PIERRE    LOTE. 

SIR  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  Bart.,  M.P. 

THE  EARL  OF  LYTION. 

SIR  H.  .S.  MAINE. 

CARDINAL  MANNING. 

DR.  MAUDSLEY. 

PROFESSOR  MAX  MULLER. 

GEORGE   MEREDITH. 

RT.  HON.  G.  OSBORNE  MORGAN, 

Q.C,  M.P. 
PROFESSOR  HENRY  MORLEY. 
RT.  HON.  JOHN  MORLEY,  M.P. 
WILLIAM  MORRIS. 
PROFESSOR   H.  N.  MOSELEV. 
F.  W.  H.  MYERS. 
F.  W.  NEWMAN. 
PROFESSOR  JOHN  NICHOL. 
W.  G.  PALGRAVE. 
WALTER  H.  P.A.TER. 
RT.  HON.  LYON  PLAYFAIR,  M.P. 
SIR  HENRY   POTTINGER,   Bart. 
PROFESSOR  J.  R.  SEELEY. 
LORD  SHERBROOKE. 
PROFESSOR   SIDGWICK. 
HERBERT  SPENCER. 
M.   JULES   SIMON. 

(DOCTOK    L'.\CADE.MIE     Fr.A.N'C/MSe) 

HON.  E.  L.  STANLEY. 
SIR  J.  FIT2J  AMES  STEPHEN,  Q.C. 
LESLIE  STEPHEN. 
J.  HUTCHISON  STIRLING. 
A.  C.  SWINBURNE. 
DR.  VON  SYBEL. 
J.  A.  SVMONDS. 
SIR  THOMAS   SYMONDS. 
(Ad.mir.\l   of   the  Fleet). 
THE  REV.  EDWARD  F.  TALBOT 

(Warue.v  of  Keble  College). 
SIR   RICHARD   TEMPLE,  Bart. 
HON.  LIONEL  A.  TOLLEMACHE. 
H.  D.  TRAILL. 
PROFESSOR  TYNDALL. 
A.  J.  WILSON. 

GEN.  VISCOUNT  WOLSELEY. 
THE  EDITOR. 


&c.  &c.  &c. 


The  Fortnightly  Review  is  published  at  2s.  6d. 

CHAPMAN    &   HALL,    LIMITED,    ii,   HENRIETTA   STREET, 
COVEXT    GARDEN,    W.C. 


CHARLES    DICk'ENS    AND   EVANS,] 


[crystal  palace  press. 


o 


« •  uv^i  I  ^  ^xn 


CS       De  Windt,  Harry 

S  From  Pekin  to  Calais  by 

D4-^  land 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


