RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


INCLUDING 


KULDJA,     BOKHARA,     KHIVA 
AND    MERV 


HENRY     LANSDELL,     D.D 


MR.A.S.,     F.R.G.S. 

AUTHOR     OF     "through     SIBERIA 


5;3iliti^  .jFrontigpifrr,  ittaps,  antr  fJlnstrations 


IN  TWO    VOLUMES 
Vol.  II. 


Hontion 

SAMPSON    LOW,    MARSTON,    SEARLE,    AND    RIVINGTON 
i88,    FLEET    STREET 

iMMMM 


I8&5 

\An  rii^Jits  reserved.^ 


I  ^^l 


SSgN  BY 

PRSSiiRVATlON 


640244 


BY   THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


THROUGH    SIBERIA 

In  one  Volume,  \os.  6d. 
Library  Edition,  2  Vols.,  30J. 


For  further  particulars  see  p.  685. 


85 


Printed  by  Hazell,  Watson,  and  Viney,  Limited,  London  an<!  A' 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 
FROM  SAMARKAND    TO  KITAB. 

PAGE 

A  new  country,  little  visited  by  Englishmen. — Changed  mode  of 
travel.  —  Tarantass  despatched  to  Karshi.  —  My  retinue.— 
Leaving  Samarkand  for  Kara-Tiube. — Tent  lodging  in  court 
of  a  mosque. — Slumbers  disturbed. ^ — Journey  towards  Kitab. — 
Ploughing  and  threshing. — Forest  plantations. — The  Takhta- 
Karacha  Pass. — ^View  of  Shahr-i-sabz. — Descent  to  Kainar- 
bulak.  —  Welcome  from  Bokhariot  ambassadors.  —  Kainar 
refreshments. — Ride  to  Kitab ^         .       i 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

FROM  KITAB   TO  SHAHR. 

Curious  hospitality. — Entertainment  by  dancing-boys  and  mounte- 
banks. —  Native  appreciation  of  bate  has.  —  Visits  from  the 
Emir's  court. — Our  lodging  and  spies. — Reception  of  Bo- 
khariot officers.  —  Guard  of  native  soldiers.  —  Dress  for  an 
audience  with  the  Emir.  —  Procession  and  arrival  at  the 
fortress. — The  Emir  Seid  Muzaffar-ed-din. — Various  estimates 
of  his  character. — Admission  to  his  presence. — My  requests 
and  presents. — Refreshment  with  courtiers. — Princely  presents. 
— Drive  to  Shahr  in  the  Emir's  carriage    .         .   •      .         .         .14 

CHAPTER   XLVII. 

FROM  SHAHR    TO  KARSHI. 

Historical  associations  of  Shahr. — Visit  to  the  Bek,  and  his  inquiries 
concerning  Kuldja. — Information  from  courtiers. — Bokhariot 
weights  and  measures. — Return  of  certain  presents. — Untrust- 
worthiness  of  Bokhariot  statistics. — Departure  from  Shahr. — 
The  Bekships  of  Chirakchi,  Shir-a-bad,  Kobadian,  and  Kilif. — 
Hissar  mountains. — Visit  to  Bek  of  Chirakchi. — Burnes  at 
Karshi  in  1832.  —  Handsome  guest-house.— Visit  to  public 
bath. — The  slave  trade  in  Bokhara. — Visit  to  Bek  of  Karshi. — 
Mosques  and  synagogues  .         .         .         .         .         ,         .         •     U 


iv  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 
FROM  KARSHI  TO    THE   OXUS  AND  BOKHARA. 

PAGE 

Khanate  of  Bokhara :  dimensions,  soil,  and  divisions. — Recent 
exploration  of  mountain  districts. — Maieff's  journeys  to  Upper 
Oxus. — Bokhariot  recovery  of  old  territory  and  annexation  of 
new.  —  Oshanin's  exploration  of  Karategin.  —  Darwaz. — Bo- 
khariot communications. — Our  departure  from  Karshi. — Kishlaks 
of  semi-nomads.  —  Khoja-Moburak.  —  Scamper  on  my  horse 
"  Diotrephes." — Kakir  cistern. — "Unfurnished  apartments" 
and  oven, — Karaul  bazaar. — -Lake  Kunja. — Stay  at  Chitarik. — 
Approach  to  Bokhara 49 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA. 

Bokhara  from  the  earliest  times,  and  afterwards  under  the  Samanids, 
Seldjuks,  and  Uigurs. — Bokhara  conquered  by  Jinghiz  Khan, 
Tamerlane,  and  the  Uzbegs.— The  Sheibanids,  Astarkhanids, 
and  Manghits. — The  late  Emir  Nasr-Ullah. — Visit  of  Burnes  to 
Bokhara.  —  Stoddart  sent  as  British  envoy.  —  Concurrent 
Russian  missions. — Conolly  enticed  to  Bokhara  and  imprisoned. 
— Stoddart  and  Conolly  killed. — Brave  journey  of  Dr.  Wolff. — 
My  entr)'  into  Bokhara. — Its  ancient  appearance  and  customs. — 
Sumptuous  lodging  and  garden. — Bokhariot  fruit-trees  and 
horticulture 66 


CHAPTER   L. 

BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

Bokhara  as  a  place  of  learning. — Desire  to  mount  a  minaret. — 
Paucity  of  Russian  inhabitants  and  their  treatment. — Visits  to 
medresses  Kokol-tash  and  Miri-arab.  —  Characteristics  of 
Kirghese  and  Sart  music. — Dancing-boys  dressed  as  girls. — 
Misinterpretation  of  an  English  song. — ^Slumbers  disturbed  by 
watchmen,  dogs,  and  military  parade. — Service  in  the  yiimma 
mosque  reminiscent  of  temple  worship  in  Jerusalem, — A  Hindu 
temple, — Gallop  round  the  walls 86 


CONTENTS.  V 

CHAPTER  LI. 
TBE  JEWS   OF  BOKHARA. 

PAGE 

My  plans  concerning  the  Jews. — Inquiry  about  the  alleged  per- 
secutions in  Moscow  and  South  Russia. — Russia  :  how  regarded 
by  Western  and  Eastern  Jews. — Oppressed  condition  of  Jews 
in  Bokhara. — Visits  to  their  synagogue,  and  their  sick. — 
Inquiry  for  Hebrew  manuscripts.  —  Hints  concerning  their 
technicalities. — Wonderful  manuscript  of  the  Old  Testament. — 
Fear  of  the  Jews  to  receive  us. — My  letter  to  the  Emir  on  their 
behalf 103 

CHAPTER  LII. 

BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE  ^Continued). 

Visit  to  a  primary  school. — Method  of  study. — A  ride  outside  the 
walls. — Mosque  of  Namazi-gah. — Visit  to  the  Kush-beggi. — 
The  Emir's  palace  and  curiosities. — Conversation  with  the 
Kush-beggi  and  his  son. — Some  of  my  requests  refused. — Value 
of  presents  received. — Visit  to  the  bazaar. — Commerce  and 
trade  of  Bokhara. — The  Righistan. — Bokhara  after  dark. — 
Standing  up  for  my  rights. — Ride  towards  Katte-Kurgan. — The 
lepers'  quarter. — Fear  of  punishment. — Return  to  our  lodgings    120 

CHAPTER  LIII. 

SUNDRIES   CONCERNING  BOKHARA. 

Both  guest  and  prisoner. — Use  made  of  custodians. — Bokhara 
minerals. — Building  materials  and  garden  produce. — Animals 
and  animal  products. — The  natives  and  their  diseases.— Treat- 
ment of  the  insane. — The  n's/ita,  or  guinea-worm,  and  in- 
vestigations concerning  it.  —  Native  method  of  treatment. — 
Classes  of  native  society. — The  Bokhara  prisons.— Inquiry  as 
to  where  Stoddart  and  Conolly  were  confined. — Manner  of  life 
of  the  Emir. — His  harem 


140 


CHAPTER  LIV. 
FROM  BOKHARA  TO  CHARJUI. 
Our  generous  reception  at  Bokhara  and  its  cause. — Extra  presents 
to  the  Emir. — Dr.  Schuyler's  '•  Turkistan." — Departure  from 
Bokhara. — End  of  Zarafshan  oasis. — Bokhariot  agriculture 
and  horticulture. — Ruins  of  Peikand. — Approaching  Kara-Kul. 
— Inexperienced  postilions.— Lake  of  Kara-Kul. — The  sands  of 
Sundukli. — Our  tarantass  left  behind. — A  night's  lodging  at 
Betik 


159 


vi  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   LV. 
CHARJUI. 

PAGE 

Departure  for  the  Oxus. — Meeting  of  Charjui  officials. — Our  lodging 
and  reception. — Pilau  and  native  bread. — Visit  to  the  Bek. — 
Received  with  music. — The  place  of  execution,  and  the  prison. — 
Charjui  bazaar  and  slave-trade.  —  A  Bek's  official  staff. — 
Administration  of  the  khanate,  and  taxes.— The  governments 
of  the  Tsar  and  the  Emir,  how  respectively  regarded  by  the 
Bokhariots. — Return  from  Charjui  to  the  Oxus. — The  tarantass 
regained. — Departure  of  our  two  attendants        .         .        .        .175 


CHAPTER  LVI. 
THE  UPPER  OXUS. 
Names  of  the  Oxus. — The  Englishman  Wood,  its  first  explorer. — Its 
source  and  issue  from  the  mountains. — Strategical  importance 
of  the  next  reach  of  200  miles. — Alleged  feasibilily  or  pro- 
bability of  a  Russian  invasion  of  India. — Fords  and  ferries  on 
the  Upper  Oxus. — The  Oxus  at  Kilif,  and  from  Khojah-Saleh 
to  Charjui. — Reports  on  the  profitable  steam  navigation  of  the 
Oxus. — The  Amu-daria  at  Charjui. — Our  boat  for  floating 
down  the  river 192 

CHAPTER  LVII. 

FROM  CHARJUI   TO  KABAKLI. 

Prospect  of  floating  300  miles  on  the  Oxus. — Escort  for  protection 
against  the  Turkomans. — Hydrography  of  the  river. — Journey 
to  Kheradj. — Rough  hospitality. — Journey  to  Ustik. — Descrip- 
tion of  the  river. — Compulsory  service  of  boatmen.— Geological 
phenomena. — Arrival  at  Ildjik.  -Change  of  boat  and  oarsmen. — 
A  Bokhariot  **  Siberia." — Arrival  at  Kabakli. — Sheep  attacked 
by  wolf. — Visit  from  the  Bek 201 

CHAPTER   LVII  I. 

FROM  KABAKLI  TO  FETRO-ALEXANDROVSK. 

Hydrography  of  river  to  Russian  frontier. — Departure  from  Kabakli. 
— Ruins  on  the  banks  and  fiigais.  —  Precautions  against 
robbers.  —  Fauna  of  the  islands  and  river  banks.  —  Native 
information. — Uzbeg  notions  of  a  future  life. — Singing  oarsmen. 
— The  Bokhariot  frontier. — Flora  of  the  river  islands  and  banks. 
—The  "  Pitniak  Curve"  and  "Lion's  Mouth."— A  dumb 
journey  thence  by  horses. — Shurakaneh.— Arrival  at  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk 213 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  LIX. 

PETKO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND    THE   LOWER   OX  US. 

PAGE 

By  what  route  homewards  ? — The  Orenburg  and  Aralo-Caspian 
routes. — A  social  evening  at  the  Governor's  house. — Change 
of  weather. — Petro-Alexandrovsk  and  its  institutions. — Pro- 
posed desert  journey. — Arrival  of  tarantass. — Distribution  of 
Scriptures. — Results  of  Bible  work  in  Siberia  and  Central  Asia. 
— The  Lower  Oxus  and  its  hydrography :  its  delta  and  fall  into 
the  Aral. — Fish  of  the  Amu-daria. — Discovery  therein  of  the 
Scaphirhyiichiis. — Geological  questions  concerning  it      .         .229 


CHAPTER   LX. 

FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHLVA. 

Departure  with  the  Khivan  Consul. — Journey  to  the  Oxus  and 
crossing. — Arrival  at  Khanki.  —  Extraordinary  sepulchres. — 
Central  Asian  funerals.  —  Our  lunch  and  native  food. — The 
Khivan  oasis  and  its  dimensions. — Its  gardens  and  principal 
aj-yks. — Arrival  in  Khiva  at  the  house  of  the  Divan-beggi. — 
His  antecedents  and  visit. — Inspection  of  his  premises. — Our 
visit  to  the  Khan. — Khivan  manuscripts  and  documents.— 
Burnaby's  "  Ride  to  Khiva" 246 


CHAPTER  LXI. 

THE   KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY. 

My  informants. — -Dimensions  of  the  khanate  :  its  soil,  geology,  and 
botany. — Khivan  melons,  and  efforts  to  introduce  them  into 
England. — Khivan  fauna,  inhabitants,  revenue,  and  foreign 
relations. — Kharezm  under  the  Arabs. — Conquests  of  Jinghis 
Khan  and  Tamerlane. — The  Uzbeg  khans,  and  commencement 
of  intercourse  with  Russia. — Raids  of  Cossacks,  and  expedition 
of  Cherkassky.  —  Khivan  enslavement  of  Cossacks. — Kazak 
khans.  —  Perovsky's  expedition  and  English  mediation.  — 
Shakespear's  conduct  of  Russian  slaves. — Russian  capture  of 
Khiva 264 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  LXII. 
THE  KHIVAN  CAPITAL  AND  ITS   COLLEGES, 

I'AGE 

The  sights  of  the  town,  including  the  bazaar. — Central  Asian 
weights,  measures,  and  trade. — Cloisonne  turquoise  jewellery. — 
Khivan  industries.  —  The  medresses  of  Allah  Kuli  and 
Madrahim  Khan.— College  life.— Classification  of  students. — 
Character  of  Muhammadan  studies. — The  Uzbeg  language 
and  kindred  dialects. — Russia's  responsibility  towards  Muham- 
madans. — Pehlivan-Ata  mosque  and  its  royal  tombs. — Moslem 
pilgrimages 284 

CHAPTER  LXIII. 

KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND    THEIR    WORSHIPPERS.  " 

Muhammadan  religious  orders. — Ceremonies  of  the  Jahria  Brother- 
hood.— Superstitious  practices. — Dancing  dervishes. — Religious 
condition  of  Central  Asiatics. — Morals  of  the  people. — Fanati- 
cism and  indifference. — Their  attitude  towards  the  Bible  and 
Christianity.  —  Importance  of  missions  to  Muhammadans. — 
Efforts  of  "Orthodox"  missionaries. — Labours  of  the  Bible 
Society. — Khiva  seen  from  a  minaret. — The  winter  palace  and 
yumma  mosque. — The  prison  and  gallows. — Home  entertain- 
ment. —  Farewell  visit  to  the  Khan.  —  Hazarasp  and  its 
legendary  origin 295 

CHAPTER  LXIV. 

FROM  KHIVA    TO   TASHAUZ. 

Departure  from  Khiva  with  Khassan  the  Batchman. — Luggage 
arbas. — Kosh-ku-pryk  and  its  melons. — Aryk  and  town  of 
Gazavat. — Russian  reconnaissance  of  Khivan  oasis. — Our  stay 
at  Shavat. — Amusements  of  the  natives. — Havlis  and  their 
supposed  resemblance  to  Scripture  "  strongholds." — Visit  to 
havli  at  Manak. — Oil  and  corn  mills. — Hawks  for  falconry. — 
Mud  walls  of  the  havli. — Invitation  to  stay. — Route  to  Tashauz  315 

CHAPTER  LXV. 
FROM  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA  URGENJ. 
Stay  in  the  Khan's  palace. — Former  condition  of  Russian  slaves  in 
Khiva. — The  town  of  Tashauz. — View  from  the  palace  roof. — 
The  Khivan  climate. — Arrival  at  Iliali. — Shakhavat  aryk  to 
Zmukshir. — The  town  of  Iliali. — A  starting-place  for  the 
Caspian.  —  Khivan  irrigation.  —  Our  luggage  attacked  by 
robbers. — Stay  at  Ak-tepe. — The  Turkoman  region. — Accident 
near  Kunia  Urgenj 328 


CONTE^/TS. 


CHAPTER   LXVI. 

PAGE 

KUNIA  URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA. 
Antiquity  of  Kunia  Urgenj. — Sieges  of  Jinghis  Khan  and  Tamerlane. 
— Visits  of  Jenkinson  and  other  Europeans. — Inspection  of  the 
ruins. — The  minarets  and  mausoleums. — Tombs  of  Tuirebek 
Khanim  and  Sheikh  Nejm-ed-din-Kubera. — ^Khivan  communi- 
cations and  routes  from  Kunia  Urgenj, — The  town  of  Hojeili. — 
Settlement,  near,  of  a  Mennonite  colony.  —  The  town  of 
Kungrad. — Our  lodgings  at  Kunia  Urgenj. — Central  Asian 
"  home  life." — Marriage  and  divorce. — Life  in  a  royal  harem. — 
Seclusion  of  women. — Need  of  female  missionaries  in  Central 
Asia 339 


CHAPTER  LXVII. 

KUNIA    CTRGENJ  AND  PREPARATIONS  FOR    THE  DESERT. 

Delay  in  getting  camels. — A  Kirghese  court  of  justice  and  witnesses. 
— Kirghese  interpreter. — A  new  servant. — Need  of  Kirghese 
literature.  —  Preparation  for  the  desert ;  camel  cradles ; 
cooking  utensils,  and  provisions. — Arrival  of  camels  and  dis- 
honesty of  attendants. — Presumptive  danger  ahead  .         .         .  357 


CHAPTER   LXVIII. 

FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO   KUNIA    VEZIR. 

Departure  from  Kunia  Urgenj.  —  Rest  in  a  Turkoman  tent. — 
Forced  labour  of  the  Khan. — Dismissal  of  attendants  with 
presents. — New  interpreter  and  guides. — Our  last  habitation. — 
Doctoring  a  Turkoman. — "Turning  in"  to  camel  cradles. — 
Rosy's  accident.  —  My  ride  through  the  night.  —  Wells  of 
Karategin. — First  caravan  breakfast. — Endeavours  to  hasten 
the  drivers. — Journey  in  the  old  Oxus  bed. — The  dam  of  Egin 
Klych. — Ruins  of  Mashrek. — Pitching  our  tent  opposite  Kunia 
Vezir. — Reference  thereto  by  Abu'l  Ghazi. — ^Jenkinson's  fore- 
cast,— Routes  of  other  Englishmen  from  Kunia  Urgenj     .         .  368 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  LXIX. 
FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR    TO  SARY  KAMISH. 

PAGE 

Order  of  march  and  loading  camels. — Tragical  end  of  a  china 
basin. — Climbing  a  camel's  hump. — The  Oxus  bed  at  Ak- 
bugut. — Description  of  old  Oxus  bed  from  Kunia  Urgenj. — 
The  Butenau  plateau  and  Kazak  tombs. — Cliffs  of  the  Ust  Urt 
and  traces  of  Jenkinson. — The  Kitchkine-daria. — The  pool  at 
Dekche. — Further  description  of  the  Oxus  bed. — ^ Wells  of  Sary 
Kamish. — Correction  of  Murad  for  stealing. — Character  of 
guides. — Arrival  at  Sary  Kamish 386 

CHAPTER  LXX. 

SARY  KAMISH  AND    OLD  BEDS   OF  THE    OXUS. 

Lakes  of  Sary  Kamish  and  their  characteristics. — Testing  specific 
gravity  of  water. — Its  chemical  analysis. — Crossing  the  lake 
basin  to  the  Ust  Urt.  —  Jenkinson' s  alleged  "Bay  of  the 
Caspian." — Geographical  problems  respecting  the  course  of 
the  Oxus  and  Sea  of  Aral. — Historical  discussion  and  physical 
investigation. — Testimony  of  travellers  from  17 17.  —  Recon- 
naissances of  Markozoff,  Stebnitzky,  Glukhovsky,  Lupandine, 
and  Petrusevitch. — Four  dry  Oxus  beds, — The  feasibility  of 
diverting  the  Oxus  into  the  Caspian. — The  cause  of  its  deflec- 
tion eastwards    . 398 

CHAPTER   LXXI. 

FROM  SARY  KAMISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR. 

Mounting  the  Ust  Urt. — The  well  Uzun  Kuyu. — Saxaul  and  other 
fuel. — Bread  baken  on  the  coals, — Capture  of  a  gazelle. — 
Remains  of  sun  worship. — Troubles  with  attendants. — Break- 
fast on  a  camel's  back. — The  wells  of  Kazakhli. — The  bay  of 
Kaplan  Kir, — A  dry  ocean  bed, — Kaplan  Kir  not  an  island. — 
The  wells  of  Kum-sebshem, — Ascent  from  the  bed  of  Kaplan  Kir  410 

CHAPTER   LXXIl, 

FROM  KAPLAN  KIR    TO  KRASNOVODSK 

Road  to  well  of  Seikiz  Khan. — Improved  prospects,  but  low  spirits. 
— Search  of  Bible  for  illustrative  passages. — Lack  of  domestic 
comforts. — Revival  of  hope  at  sight  of  Caspian. — Russian 
itinerary  from  Iliali  to  Krasnovodsk. — The  pond  of  Porsu. — 
Gazelles, — The  Kara-boghaz  and  its  geography. — A  sixteen 
bours'  march. — Oriental  customs  illustrated, — Fauna  of  the 
steppe. — The  land  tortoise. — Last  night  on  the  camel's  back. — 
Mouldy  bread  and  tattered  garments. — Arrival  at  Krasnovodsk  421 


CONTENTS.  XI 

CHAPTER  LXXIII. 
TURKMENIA. 

PAGE 

Turkmenia:  its  boundaries,  area,  and  surface. — Russian  maps 
with  new  frontier. — Revision  of  this  and  following  chapters  by 
M.  Lessar. — The  Caspian  littoral. — The  Balkhan,  Kuren-dagh, 
and  Kopet-dagh  mountains. — The  rivers  Atrak  and  Gurgan. — 
Meteorology,  flora,  and  fauna. — The  Turkomans  :  their  origin, 
physiology,  and  characteristics. — Turkoman  tribes  :  their  dis- 
tribution and  sub-divisions. — Habitations,  food,  and  occupa- 
tions.— Turkoman  women 434 


CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

THE    TURKMEMAN  OASES. 

Oases  of  Akhal,  Attek,  Tejend,  and  Merv. — The  Akhal  oasis  :  its 
dimensions,  settlements,  and  history. — The  Attek  settlements, 
history,  and  hydrography. — The  Tejend  oasis. — The  Heri  Rud 
from  Herat  to  Sarakhs,  and  below. — The  Merv  oasis. — The 
Murgab  from  Penjdeh. — Unknown  country  between  the  Murgab 
and  Heri  Rud. — The  desert  around  Merv,  and  its  historical 
associations. — Merv  in  the  times  of  Burnes,  Abbott,  Shake- 
spear,  and  Wolff — List  of  Central  Asian  travellers  from  the 
13th  to  the  19th  centuries 449 


CHAPTER  LXXV. 

THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE    TO   MERV. 

Russo-Turkoman  relations  from  17 13. — Russian  forts  on  the  Caspian 
seaboard.  —  Opposition  from  Kirghese  and  Turkomans. — 
Russian  advance  to  Kizil  Arvat  and  Chikishliar. — Failures 
under  Markozoff.  —  Pacification  of  Yomud  Turkomans  by 
Lomakin. — Lomakin's  defeats  by  the  Akhal  Tekkes. — Skobe- 
leff's  campaign  and  capture  of  Geok  Tepe. — Turkmenia  visited 
by  political  agents,  private  adventurers,  and  a  journalist. — 
Journeys  of  Marsh,  Napier,  Macgregor,  Butler,  and  Petruse- 
vitch. — O' Donovan's  ride  to  Merv,  and  extracts  from  his  private 
correspondence. — Journeys  in  disguise  of  Stewart  to  Khorassan 
and  Alikhanoff  to  Mer^^  —  Benoist-Mechin's  journey  from 
Khiva  to  Merv  ..........  460 


xii  COA^IJ^WTS. 

CHAPTER  LXXVI. 
MERV    AS    ANNEXED. 

PAGE 

The  fortress  of  Kaushid  Khan. — Irrigation  and  vegetation  of  the 
oasis. — MervTekkes  :  their  number,  divisions,  and  distribution, 
with  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  trade. — Their  religious  and 
moral  characteristics. — Their  lawlessness  at  home  and  atrocities 
abroad. — Persian  slaves. — Submission  of  Mervis  to  Russia. — 
Explanations  of  the  Moscow  Gazette. — Suspicions  of  Russian 
intrigue. — Dependence  of  Merv  on  Khiva. — Signs,  in  1883,  of 
coming  submission. — Partial  opposition  to  Russian  rule. — The 
present  situation 475 


CHAPTER  LXXVII. 

FROM  KRASNOVODSK  HOMEWARDS. 

Descent  into  Krasnovodsk. — Hospitality  of  the  Commandant. — 
Dismissal  of  native  attendants. — Our  rate  of  travel  and 
itinerary. — Mertvy  Kultuk  and  Kizil  Arvat  routes. — Visit  to 
Merv  abandoned. — The  town  of  Krasnovodsk,  and  its  scanty 
supplies. — Visit  to  a  Turkoman  aba. — Turkoman  women •  and 
jewellery. — Armenian  trading. — Passage  across  the  Caspian. — 
Baku  and  its  oil. — From  Baku  to  Tifiis  in  a  horse-box. — Bible 
distribution  from  Tifiis.  —  Scenery  at  Batoum. — Voyage  to 
Odessa. — Summary  of  journey,  and  farewell       .         .         .         .  491 


APPENDICES 


P>tGB 

A.  The  Fauna  of  Russian  Turkistan  :— 

Preface 506 

Mammalia 515 

Aves 517 

Reptilia 528 

Amphibia 529 

Pisces        ..........  530 

' 533 

Mollusca   ..........  537 

Araneae 543 

Crustacea 548 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

PAGE 

Coleoptera 552 

Mellifera             ...  562 

Sphegidae 568 

Scoliidae            .........  572 

Mutillidae 575 

Formicidae 576 

Chrysidiformes  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -579 

Lepidoptera        .         .         . 581 

,,            of  Kuldja 596 

Neuroptera         .........  609 

,,           Odonata 612 

Orthoptera  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -613 

Vermes 615 

B.  The  Flora  of  Russian  Turkistan  : — 

Preface 618 

List  of  Species  .........  623 

C.  Bibliography  of  Russian  Central  Asia:— 

Preface      ..........  654 

Asia  (Central)  in  general 659 

Bokhara     . 667 

Khiva 668 

Khokand 670 

Kuldja 671 

Siberia — Western       ....                  ...  673 

Turkistan  ..........  674 

Turkmenia 677 

Maps  illustrative  of  Central  Asia 679 

Alphabetical  List  of  Authors 681 

General  Index    68s 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS    IN   VOL.    II. 


PAGE 
THE   FORTRESS  OF  KITAB  AT  SHAHR-1-SABZ— THE   AUTHOR'S    RETURN  FROM    A 

VISIT  TO  THE  EMIR  OF  BOKHARA Frontispiece 

KTHNOLOGICAL  MAP  OF  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA,  INCLUDING  KULDJA, 
BOKHARA,  KHIVA,  AND  MERV,  WITH  AUTHOR'S  ROUTE,  AND  SHOWING 
THE     LOCALITIES      INHABITED     BY     RUSSIANS,      KIRGHESE,     TURKOMANS, 

UZBEGS,  TAJIKS,    AND  CHINESE  RACES To  face  I 

THE   BAZAAR,    OR   MARKET  PLACE,   OF  KITAB 23 

SEID  MUZAFFAR-ED-DIN,    EMIR  OF  BOKHARA 27 

RUINS     OF     TAMERLANE'S      PALACE      AT     SHAHR-I-SABZ,      AND     REVIEW     OF 

BOKHARIOT  TROOPS 35 

THE  COURT   MOSQUE   AT   KITAB 38 

TOMB  OF  ABDULLAH   KHAN   AT   BAHA-UD-DIN 70 

GROUND   PLAN    OF   THE    PRINCIPAL   GUEST-HOUSE   AT    BOKHARA            .           .            .  81 

ENCAMPMENT  OF   BOKHARIOT  SOLDIERS 93 

MEDRESSE  OF  ABDUL   AZIZ   KHAN 99 

A   JEW    OF   CENTRAL    ASIA Ill 

A   JEWESS  OF   BOKHARA II3 

A   TIBETAN   COW    AND   NATIVE   KEEPER 143 

A   PUBLIC   POOL   AT   BOKHARA 147 

THE   AUTHiJK     IN     KOBE    OF    HONOUR,    WITH     lURQUOISK     BRIDLE,    PRESENTED 

BV  THE   EMIK   OF   BOKHARA 161 

CENTRAL   ASIAN    MUSICIANS 182 


VIKW  OF   KHIVA   WITHIN   THE  OUTER   WALL 


253 


AGE 
260 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.  xv 

SEID   MUHAMMAD  RAHIM,    KHAN   OF  KHIVA 

THE  WINTER   PALACE  OF  THE   KHAN   AT   KHIVA 281 

THE   MEDRESSE   MADRAHIM 289 

THE   GREAT   MINARET   OF   KHIVA 29I 

MINARET  OF  THE   MOSQUE   SEID   BAI 3o6 

KHIVAN   TAMBOURINE  MUSIC 309 

THE   HAZARASP  GATE   AT   KHIVA S^l 

A    KHIVAN   AREA 3^7 

GROUND   PLAN   OF  A   KHIVAN   HAVLI 324 

A   CENTRAL   ASIAN   CORN   MILL .  .  •  3^5 

THE  MINARETS  OF   KUNIA   URGENJ .  343 

THE   TOMB  OF  TIUREBEK   KHANIM 345 

A   KIRGHESE  EQUESTRIENNE 3^0 

A   KIRGHESE    "FLITTING" •  3^8 

TURKOMAN   TENTS   NEAR   KRASNOVODSK,    ON   THE  SHORE  OF  THE  CASPIAN      .  446 

THE   FORTRESS  OF   KRASNOVODSK 497 

GOVERNOR'S   HOUSE   AND   STORES   AT   KRASNOVODSK 498 

OFF  SUKUM  KALI."     {From  an  oil  painting  by  Aivazovski,  in  the  possession 

of  Dr.  Lansdell) 504 


OBSERVANDA. 


In  proper  names  the  letters  should  be  pronounced  as  follows : — 
a  as  in  fother ;  ^  as  in  th^re ;  /  as  in  ravme ;  ^  as  in  g^ ;  z/  as  in 
h/nar ;  and  the  diphthongs  at  and  ei  as  /  in  h/de.  The  consonants 
are  pronounced  as  in  English,  save  that  kh  is  guttural,  as  ch  in  the 
Scotch  loch. 

Unless  otherwise  stated  : — 

1.  The  dates  are  given  according  to  English  reckoning,  being  in 
advance  of  the  Russian  by  twelve  days. 

2.  English  weights  and  measures  are  to  be  understood. 

3.  Degrees  of  temperature  are  expressed  according  to  the  scale  of 
Fahrenheit. 

The  ordinary  paper  rouble  is  reckoned  at  two  shillings,  its  value 
at  the  time  of  the  Author's  visit ;  but  before  the  Russo-Turkish  war 
in  1877,  it  was  worth  between  halfa-crown  and  three  shillings. 

The  Russian  paper  rouble  (or  100  kopecks)  equals  2  shillings  English, 
silver      ,,  „      3       „ 


vershok 

arshin 

sajen 

verst  (500  sajens) 

desiatin  (2,400  sq.  sajens) 

sq.  verst 

zolotnik  (96'dols) 

pound 

pood 

garnet 

vedro 

chetvert 


1*75  inches      ,, 
28  inches         „ 
7  feet 

'667,  mile       „ 
2*86  acres      „ 
•43949  sq.  mile, 
equals  2-41  drams  avoirdupois. 
1 4 '43  ounces. 
.,  36  lbs. 

•34  peck. 
„       2*7     Imperial     gallons,     or 

3*25  gallons  of  wine. 
„         '72  quarter. 


I'or  Asiatic  Moneys,  Weiglits,  and  Measures,  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  682 


RUSSIAN    CENTRAL  ASIA, 

INCLUDING 

KULDJA,   BOKHARA,   KHIVA,  AND   MERV. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

FROAI  SAMARKAND  TO  KITAB. 

A  new  country,  little  visited  by  Englishmen. — Changed  mode  of  travel. 
— Tarantass  despatched  to  Karshi. — My  retinue. — Leaving  Samar- 
kand for  Kara-Tiube. — Tent  lodging  in  court  of  a  mosque. — Slum- 
bers disturbed. — Journey  towards  Kitab. — Ploughing  and  threshing. 
— Forest  plantations. — The  Takhta-Karacha  Pass. — View  of  Shahr- 
i-sabz. — Descent  to  Kainar-bulak. — Welcome  from  Bokhariot 
ambassadors. — Kainar  refreshments. — Ride  to  Kitab. 

T^HUS  much  in  regard  to  Russian  Central  Asia, 
X  which  is  the  main  title  of  this  book.  Now 
we  enter  on  a  different  district — Bokhara,  Khiva,  and 
Turkmenia — and  with  change  of  scene  comes,  in  a 
measure,  change  of  treatment.  When  preparing  to 
leave  Samarkand  I  was  conscious  of  making  a  dis- 
tinctly new  departure.  One  Russian  officer  had 
expressed  surprise  that  I  did  not  travel  with  a 
servant.  I  decidedly  preferred  not  to  do  so  on 
Russian  soilj  but  now  I  was  to  start  as  a  proprietor 
of   horses,    with    two    interpreters    and    two    mounted 

VOL.  IL  I 


2  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

attendants — a  cavalcade  of  five,  that  afterwards 
increased  sometimes  to  a  dozen.  Further,  my  taran- 
tass,  with  all  my  personal  conveniences,  was  no 
longer  to  be  the  chariot  in  which  we  could  roll  along 
in  comparative  ease, '  but,  at  the  outset  at  all  events, 
my  baggage  had  to  be  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and 
myself  to  take  to  the  saddle.  The  tarantass  was  to 
be  sent  by  a  carriage-road  through  Djam  to  Karshi,  a 
distance  of  94  miles,  and  it  was  not  easy  at  first  to 
decide  what  things  were  so  necessary  or  so  valuable 
that  they  must  be  taken  with  me  ;  but  when  all  was  in 
readiness  there  were  16  packages  to  be  placed  in 
the  carriage,  besides  such  as  could  be  locked  up.  The 
common  cart  of  the  country  is  called  an  arda,  and 
the  man  who  drives  it  an  arba-kesh.  One  of  these 
men  had  undertaken  to  get  my  tarantass  to  Karshi  for 
^4,  and  there  await  my  coming,  asking,  however,  for 
three-fourths  of  the  pay  in  advance. 

For  some  reason  I   did  not  clearly  understand,  the 
arbakesh  insisted  on  taking  the  wheels  off  the  tarantass 
and  mounting  it  on  an  arba.      I  confess  to  having  some 
qualms  about  committing  ''  my  little  all "  to  the  care  of 
the  man,  especially  in  a  new  country  where   I  should 
be  unable  to  invoke  the  aid  of  a  friendly  tchinovnik 
if  things  went   wrong.      A    happy  thought  occurred, 
however,   when    all   was   in    readiness,   respecting   the 
importance  attached  by  Easterns,  and  for  that  matter 
by  Russians  too,   to  a  seal.      Taking  light  and  wax 
I    solemnly    sealed    up  the  curtain   and   hood,   in  the 
presence  of  the  arba-kesh  and  his   helper,   and   then 
called  them  in  to  put  each  "  his  mark  "  to  a  receipt  for 
the  tarantass   and   its  contents.      I    afterwards  heard 
that  the  natives  were  frightened  by  this  formal  pro- 
ceeding, especially  as  it  took  place  in  the  house  of  the 


FROM  SAMARKAND  TO  KITAB.  3 

Governor,  and  they  drew  from  the  transaction  pre- 
cisely the  inference  I  intended,  that  they  had  some 
thing  important  committed  to  their  charge,  and  must 
mind  what  they  were  about  with  it.  My  tarantass 
then  rolled  out  of  the  yard  like  a  miniature  locomotive 
on  one  of  Pickford's  trucks,  after  which,  on  October  2nd, 
I  placed  my  foot  in  the  stirrup,  as  Tamerlane  used  to  say, 
when  leaving  Samarkand,  and  went  forth  to  conquer. 

The  two  djiguitts,  named  Kolutch  and  Fazul,  were 
both  Uzbegs,  and  dressed  in  long  robes  and  white 
turbans.  They  were  to  accompany  us,  if  I  pleased, 
as  far  as  the  Oxus,  but  they  were  provided  with  little 
luggage,  for  it  was  all  stow^ed  away  in  saddle-bags. 
Fazul  could  speak  no  Russian,  and,  so  far  as  informa- 
tion was  concerned,  was  of  little  service  ;  so  I  sent  him 
forward  to  accompany  the  man  who  had  charge  of  the 
sumpter  horse,  which  had  been  hired  from  the  bazaar 
at  2s.  a  day  to  go  with  us  as  far  as  Karshi.  Kolutch, 
the  other  djiguitt,  was  a  man  of  more  character,  and, 
for  an  Oriental,  had  a  considerable  amount  of  ''  go  "  in 
him;  too  much,  I  fancy,  for  the  natives,  over  whom  he 
appeared  occasionally  to  lord  it,  but  he  was  faithful  to 
me  and  mine.  Our  Tatar  interpreter  was  one  Sulei- 
man Yakooboff,  whom  we  surnamed  ''  Yakoob." 

Leaving  the  Governor's  palace,  and  its  kind  hospi- 
tality, we  passed  the  tomb  of  Tamerlane,  and  saw  the 
Russians  at  work  on  the  exterior  of  the  dome,  and 
then  left  Samarkand  by  what  used  to  be  the  Khoja 
Akhrar  gate,  so  called  after  a  celebrated  saint  of  that 
name,  but  now  thrown  down.  Just  beyond  there  sat  a 
woman  by  the  wayside  begging,  who  rose  and  lifted 
her  veil,  to  show  the  white  leprous  spots  on  her  face;* 

*  Like  the  four  leprous  men  at  the  entering-  in  of  the  gate  of  Samaria, 
who  said,  "  Why  sit  we  here  until  we  die  "  (2  Kings  vii.  3). 


4  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

— the  last  woman's  face  I  was  to  see  for  some  time, 
for  over  the  border  they  were  all  veiled.  Our  route 
lay  through  suburban  gardens,  with  fruit-trees  hanging 
on  either  hand  over  the  walls,  till  we  reached  the 
Ankhor  aryk,  where  the  steppe  commences,  with 
hillocks  here  and  there,  but  bare  and  lifeless,  except 
where  covered  with  thorny  bush.  Our  first  day's 
journey  was  to  be  only  as  far  as  Kara-Tiube,  a  distance 
of  2  1  miles.  This  was  so  arranged  in  order  to  give 
us  an  easy  start  before  entering  on  the  country  beyond, 
which  was  said  to  be  unusually  difficult.  We  were 
warned  of  this  at  our  last  lunch  at  the  Governor's 
house,  and  heard  that  some  officers  had  even  discussed 
whether  we  should  accomplish  the  mountain  pass  at 
all ;  but  my  national  vanity  was  flattered  to  hear  that 
one  of  them  said,  "  Oh,  yes,  they  will  succeed,  for  they 
are  Englishmen ;  and  what  the  English  begin  they 
carry  through."  It  would  not  have  done  to  break 
down  after  this  ;  but  as  I  was  'not  in  bed  till  half-past 
one  the  night  before,  and  had  risen  at  six  in  order  to 
pack,  I  was  not  sorry  that  the  first  day's  journey  was 
to  be  only  an  afternoon  ride. 

About  halfway  to  Kara-Tiube  the  road  crosses  a  deep 
ravine  with  steep  banks,  and  we  had  been  told  that 
the  remains  of  Tamerlane's  camp  were  still  visible. 
Neither  Kolutch  nor  Yakoob  had  ever  heard  of  them, 
however ;  and  though  we  did  see  certain  mounds  of 
earth  apparently  artificial,  I  should  think  them  more 
likely  to  be  connected  with  former  irrigation  works 
than  with  Tamerlane.  Fifteen  miles  from  Samar- 
kand we  came  to  the  Russian  summer  camp,  where 
the  soldiers  were  exercising,  and  singing  as  they 
marched.  One  of  the  things  that  struck  me  was  the 
ranks  of  sham  men  they  had  put  up  to  shoot  at  for  a 


I 


FROM  SAMARKAND   TO  KITAB.  5 

review  on  the  day  following.  Yakoob  informed  us,  in 
proceeding,  that  the  correct  thing  was  for  me  to  go  last, 
and  the  djiguitt  a  little  distance  on  ahead  ;  but,  however 
correct,  this  had  one  disadvantage  for  me,  namely,  that 
I  caught  all  the  dust  kicked  up  by  those  preceding  me, 
and  against  this  I  soon  revolted.  Again,  it  is  con- 
sidered by  the  Asiatics  more  dignified  for  a  great 
personage  to  let  his  horse  walk  or  amble  than  to 
galop.  Yakoob  said  my  stallion  had  been  doing  no 
work  of  late,  and,  therefore,  begged  I  would  not  ride 
too  fast  the  first  day  ;  but  my  steed  was  like  to  a  fed 
horse  in  the  morning,  neighing  wherever  he  went,  and 
impatient  of  restraint;  so  I  let  him  go.  Mr.  Sevier's 
horse  took  the  cue  from  mine,  and  we  thus  frequently 
left  Yakoob  and  Kolutch  for  a  while  behind.  We  had 
a  fair  wheel-road  to  within  5  miles  of  our  destination, 
but  on  reaching  the  foot  of  the  mountains  it  became 
little  more  than  a  path,  though  still  practicable  for 
carriages.  We  mounted  the  first  range  of  hills,  and 
had  from  the  summit  a  fine  view  of  the  valley  beyond, 
and  of  the  plains  we  had  left  behind.  Notice  of  our 
coming  had  been  sent  forward  to  the  chief  of  the 
volost,  who,  as  we  approached  Kara-Tiube,  came  out 
to  meet  us,  and  conducted  us  to  the  courtyard  of  a 
mosque,  where  a  tent  was  put  up  for  our  use.  We 
had  left  Samarkand  at  2.15,  and  completed  our  21  miles 
in  3J  hours. 

Kara-Tiube  lies  in  a  hollow  among  the  lower  hills  of 
the  Samarkand  range,  and  under  native  rule  possessed 
a  frontier  fortress.  The  Emir  made  it  a  centre  of 
operations  during  his  war  with  the  invading  Russians. 
The  fortifications  were  destroyed  by  General  Abramoff, 
in  1868.  I  could  not  help  thinking  what  a  change  had 
come  over  the  scene  in  a  dozen  years,  for  I  suppose 


6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

that,  previous  to  the  advent  of  the  Russians,  the  Mussul- 
mans from  choice  would  hardly  have  tolerated  the 
presence  of  an  "  infidel  "  in  their  midst  ;  whereas  now 
they  were  entertaining  us  in  the  courts  of  their  mosque.* 
The  tent  was  nicely  carpeted  under  foot  with  handsome 
bands  around,  though  the  roof  and  sides  were  some- 
what the  worse  for  wear — one  rent,  in  fact,  being  opened 
to  admit  light.  Yakoob  said  that  he  would  close  it 
when  we  were  going  to  sleep.  Till  then  it  would  help 
to  air  the  tent,  he  said,  utterly  oblivious  that  there  was 
too  much  air  for  my  liking  already.  Here  we  ate  our 
first  meal  prepared  by  the  natives,  beginning  with 
sweetmeats,  and  going  on  through  soup,  native  bread, 
grapes,  and  pilau,  made  of  meac  and  rice. 

As  we  intended  to  start  early  next  morning,  we  soon 
got  ready  after  dinner  for  bed.  I  set  my  alarum,  and 
placed  my  revolver  under  the  pillow.  But,  though 
tired,  it  was  not  so  easy  for  me  to  sleep.  Just  outside 
the  djiguitts  were  talking,  and  sending  round  their 
gurgling  kalian,  or  water-pipe,  the  horses  were  rest- 
less, sundry  dogs  barking  and  whining,  as  well  as 
stallions  fighting.  My  first  sleep  was  disturbed  by  a 
rattling  of  plates,  due,  it  soon  appeared,  to  an  intruding 
tom-cat.  I  quickly  drove  him  out,  and,  being  thus  on 
my  feet,  looked  outside  the  tent.  There  lay  Yakoob 
and  the  djiguitts  asleep  and  covered,  but  in  the  open 
air,  as  an  ordinary  thing,  and,  all  around  being  quiet,  I 
turned  in  again,  to  be  disturbed  within  an  hour  by 
another  cat  getting  on  the  table,  knocking  over  a 
candlestick,  and  stopping  my  alarum.  Of  course,  I 
blessed  every  member  of  the  feline  race,  gave  chase 

*  We  were  not  again  lodged  in  the  courtyard  of  a  religious  building, 
but  it  served  to  recall  the  Israelites  in  captivity,  who  "  made  themselves 
booths,  every  one  upon  the  roof  of  his  house,  and  in  their  courts,  and 
in  the  courts  of  the  house  of  God  "  (Neh.  viii.  i6). 


FROM  SAMARKAND  TO  KITAB.  7 

again,  and  re-set  my  alarum,  of  which  I  then  heard  no 
more  till  it  awoke  me  early  next  morning,  not  so  stiff 
as  I  expected  to  be,  and  ready  to  set  things  astir. 

Our  second  day's  journey  was  to  Kitab,  a  distance 
of  22  miles  over  the  Takhta-Karacha  Pass,  for  which 
we  set  out  at  half-past  seven  o'clock.  The  road 
threads  the  defile  of  Katta-Sai,  in  which  flows  a 
turbulent  little  mountain  stream  of  the  same  name. 
Following  the  windings  of  this,  and  occasionally  cross- 
ing it,  we  saw  from  the  road  a  tiller  of  the  soil,  with  a 
yoke  of  oxen  and  a  plough,  that  from  its  primitive 
form  might  have  served  for  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat.* 
Somewhat  further  on  we  saw  a  good  illustration  of  the 
threshing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite.  The  grain, 
instead  of  being  thrashed,  is  trodden  out  by  oxen  or 
horses,  on  a  space  specially  prepared,  termed  khirman. 
In  this  case  two  oxen  only  were  employed,  and  their 
treading  power  was  economized  more  ingeniously  than 
pleasantly,  I  should  imagine,  to  one  at  least  of  the  pair. 
One  ox  was  fastened  to  the  off  end  of  a  pole,  that  worked 
on  a  pivot  in  the  centre  of  the  floor,  a  boy  holding  on  to 
his  tail  as  to  a  rudder,  and  thus  providing  for  the  circum- 
ference of  the  floor,  whilst  the  second  ox,  with  his  hinder 
parts  in  the  centre  and  his  head  tied  to  his  fellow,  by 
means  of  a  crab-like  motion  trod  the  central  area.f 

*  The  saban,  or  two-pronged  plough  of  Central  Asia,  is  a  sharpened 
block  of  wood,  tipped,  it  may  be,  with  an  iron  point,  and  fastened  at  a 
sharp  angle  to  a  long  pole.  On  the  front  of  this  pole  is  laid  a  beam, 
or  yoke,  about  7  feet  long.  Cords  are  let  into  this  at  either  end,  and 
the  oxen  are  made  fast.  The  ploughman  holds  on  to  a  fork,  let  into 
the  pointed  beam,  and  the  implement  turns  up  about  7  inches  of  earth. 
In  the  case  I  am  describing  it  appeared  to  be  easily  guided  by  one 
hand  through  a  light  soil.  Harrowing  is  effected  by  means  of  a  comb 
made  of  a  beam,  in  which  are  fastened  long  wooden  teeth.  It  is  drawn 
by  a  pair  of  oxen.  In  order  that  the  harrow  may  go  deep  into  the  soil, 
two  or  three  men  stand  on  it,  whilst  the  animals  draw  it  over  the  field. 

t  The  oxen  were  not  muzzled  (Deut.  xxv.  4),  and  the  abundance  of 


8  .  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

For  some  distance  the  rise  towards  the  pass  was 
very  gentle.  Before  the  cHmbing  began  in  earnest, 
we  called  a  halt  at  a  poor  little  uninhabited  caravansary, 
Aman-Kutane,  where  we  ate  bread  and  melons  to 
fortify  us  for  the  coming  steeper  road.  Here  was  one 
of  the  plantations  mentioned  by  General  Korolkoff, 
which  the  Russians  place  on  the  mountains  to  keep 
the  soil  from  washing  down.* 

Nor  was  this  the  only  vegetation.  So  long  as  we 
kept  near  the  stream  there  were  considerable  patches  of 
grass,  and  we  passed  a  collection  of  mud  huts  and  tents 
inhabited  by  semi-nomads  who  tilled  a  little  ground. 
Across  the  stream  we  saw  the  women  weaving,  and  a 
narrow  texture  stretched  on  the  ground.  On  losing 
sight  of  the  stream,  we  left  vegetation  behind,  and 
had  to  climb  a  narrow  path,  almost  a  rude  staircase,- 
of  stones  and  boulders,  to  a  height  above  the  sea  of 
about  5,200  feet. 

food  placed  within  their  reach  was  reminiscent  of  the  language  of 
Hosea  x.  11.,  "  Ephraim  is  as  an  heifer  that  is  taught,  and  loveth  to 
tread  out  the  corn."  I  did  not  see  in  Central  Asia  an  implement  that  I 
observed  in  the  Trans-Caucasus,  which  made  clearer  to  me  a  verse  in 
Isaiah,  where  the  prophet  says  (xli.  15),  "  Behold,  I  will  make  thee  a 
new  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth."  Among  the  Armenians, 
I  saw  in  use  in  1880  an  instrument  suggestive  of  the  Latin  tribulujn 
(whence  our  word  tribulation),  a  heavy  plank,  or  threshing  sledge, 
studded  on  one  side  with  angular,  tooth-like  pieces  of  iron  and  flint, 
about  an  inch  high.  The  plank  was  widened  at  one  end,  for  a  man  to 
stand  on,  and  narrowed  and  raised  at  the  other  for  an  animal  to  be 
attached ;  and  this  instrument,  dragged  over  the  floor,  not  only  beat 
out  the  com,  as  did  the  treading  of  oxen,  but  cut  up  the  straw.  The 
whole  detritus  was  then  swept  in  a  heap,  and  tossed  into  the  air  by 
shovelsful,  when  the  corn  fell  on  the  earth,  and  the  rest  *'  became  like 
the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floors,"  which  the  wind  carried  away 
(Dan.  ii.  35). 

*  The  surplus  trees  raised  for  this  purpose  are  given  to  the  natives, 
who  readily  undertake  their  culture.  The  year  I  was  in  Samarkand 
they  had  distributed  1,000,000,  and  in  the  following  spring  expected 
thus  to  give  from  2,000,000  to  3,000,000  of  saplings.     Of  the  various 


FROM  SAMARKAND   TO  KITAB.  9 

We  were  now  on  the  crest  of  the  mountains  of 
Kitab,  a  continuation  of  the  Hissar  range,  that  sepa- 
rates the  Zarafshan  province  from  Bokhara.  From 
the  broad  platform  of  rock,  about  30  paces  wide,  we 
looked  back  on  the  dry  and  arid  steppe  we  had  crossed 
from  Samarkand,  but  before  us  the  scene  was  of  a 
more  pleasing  character.  There  lay  on  either  side  of 
the  Kashka-daria  the  twin  towns  of  Kitab  and  Shahr, 
called  together,  from  the  number  of  its  trees  and 
gardens,  Shahr-i-sabz,  or  "the  green  city."  The 
beauty  of  the  landscape  from  this  spot  had  been 
extolled  by  Colonel  Alexandroff,  who  lunched  with 
us  the  day  before  we  started.  To  an  Oriental  this 
view  would  be,  no  doubt,  exceedingly  pretty,  and  to 
an  European  tolerably  so  ;  but  it  was  nothing  compared 
with  that  obtainable  from  scores  of  places  in  England, 
to  say  nothing  of  mountain  scenery  in  Switzerland 
or  the  Caucasus. 

We  had  now  to  descend  by  a  far  steeper  track,  over 
bare  rocks  of  granite  and  gneiss,  the  path  leading  by  a 
cornice,  excessively  sinuous  and  obstructed,  with  round 
stones  that  rolled  down  the  precipitous  slopes.  I 
judged  it  best  to  give  my  horse  full  liberty  to  choose 

trees  and  shrubs  cultivated  by  the  Russians,  the  General  mentioned  to 
me  a  variety  of  Poplar  {P.  alba  ^yramidalis,  also  called  P.  boleana), 
almost  unknown  in  Europe,  but  common  in  Central  Asia,  where  it 
attains,  in  from  15  to  20  years,  proportions  fit  for  building,  and  is  sold 
from  loi".  to  i6s.  the  tree.  Elm  is  used  for  making  arbas,  as  also  some- 
times is  almond  wood,  but  not  often  that  of  the  wild  nut.  They  have 
introduced  also  several  kinds  of  conifers,  among  them  Thuya  Orien- 
talis,  which  does  not  grow  so  large  as  in  Europe,  though  it  attains  to 
70  feet.  To  these  may  be  added  the  white  and  black  Mulberry  {M. 
alba  et  7iigra),  especially  the  former  for  silk  culture ;  and  many 
European  kinds  of  fruit-trees,  especially  Apples  and  Pears,  which 
attain  only  moderate  perfection,  as  cultivated  by  the  Sarts,  and 
Raspberries,  which  I  understood  the  natives  do  not  cultivate  at  all. 
More  than  12,000  fruit-trees  were  grafted  the  year  of  my  visit,  and 
were  to  be  given  to  the  natives. 


10  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

his  own  path,  and  so  did  Sevier.  It  was  amusing 
sometimes  to  see  the  creatures  after  they  had  chosen 
a  track,  and  found  it  more  difficult  than  was  anticipated, 
hark  back  and  try  another.  I  did  not,  at  the  time, 
think  of  the  danger  we  ran,  if  a  horse  stumbled,  of 
breaking  one's  skull  against  the  jutting  rocks  on  every 
hand  ;  but  when  reading  from  Dr.  Schuyler  that  only 
one  of  his  party  had  a  sufficiently  strong  head  to  make 
the  whole  descent  on  horseback,  it  occurred  to  me 
that  we  should  have  done  more  wisely  to  dismount 
and  allow  the  horses  to  be  led.  On  completing  the 
descent  among  the  rocks,  where  the  path  was  barely 
wide  enough  for  two  horses  to  pass,  and  issuing  from 
the  Takhta  Karacha  defile,  the  road  widened  as  we 
approached  Kainar-bulak,  our  first  Bokhariot  village. 

We  were  now  only  7,500  paces,  or  say  five  miles, 
from  Russian  territory,  where  one  may  find  the  newest 
outcome  of  the  intelligence  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
yet  we  seemed  to  have  dropped  from  the  clouds 
among  men  and  things  3,000  or  4,000  years  behind. 
If  what  we  saw  among  the  Kirghese  recalled  the  days 
of  Abraham,  the  new  experience  brought  to  one's 
thoughts  a  number  of  messengers  despatched  by  one 
of  the  kings  of  Israel.  We  were  met  by  the  Bek,  or 
Governor  of  the  district,  also  a  military  officer  sent 
direct  from  the  Emir,  with  several  others,  wearing  tur- 
bans of  spodess  white,  and  clad,  one  in  striped  silk, 
another  in  a  robe  of  cloth  of  gold,  and  all  mounted  on 
gaily  caparisoned  horses.  They  had  come  to  inquire 
for  the  welfare  of  various  personages,  to  receive  and 
welcome  me,  and  put  a  series  of  questions  respecting 
my  health  and  my  journey.  After  shaking  hands  and 
saluting  me  with  an  Aman,  the  Bek  proceeded  to  ask 
in  stereotype  fashion,  *'Is  the  Emperor  well?    Is  the 


^ROM  SAMARKAND  TO  KITAB.  ii 

Governor-General  Chernaieff  well  ?  and  is  General 
Abramoff  well?"  This  was  spoken  in  Turki  to  Yakoob, 
who  put  it  to  Sevier  in  Russ,  after  which  it  reached 
me  in  English.  I  replied  that,  when  I  passed  through 
Petersburg,  his  Imperial  Majesty  was  well,  also  that 
in  Petersburg  I  saw  General  Chernaieff,  who  was  well, 
and  that  General  Abramoff,  whom  we  had  recently 
left,  was  in  good  health.  This  principal  messenger, 
having  completed  his  ceremonious  inquiries,  moved  on 
in  front,  and  the  old  general  or  colonel  came  up  to 
announce  that  the  Emir  had  sent  him  to  say  that  he 
was  very  glad  w^  had  come,  that  he  hoped  I  was  not 
greatly  exhausted  by  the  difficulties  of  the  way,  and 
begged  us  to  take  refreshment  in  Kainan 

Kainar  is  a  kish-lak^  or  village,  as  it  is  usually 
rendered,  though  the  word  literally  means  winter 
quarters,  just  as  lai-lak  means  summer  quarters.  In 
summer  quarters  the  habitation  used  is  a  tent,  but  in 
winter  quarters  it  is  often  a  mud  house,  which  in 
summer  is  deserted  or  turned  into  a  store.  In  the 
present  instance  we  were  conducted  through  the  yard 
of  what  I  suppose  was  the  Bek's  house,  our  horses 
picketed  to  a  circle  of  posts,  and  ourselves  shown 
into  a  room  where  was  a  table  evidently  rigged  up  for 
the  occasion,  and  groaning  beneath  a  dozen,  if  not  a 
score,  of  trays  of  grapes,  sweetmeats,  almonds,  sugared 
nuts,  melons,  and  other  kinds  of  fruit.  Upon  these  I 
concluded  we  were  to  make  a  meal,  and  I  began  the 
attack,  till  it  appeared  these  things  were  only  by  way 
of  pudding  and  sweets  presented  in  inverse  order  to 
English  fashion,  and  to  be  followed  by  more  substantial 
dishes  of  meat,  boiled  chicken,  and  rice.  This  was 
a  lesson  for  me,  and  so  was  the  next  performance  in 
clearing  the  table;  for  whereas,  at  home,  one  is  brought 


12  I^USSIAA^  CEN2RAL  ASIA. 

up  to  "  eat  what  you  please,  but  pocket  none,"  in 
Bokhara  it  is  expected  that  you  eat  what  you  can, 
and  pocket  the  rest.  All  was  to  be  mine,  and  I  found 
that  Yakoob,  the  djiguitts,  and  attendants  were  ready 
to  accept  the  remainder  as  a  perquisite,  and  stow  away 
the  same  in  their  bags. 

We  were  left  to  partake  of  refreshment  alone,  and 
when  the  envoys  subsequently  entered,  I  showed  to 
him  who  appeared  to  be  master  of  the  ceremonies  the 
letter  I  had  received  from  General  Chernaieff,  where- 
upon he  spoke  to  me  about  seeing  the  Emir  on  the 
following  day.  For  the  information  of  the  Emir  our 
names  had  to  be  entered  in  a  book,  the  hour  we  arrived, 
and  when  we  departed,  with  particulars  of  our  visit. 
They  asked  how  soon  we  meant  to  start  for  Kitab, 
whereupon  observing  that  it  was  1.45  p.m.,  I  replied, 
''In  15  minutes";  but  this  was  contrary  to  their  notions, 
and  they  wished  to  put  down  3.0  as  the  hour  of  our 
departure,  "  so  that  it  might  look  to  the  Emir  as  if  we 
had  been  well  entertained."  Not  that  they  cared,  how- 
ever, that  we  should  wait,  and  our  horses  were  accord- 
ingly made  ready. 

It  was  five  miles  further  to  Kitab,  along  a  carriage- 
able road,  through  an  inhabited  district.  On  starting, 
our  escort  increased,  and  we  were  preceded  by  a  score 
or  so  of  horsemen,  who  smothered  us  with  dust.  I 
begged  them,  therefore,  to  go  on  far  ahead.  This 
dispersed  the  crowd,  and  we  rode  along  to  Urus  (or 
Russian)  Kishlak,  and  beyond  we  forded  the  River 
Kashka.  Soon  afterwards  we  approached  the  mud 
wall,  53  miles  long,  which  once  surrounded  Shahr-i- 
sabz,  and  included,  besides  Kitab  and  Shahr,  several 
villages,  with  fields  and  gardens.  These  entirely 
occupied  the  whole  space  within  the  wall.     In  winter 


FROM  SAMARKAND   TO  KITAB.  13 

a  large  part  of  the  neighbouring  country  is  under 
water,  and  even  in  the  dry  season  unhealthy  swamps 
abound.  We  had  to  approach  the  citadel  of  Kitab  by 
a  narrow  street,  with  water  and  mud  up  to  the  horses' 
knees,  the  Colonel,  In  cloth  of  gold,  having  motioned 
me  to  his  side  to  enter  the  town  with  something  like 
state.  iVs  we  passed  along,  the  people  rose  and  saluted 
the  Colonel  with  a  "  Salaam  aleikum^'  or  ''  Peace  be 
with  you,"  but  not  bowing  so  servilely  as  at  Khokand. 
Other  mounted  officials  now  came  to  present  them- 
selves, and  formed  a  cavalcade  that  brought  us  at  last 
to  what  was  to  be  our  lodging.  I  had  read  that  It  was 
a  point  of  Bokhariot  etiquette  as  to  how  near  one 
should  ride  up  to  a  palace  or  great  house  before  dis- 
mounting. My  retinue,  I  observed,  alighted  outside 
the  street  gates,  but  we  were  conducted  on  horseback 
*' right  In"  the  courtyard,  and  then,  having  dismounted, 
were  shown  Into  our  room. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

FROM  KITAB  TO  SHAHR. 

Curious  hospitality. — Entertainment  by  dancing--bo3's  and  mountebanks. 
— Native  appreciation  of  batchas. — Visits  from  the  Emir's  court. 
— Our  lodging  and  spies. — Reception  of  Bokhariot  officers. — Guard 
of  native  soldiers. — Dress  for  an  audience  with  the  Emir.  — Pro- 
cession and  arrival  at  the  fortress. — The  Emir  Seid  Muzaffar-ed- 
din. — Various  estimates  of  his  character. — Admission  to  his 
presence. — My  requests  and  presents. — Refreshment  with  courtiers. 
— Princely  presents. — Drive  to  Shahr  in  the  Emir's  carriage. 

OUR  house  at  Kitab  was  certainly  not  a  mansion, 
for  the  principal  room  measured  only  about  1 2  feet 
by  10.  Perhaps  lack  of  space  was  meant  to  be  atoned 
for  by  abundance  of  air,  for  there  were  6  doors,  and 
over  3  of  them  unglazed  lattices.  We  learned, 
however,  that  hereafter  we  should  be  lodged  in  better 
guest-houses,  but  that  few  embassies  came  to  Kitab. 
Soon  after  our  arrival  we  were  asked  what  we  should 
like  to  do.  I  replied  that  we  wished  to  see  the  town, 
and  that  I  should  be  glad  if  we  could  find  some  coins 
and  other  antiquities  or  curiosities.  I  had  been  told 
by  the  Russians  that  the  shortest  space  etiquette  would 
allow  of  our  staying  at  Kitab  would  be  three  days,  and 
this  was  the  time  I  told  them  when  they  asked  how 
long  I  should  remain  their  guest.  My  answers  were 
reported  to  the  Emir,  and  his  messenger  came  back  to 


FROM  KITAB  TO  SHAHR.  15 

say  that  they  thought  we  should  stay  at  least  a  week, 
that  my  wish  for  coins  should  be  attended  to,  and  that 
we  could  see  the  town  after  our  audience  with  the  Emir. 
On  our  arrival  we  had  found,  as  at  Kainar,  the  table 
laden    with  trays  of  sweets  and  fruits,   and,    in    addi- 
tion, there  awaited  me,  as  a  present,  at  least  half-a-dozen 
loaves  of  white  sugar,  and  as  many  boxes  of  sugar- 
candy,  both  imported  from  Russia.      I  soon  voted  my 
own    tea   preferable    to    the  green  tea  drunk    by   the 
natives,   and,  after  taking  refreshment,  found  that  we 
were  to  be  entertained  that  evening  by  a  grand  per- 
formance   of  musicians,    batchas,    and    buffoons.      At 
dusk  the  scene  was  lighted  up  with  25  lamps,  and  we 
were  to    sit  under   a   spreading  vine    that    formed    a 
rustic  balcony   at    the    back   of  the    house,   and   from 
thence  to  see  the  fun.     Three  men,  with  tambourines, 
sat  near  a  charcoal  fire  in  a  brazier,  over  which,  from 
time  to  time,  they  held  their  instruments   to  tighten 
the    parchment.       Presently    four    boys,    or    batchas, 
arrived,   and   were  presented  to  us  as  the  artistes  of 
the  evening ;  and  whilst  they  were  drinking  tea  and 
eating  fruit,  the  tambourines,  increased  to  ^v&,  began 
to  sound   and   the   men   to   sing.     The  batchas  were 
dressed  in  red,  flowing  robes,  with  loose,  wide  trousers, 
but   had    their    feet    uncovered,    their    most    striking 
peculiarity  being  their  long  hair,  like  that  of  girls.      In 
the  first  dance  the  four  boys  walked   leisurely  round 
and  round,  keeping  time  with  clappers.      In  the  next 
they  danced  faster,  clapped  their  hands,  and  sang  in 
unison, — love,  on  the  part  of  the  supposed  girl,  being 
the  burden  of  their  song.      In  the  third  dance  the  lover 
answered  this  ditty,  and  in  the  fourth  the  dance  was 
interspersed  with  somersaults  and  other  antics. 

Whilst  the  batchas  were  dancing  and  putting  them- 


i6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

selves  through  various  movements  intended  to  be 
graceful,  two  men  carried  candles,  dodging  about  to 
hold  them  close  to  the  dancers,  that  their  good  looks 
might  be  admired,  the  candle-bearers  themselves  con- 
torting their  faces,  and  disporting  themselves  like 
clowns.  One  of  their  nonsensical  feats,  when  there  was 
a  lull  in  the  dance,  was  to  sit  opposite  each  other  and 
make  grimaces,  or  move  the  muscles  and  skin  of  the 
face  like  a  rabbit.  They  brought  on  next  a  Persian 
song  and  dance  with  whistles,  the  batchas  snapping 
their  fingers  in  time,  and  then  striking  together  a  pair 
of  wands. 

As  the  entertainment  proceeded,  a  large  crowd, 
attracted  by  the  sound  of  the  music,  pressed  into  the 
courtyard  and  garden,  delighted  to  witness  the  per- 
formance. Their  appreciation  of  the  batchas  was 
intense.  They  offered  them  tea  and  fruit,  and,  when 
the  boys  sat,  they  could  hardly  have  been  made  more 
of  had  they  been  the  first  stars  of  a  London  season. 
They  seated  themselves  apart  from  ''  the  vulgar 
crowd,"  near  to  us,  whereupon  lights  were  placed 
before  them,  that  all  might  gaze  and  admire.  He 
thinks  himself  a  happy  man  to  whom  a  batcha  con- 
descends to  offer  a  bowl  of  tea,  and  receives  it  with 
expressions  of  great  respect.  So,  again,  if  a  man 
offers  tea  to  a  batcha,  it  is  counted  an  honour  if  it  is 
taken  and  the  cup  returned,  after  tasting,  to  the  owner, 
but  a  great  indignity  if  the  remainder  be  handed  to 
another.  I  gave  the  boys  refreshments,  and  sent 
round  to  the  crowd  some  of  our  boxes  of  sugar-candy, 
which  was  readily  accepted. 

We  were  next  entertained  with  some  acrobatic 
feats,  the  men  bending  backwards  till  their  heads 
touched    the   ground,    and   performing    several    other 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR.  17 

fantastic  exercises.  After  this,  a  man  gave  us 
a  Hindu  dance,  and  preparations  were  made  for 
some  rude  comic  acting,  in  which  were  represented 
various  scenes  from  native  Hfe — first  a  quarrel 
and  law-suit  about  a  scarf  Presently  a  high  priest, 
or  some  dignitary  amply  covered  with  cotton  wool 
to  represent  white  hair  and  beard,  was  carried  in 
on  a  sort  of  sedan  chair.  Whether  he  was  intended 
to  represent  the  Emir  or  the  Grand  Lama  I  am  un- 
certain, but  he  was  waited  upon  with  great  obse- 
quiousness, whilst  the  musicians  kept  up  vociferous 
singing  and  loud  beating  of  tambourines.  Presently 
a  supposed  dead  man  was  brought  in,  upon  whom  the 
mullah  sprinkled  water  in  such  abundance  as  to  make 
the  corpse  wince,  and  he  then  proceeded  to  count  the 
dead  man's  debts,  supplying  himself  with  a  substitute 
for  ink  with  a  nastiness  that  will  not  allow  of  de- 
scription. At  length,  by  accident  or  by  design,  one  of 
the  candles  set  fire  to  the  cotton  wool  of  the  judge's 
hair,  and  he  was  about  to  be  enveloped  in  fiames,  but 
which  fortunately  they  were  able  to  put  out,  and  this 
touch  of  reality  brought  the  proceedings  to  an  uncere- 
monious close. 

I  am  not  aware  that  the  Central  Asiatics  dance  at 
all  as  a  social  amusement,  but  only  as  a  spectacle. 
The  boys  are  early  trained  to  it,  and  continue  their 
profession  until  the  beard  grows.  The  Emir  has  a 
staff  of  them,  who,  when  he  stays  in  Kitab,  dance 
every  night  from  7  to  10  in  some  public  place.  Rich 
men  also  keep  them  for  their  enjoyment,  and  even 
poor  families  club  together  to  maintain  a  corps  for 
their  joint  amusement.* 

*  These  batchas  are  also  used,  though  not  in  all  cases,  for  immora 
purposes.     Vambery  alludes  to  this  at  the  time  of  his  visit  to  Bokhara. 
One  hears  and  reads  of  the   Emir  having  formerly  had  a  male  and 
VOL.  II.  2 


18  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

It  was  nearly  midnight  before  the  batchas  left  our 
house,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  they  did  not  prolong  the 
fun  near  at  hand  ;  but  they  had  put  us  up  bedsteads  and 
pillows  at  either  end  of  our  room,  and  we  were  glad 
enough  to  get  to  bed.  Next  morning  they  gave  us  for 
breakfast  fruits,  boiled  milk  and  rice  with  butter,  and 
sour  cream.  Quite  early  some  courtiers  came,  saying 
that  the  Emir  had  already  asked  several  times  after 
my  health,  and  his  Majesty  (or  his  Highness,  as  the 
Russians  call  him)  wished  to  know  whether  we  were 
dull,  because,  if  so,  he  would  send  some  persons  to 
amuse  us.  I  replied  that  we  were  not  dull,  having 
plenty  of  reading  and  writing  to  do.  His  spokesman, 
we  were  told,  was  a  colonel,  and  we  afterwards  learned 
that  he  was  a  very  near  attendant  and  minister  of  the 
Emir,  named  Hodja  Abul  Fais,  and  one  of  the  most 
enlightened  of  the  Bokhariots  that  we  met.  He  had 
lived  seven  years  in  Constantinople,  and  had  travelled 
to  Kief,  Moscow,  and  Orenburg.  Both  being  travellers 
we  compared  notes,  I  telling  him  of  my  Central  Asian 
journey,  and  my  former  route  through  Siberia  round 
the  world.  I  offered  him  a  copy  of  St.  Matthew's 
Gospel    in    Osmanli    Turkish,   which   he   appeared   to 

female  harem,  and  M.  Ostroumoff,  writing  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
Mussulmans  of  Central  Asia,  states  that,  from  1869 — 71,  out  of  103 
criminal  law-suits  brought  before  the  Russians,  2z^  were  traced  to  the 
keeping  of  such  boys,  10  persons  having  committed  murder  and  14 
robbery  to  find  the  money  to  pay  them.  Some  parents,  he  says,  them- 
selves use  or  sell  their  boys  as  batchas,  and  one  law-suit  was  brought 
by  a  father  against  a  whole  family  who  had  thus  used  his  son.  So  long 
as  the  batchas  are  young  and  good-looking  they  are  petted  and  spoiled, 
but  afterwards  they  often  fall  into  a  life,  as  Dr.  Schuyler  says,  of  caprice, 
extravagance,  and  dissipation.  They  told  me  that  the  Emir  did  not 
allow  women  to  dance,  which  probably  meant  m  public,  as  I  heard  of 
them  doing  in  Khokand.  Dr.  Schuyler,  too,  speaks  of  their  performing 
in  the  women's  court ;  but  we  saw  none  throughout  Central  Asia.  Such 
a  practice  in  public,  if  not  also  in  private,  would  be  quite  contrar)'  to 
Sunni  Muhammadan  ideas. 


*l 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR.  19 

read  fluently.  On  learning  what  it  was,  he  said  God 
had  given  four  books  to  men,  of  which  this  was  one, 
whereupon  he  kissed  and  accepted  it  with  thanks, 
putting  it  away  in  his  breast.  He  then  asked  how 
old  I  was,  guessed  me  too  young  by  ten  years,  and 
was  surprised  that  my  beard  was  so  black  and  without 
grey  hairs.* 

After  the  departure  of  this  courtier  I  walked  out  to 
look  at  our  surroundings.  Our  house  stood  on  a  bank 
some  half-dozen  feet  above  the  courtyard,  with  a 
stream  of  water  running  near,  the  specific  gravity  of 
which  I  tested,  and  found  to  be  99.  In  the  yard  and 
the  adjacent  open  sheds  our  horses  were  picketed, 
whilst  on  the  other  side  of  the  house  were  sunken, 
muddy  fiower-beds,  watered  by  irrigation,  with  chry- 
santhemums in  blossom.  Near  these  beds  were 
dwellings  resembling  offices,  into  which  I  began  to 
pry,  when  Yakoob  came  running  up  in  alarm  to 
inform  me  that  I  was  entering  the  women's  domains. 
Of  course  I  at  once  drew  back,  though  so  effectually 
had  the  fair  ones  kept  out  of  sight  that  I  had  not  the 
least  idea  there  were  any  on  the  premises.  I  fancy 
however,  they  had  seen  me,  and  I  perceived  that 
other  eyes  were  upon  us  also.  Six  open  doors  in  one 
small  room  I  had  voted  rather  too  much  of  a  good 
thing,  and  closed  accordingly  the  three  that  gave 
access  to  the  courtyard,  leaving  open  for  light  and  air 
those  facing  the  garden  and  offices.  One  of  the 
attendants  came  to  ask  whether  I  would  not  like  the 
opposite  doors  opened,  so  that  the  air  might  enter,  but 

*  More  than  once  this  question  was  asked  in  the  khanate,  and 
followed  by  a  similar  remark.  A  Russian  living  in  the  town  of 
Bokhara  told  me  that  the  natives  are  usually  grey  at  35,  that  his 
brotlier  living  there  for  three  years  began  to  get  grey  at  24,  but  that 
on  going  back  to  Russia  the  grey  hairs  disappeared. 


20  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  declined,  beginning  to  suspect  that  what  he  really 
wanted  was  to  spy  from  the  yard  what  I  was  doing, 
and  this  suspicion  increased  when,  chancing  to  look  in 
the  direction  of  the  offices,  I  saw  a  man  had  taken 
a  seat  commanding  a  view  of  our  room,  off  which  he 
scarcely  took  his  eyes.  In  the  course  of  the  morning 
a  messenger  came  from  the  Emir  and  told  us,  to  our 
disgust,  that  his  Majesty,  having  heard  how  late  we 
got  to  bed  on  the  previous  night,  felt  sure  we  must 
be  tired,  and  so  would  not  see  us  till  the  morrow. 
About  midday  we  said  that  we  should  like  to  go  out  in 
the  afternoon  for  a  ride,  and  to  see  the  town,  where- 
upon I  discovered  that,  in  addition  to  being  a  guest,  I 
was  also  a  prisoner,  for  they  said  we  must  not  leave 
the  premises  without  the  permission  of  the  Emir,  and 
this  permission  did  not  come. 

In  the  evening  we  were  informed  of  the  arrival  of 
the  assistant  to  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Bokhariot 
forces,  the  commander  of  a  battalion,  and  a  guard  of 
honour,  30  strong.  There  was  no  need  to  fear,  his 
Majesty  said,  but  he  had  thought  it  better  to  send  us  a 
guard.*  We  were  just  finishing  our  evening  meal,  and 
I  invited  the  officers  in,  and  plied  them  with — not 
cups,  but — bowls  of  tea,  bread,  butter,  and  eggs.  Upon 
these  meats  the  gallant  commanders  made  a  vigorous 
onslaught,  and  it  was  not  until  each  had  disposed  of 
half-a-dozen  basins  of  tea  that  they  cried  "enough," 
their  politeness  having  come  to  an  end  ;  for  I  dis- 
covered that,  according  to  Bokhariot  etiquette,  they 
were  bound  to  keep  on  eating  as  long  as  we  kept 
offering. 

I    then    tried    to    amuse    them    by    showing    them 

•  To  be  "  valiant  men  about  our  bed  ....  every  man  with  his  sword 
upon  his  thigh,  because  of  fear  in  the  night"  (Cant.  iii.  8). 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR.  21 

engravings  of  Central  Asia  in  Madame  Ujfalvy's  ''De 
Paris  a  Sainarcand^'  but  the  officers  seemed  somewhat 
slow  in  taking  in  their  meaning.  It  occurred  to  me 
afterwards  that  they  were  perhaps  the  first  pictures 
they  had  ever  seen.*  To  Yakoob,  who  had  been 
brought  up  in  Russia,  all  was  plain  enough,  as  he 
looked  over  the  book  with  pleasure,  and  interpreted  ; 
but  it  raised  a  curious  question  in  my  mind  as  to  what 
would  be  the  impression  produced  on  a  man's  under- 
standing, at  40  years  of  age,  who  then  saw  a  picture 
for  the  first  time. 

Next  morning  we  went  out  to  look  at  our  guard  of 
honour.  One  officer  wore  a  tunic  of  red  glazed  calico, 
a  black  sheepskin  hat,  and  a  sword,  and  his  brother 
officer  carried  in  his  girdle,  as  indicative  of  his  rank, 
a  battle-axe.  The  uniforms  of  the  rank  and  file 
were  of  the  nondescript  character,  easily  imagined 
when  I  add  that  the  Emir's  soldiers  find  their  own  food 
and  clothes.  One  soldier  had  buttons  on  his  coat  that 
had  done  service  in  various  British  regiments,  the  nth 
among  them,  whilst  their  muskets  w^ere  of  all  degrees 
of  antiquity,  one  having  been  stamped  in  the  year  of 
grace  1800!  The  Emir  had  twelve  guns  at  Kitab, 
and  more  at  Bokhara,  and  his  army  consisted,  it  was 
said,  of  14,000  warriors,  of  whom  6,000  were  cavalry. f 
If  these,  thought  I,  are  a  specimen  of  the  Sovereign's 
body-guard,  and  the  pick  of  his  troops,  what  must  the 

*  The  Sunni  Muhammadans  hold  it  contrary  to  their  faith  to  represent 
anything  that  has  life,  whether  vegetable  or  animal,  being  taught,  I 
believe,  that  those  who  paint  animals  will  at  the  day  of  judgment  have 
to  put  life  into  them.  Anyway,  not  a  ghost  of  a  picture  of  any  living 
thing  did  I  see  all  through  the  khanate. 

t  Another  informant,  a  courtier,  said  he  thought  it  was  20  battalions 
of  1,000  each,  and  the  cavalry  as  many  more  ;  but  the  Kush-beggi,  or 
Viceroy,  told  me  15,000,  of  whom  5,000  were  cavalry.  All  of  them  are 
volunteers,  who  serve  from  18  till  death,  on  the  munificent  pay  in  the 


22  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

rest  be  like,  and  would  it  not  have  been  passing  strange 
if  the  Russians  had  not  beaten  them  ?  *  But  whilst  I 
was  taking  stock  of  the  soldiers,  and  showing  them  my 
revolver,  some  courtiers  came  to  say  that  the  Emir  was 
ready  to  receive  me,  and  I  had  to  think  of  a  fitting 
Court  dress. 

Dr.  Wolff,  who  escaped  with  difficulty  from  the 
clutches  of  the  present  Emir's  father,  wore  his  gown 
and  hood  into  Bokhara,  carried  a  huge  Bible  under 
his  arm,  and  announced  that  he  was  the  great  dervish 
of  England  ;  and  he  partly  attributed  his  safety  to 
having  maintained  throughout  his  ecclesiastical  cha- 
racter. I  had  some  thought,  therefore,  of  taking  a 
leaf  from  his  book,  and  the  more  so  because  Russians 
had  told  me  that  the  Emir  would  not  distinguish 
between  my  clerical  coat  and  that  of  a  Russian 
merchant,  and  that  all  the  Russian  dignitaries  this 
Asiatic  sovereign  had  seen  were  in  uniform  and 
decorated  with  medals.  This  suggested  to  me  that 
it  might  be  desirable  if  I  could  combine  in  my  raiment 
the  splendours  of  ecclesiastical  vestments  and  military 
uniform.  But  where  was  the  Emir  ?  Was  he  living 
close  by,  our  house  being  a  part  of  his  palace,  or 
was  he  a  mile  off?  because,  if  I  were  going  to  get 
myself  up  very    gorgeously,    and    his     Majesty    were 

country  of  x'js.  td.  a  month,  or,  at  the  capital,  of  20s.  Another  account 
I  heard  said  lOJ".  a  month,  that  these  hired  troops  are  a  militia  rather 
than  a  standing  army,  of  which  there  was  said  to  be  none  in  Bokhara. 
The  men  live  at  home,  and  come  up  for  drill  occasionally,  and  when  they 
wish  to  quit  the  force,  simply  give  up  their  muskets  and  uniforms,  and 
go  about  their  business. 

♦  The  natives  told  me  that,  at  the  occupation  of  Samarkand,  the  very 
sight  of  the  Russian  soldiers,  before  they  had  crossed  the  river,  made 
the  enemy  run  like  sheep.  1  heard,  too,  that  when  a  fortress  was 
stormed,  the  natives  entirely  gave  up  hope,  and  simply  sat  down,  each 
awaiting  his  turn  to  be  killed. 


THE   BAZAAR   OR 


r  PLACE  AT  KITAB, 


Pa^e  23,  Vol.  II. 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR.  22, 

living  close  by,  it  might  be  more  convenient  to  walk. 
My  inquiry  had  reached  the  great  man's  ears,  and 
he  seemed  to  have  taken  it  as  a  trait  of  humility  on 
my  part  that  I  did  not  think  myself  worthy  to  come 
mounted  to  his  presence.  He  therefore  sent  me  a 
message  to  say  he  had  heard  I  talked  of  walking  to 
the  palace,  but  that  he  desired  I  would  ride. 

So  I  proceeded  to  make  ready,  and  first  put  on 
my  cassock,  that  did  duty  when  I  went  to  the  Court 
of  St.  James's.  Over  this  I  put  on  a  gorgeous,  gold- 
embroidered  waistcoat,  adapted  from  a  garment  I 
bought  in  Servia,  as  a  specimen  of  a  Servian  gentle- 
man's vest — grand  enough  for  a  general — and  tied  a 
cincture  at  the  bottom,  with  ends  hanging  at  the  side, 
and  over  these  I  hung  my  scarlet  hood.  Fortunately, 
perhaps,  there  was  no  mirror  in  the  room,  or  my 
heart  might  have  failed  me  ;  but  I  next  put  round  my 
neck  a  Provincial  Grand  Chaplain's  collar  of  purple 
and  gold,  and  on  this  pinned  three  or  four  masonic 
jewels,  by  way  of  medals,  and  slung  at  the  bottom  my 
pocket  Bible  ;  after  which  my  costume  was  completed 
by  a  college  cap  ;  and  thus  arrayed  I  mounted  my 
palfry  and  sallied  forth.  My  two  djiguitts  went  in 
front,  preceded  by  a  whole  bevy  of  officials,  and  the 
two  interpreters  came  after.  Of  course  I  looked  at  the 
people  as  we  passed  through  the  streets.  Need  I  say 
that  they  looked  still  harder  at  me,  doing  my  utmost, 
as  I  was,  to  keep  my  countenance  ?  The  boys,  not 
content  with  a  passing  glance,  ran  before,  and  kept 
turning  round  to  look,  and,  in  the  bazaar,  buyers  and 
sellers  stopped  their  bargaining  in  order  to  gaze. 
All  went  well,  however,  and  we  reached  the  citadel. 
This  is  a  large  artificial  mound,  surrounded  by  high  clay 
walls,   having  an   imposing  gateway,   with  a  chamber 


24  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

above,  and  a  tower  on  either  side.  A  number  of 
troops  were  drawn  up,  who  received  me  with  a  salute, 
and  we  dismounted  to  be  received  by  two  officers  at 
the  entrance,  one  of  whom  took  charge  of  my  presents 
for  his  master.  We  then  crossed  the  first  court,  and, 
on  entering  the  second,  I  caught  sight  of  his  Majesty, 
at  a  distance,  through  an  open  door. 

Of  him  I  had  read  various  and  somewhat  conflicting 
accounts.  Of  his  father,  Nasr-Ullah,  there  seemed  to 
be  but  one  opinion,  and  that  about  as  bad  as  it  could  well 
be  ;  but  of  the  reigning  Emir,  Seid  Muzaffar-ed-din, 
Vambery,  in  1863,  spoke  rather  favourably.* 

For  my  own  part,  I  heard  stories  from  Russians  and 
natives  alike,  to  which  I  shall  hereafter  refer,  that  in  a 
manner  confirmed  both  the  bright  and  shady  sides  of 
the  Emir's  character.  Meanwhile,  knowing  that  the 
man  I  had  to  deal  with  was  a  despot,  and  remembering 
his  power  to  hinder  or  advance  my  journey,    I    was 

*  Vambery  says,  "  The  Emir  is  in  the  forty-second  year  of  his  age, 
of  middle  stature,  somewhat  corpulent.  He  has  a  very  pleasing  coun- 
tenance, fine  black  eyes,  and  a  thin  beard.  In  his  youth  he  ...  .  was 
always  distinguished  for  the  gentleness  and  affability  of  his  manners. 
He  carries  out  strictly  the  political  principles  of  his  father,  and,  in  his 
capacity  as  Mullah  and  pious  Mussulman,  is  the  declared  enemy  of 
every  innovation.  On  his  accession  he  had  impressed  upon  his  signet 
the  device,  *  Government  by  justice,'  and  up  to  the  present  moment  has 
most  scrupulously  observed  it  ...  .  Towards  his  grandees,  who  for  the 
most  part  well  merit  the  treatment  they  meet  with,  he  is  very  severe ; 
for  although  punishing  with  death  even  trivial  offences  in  these,  he 
spares  the  poorer  classes.  Hence  the  expression  applied  to  him  by  the 
people,  and  which  does  him  honour,  for  they  say  of  him  that  he  is  a 
'killer  of  elephants  and  protector  of  mice.'" 

Ten  years  later,  Dr.  Schuyler  had  a  short  audience  with  the  Emir, 
and  described  him  as  "tall,  stout,  with  sallow  complexion,  and  small, 
dark,  uneasy  eyes,  which  he  kept  turning  in  all  directions.  His  flesh 
looked  very  flabby  and  unhealthy,  and  his  hands  trembled  constantly 
throughout  the  interview,  as  I  have  been  told  from  a  too  frequent  use 
of  aphrodisiacs." 

Ten  years  later  still,  M.  Stremoukhof,  ex-political  secretary  of  General 


FROM  KITAB  TO  SHAHR.  25 

naturally  anxious  for  a  favourable  interview.  I  wanted 
in  the  first  place  to  extend  my  travels  into  parts  of 
the  khanate  that  Dr.  Schuyler  was  not  allowed  to 
visit,  next  to  distribute  among  the  Bokhariots  my 
remaining  copies  of  the  Scriptures,  beginning  with  the 
Sovereign  himself,  and,  lastly,  I  wished  to  search  for 
manuscripts,  and  to  get  all  the  general  information  I 
possibly  could. 

The  Bokhariots  have  a  poetical  conceit  that  a 
stranger,  on  being  admitted  to  an  audience  with  the 
Emir,  is  so  overwhelmed  with  the  brightness  of  his 
presence,  that  he  needs  an  attendant  on  either  side  to 
support  him  from  fainting.  I  fancy  that  intercourse 
with  the  Russians,  who,  as  conquerors,  do  not  stand 
upon  such  nonsense,  is  breaking  down  the  custom,  or 
perhaps  the  attendants  did  not  think  me  a  fainting 
subject.  At  all  events  I  have  no  recollection  of  being 
supported  into  "the  presence."  The  courtiers  began 
to  bow  immediately  they  turned  the  corner  of  the 
court  from  whence  his  Majesty  was  visible.  I  had 
received  the  hint,  however,  that  I  should  act  as  if 
being  presented  to  my  own  or  the  Russian  sovereign^ 
and  I  accordingly  reserved  my  bow  till  I  entered  the 
audience  chamber.     It  was  a  good-sized  room,  carpeted 

von  Kaufmann,  gave,  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Gazette,  a  less  favourable 
account  than  either  of  the  preceding-,  saying,  "  The  present  Emir, 
whose  mother  was  a  slave,  is  an  uneducated,  unmannerly  coward,  and 
an  immoral  man.  He  spent  his  youth  among  thirty  wives,  several 
hundreds  of  concubines,  a  whole  squadron  of  batchas,  reciters  of 
poetr}"-,  jesters,  and  jugglers.  The  young  Emir's  mental  faculties  could 
not  possibly  be  developed  among  the  depraved  set  with  whom  he  asso- 
ciated, and  it  is  now  commonly  said  of  him  that  he  has  little  savat, 
meaning  that  he  can  hardly  decipher  any  document.  He  is  even  now 
accessible  only  to  flatterers,  mischief  makers,  and  charlatans.  .  .  . 
During  his  father's  lifetime  the  young  man  put  some  little  restraint 
upon  himself,  but  when  he  became  Emir  he  gave  full  vent  to  all  his 
worst  propensities." 


26  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

all  over,  but  without  a  stick  of  furniture,  except  two 
roughly-made  deal  chairs  with  crimson  seats.  The 
Emir  was  perched  on  one,  and,  after  giving  me  a  feeble 
shake  of  the  hand,  he  motioned  me  to  the  other.  I 
had  seen  his  portrait  at  Tashkend,  photographed,  I 
think,  in  1874,  and  from  which,  I  presume,  the 
engravings  have  been  made  ;  but  as  I  had  heard  his 
Majesty  spoken  of  as  an  old  man,  I  expected  to  find 
him  grey,  whereas  his  hair  was  black,  and,  though 
apparently  in  debilitated  health,  he  looked,  thanks 
perhaps  to  cosmetics  which  he  is  said  to  use  freely, 
less  than  58,  which   I   heard  was  his  age. 

When  I  had  seated  myself,  Mr.  Sevier  and  Yakoob 
stood  in  front,  a  few  courtiers  being  behind.  The 
Emir  began  by  saying  he  had  heard  that  I  came  from 
far  ;  he  was  glad  that  I  had  come,  and  hoped  that  I 
had  recovered  from  fatigue. 

I  thanked  him,  and  said  that  the  Russians  had  given 
me  permission  to  go  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk  ;  would 
he  be  so  kind  as  to  direct  that  my  tarantass  should  be 
taken  to  Charjui,  and  then  floated  down  the  Oxus  ? 

-  Yes." 

I  then  said,  ''  I  am  an  English  mullah,  and  can  read 
Hebrew  and  Greek.  I  should  very  much  like  to  be 
allow^ed  to  see  what  ancient  manuscripts  there  may  be 
in  your  Majesty's  library." 

Answer  :  ''He  had  heard  that  I  was  interested  in 
antiquities.  I  might,  therefore,  search  for  them  where 
I  pleased,  and  have  any  I  could  find  ;  and  his  men 
would  help  me." 

Thus  far,  all  promised  well,  and  I  went  on  to  say 
that  I  had  seen  prisons  and  hospitals  in  many  parts  of 
the  world,  especially  in  Siberia,  and  that  I  should  like  to 
to  be  allowed  to  see  those  of  his  Majesty's  dominions. 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR. 


27 


Here  I  suppose  I  ''  put  my  foot  in  it,"  for  I  received 
no  answer.  In  asking  Russians  the  kind  of  presents 
that    would    be    suitable    for    the    Emir,     I    had    been 


>EID    MTZAFKAR-ED-DIN,    E.MIK    OF    BOKHARA. 


especially  advised  to  offer  articles  that  would  be  itezv 
to  him.  I  was  not  too  well  supplied  with  such  things,  for 
I  was  not  sure,  on  leaving  England,  that  I  should  get 
into  Bokhara,  nor  had  I  previously  travelled  in  coun- 


28  •  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

tries  where  money  was  not  generally  regarded  as  the 
best  of  presents.  When,  however,  no  reply  came  to 
my  request,  I  pointed  to  the  scarlet  raiment  on  my 
back,  telling  his  Majesty  that  such  a  decoration  was 
worn  by  our  chief  mullahs  in  England  ;  that  I  had 
heard  he  was  a  mullah,  and  that  I  should  be  gratified 
if  he  would  accept  my  Doctor's  hood  ;  and  then,  to 
make  quite  sure  that  among  my  presents  there  should 
be  something  decidedly  new,  I  added  the  masonic 
collar  and  jewels  !  He  seemed  at  first  not  to  under- 
stand me,  until,  having  called  in  the  aid  of  his  own 
interpreter,  he  replied,  *'  Yes " ;  and  again  there 
followed  a  painful  silence. 

I  was  beginning  to  think  him  provokingly  uninquisi- 
tive,  and  inquired  whether  he  had  any  questions  to 
ask  about  England. 

Again  there  came  no  answer,  whereupon  I  rose. 
Then  he  said  he  must  consider.      Did  1  mean  about 
England,  or  about  my  travels  ? 

I  answered,  '*  Whichever  your  Majesty  pleases." 
'*  What,  then,"  said  he,  "is  the  aim  of  your  travels.'^" 
''  Primarily,"  I  answered,  "  to  distribute  good  books  i 
in    prisons    and    hospitals  ;    but,    besides    that,    I    am  1 
interested  in  antiquities." 

"  Now,"  said  he,  "  I  understand  your  object." 
I  handed  him  two  of  my  letters,  with  accompanying- 
translations  in  Turki,  but  he  hirdly  glanced  at  them, 
and  rather  impatiently,  I  thought,  put  them  aside. 
We  then  shook  hands,  and  all  literally  "backed  out  " 
of  his  presence.  We  had  been- told  beforehand  thdt 
refreshment  would  be  provided,  of  which  we  partook, 
in  the  room  of  the  chief  ministers.  They  said  we 
ate  too  little,  and  asked  about  my  costume,  one  of 
them  having  been  in   Belgrade,  the  very  town  where 


FROM  KITAB   TO   SHAHR.  29 

my  vest  was  purchased.  They  had  no  prisons  worth 
seeing,  they  said.  They  used  to  put  prisoners  in  the 
stocks,  but  not  now.  They  were  curious  to  know  what 
were  the  books  we  had  given  to  the  Emir;  they  under- 
stood our  giving  books  in  ''  the  hospitals  to  cure  the  sick, 
but  had  we,  besides,  any  medicine?"  I  gave  presents 
of  rings  and  a  pocket  microscope  to  these  ministers, 
for  which  they  said  they  had  nothing  to  give  in  return  ; 
but  they  soon  came  to  tell  me  that  the  Emir  had 
looked  at  my  presents,  and  thought  them  very  curious, 
and,  further,  they  brought  into  the  room  to  me,  as  a 
present,  at  least  a  score  of  changes  of  raiment,  for 
myself  and  retainers.  These  were  the  robes  of  honour, 
or  khalats,  of  which  the  Russians  had  told  me  the 
Emir  would  give  enough  to  "  bury  me."  Some  were 
of  cotton,  of  gaudy  colours,  others  of  native  silk,  some 
few  of  Russian  brocaded  satin,  like  the  Russian  priests' 
vestments  ;  one  or  two  were  of  Cashmere,  and  another 
of  pea-green  velvet,  to  envelop  me  from  head  to  foot ! 
This,  however,  was  only  the  beginning  of  favours,  for 
I  was  next  informed  that  the  Emir  had  sent  me  a 
horse  for  myself,  and  another  for  whomsoever  I  pleased. 
Nor  was  my  charger  sent  without  saddle  or  bridle, 
for  it  had  both,  as  well  as  a  saddle-cloth,  covering 
him  from  mane  to  tail,  and  hanging  down  on  either 
side,  two  feet  from  the  withers  and  three  feet  behind. 
The  saddle-cloth  is  the  handsomest  I  have  ever  seen, 
and  is  of  crimson  velvet,  embroidered  with  gold  and 
silver  thread  and  silk  of  various  colours,  in.  seven 
large  foliate  patterns,  surrounded  by  a  scroll  border 
of  similar  workmanship,  and  edged  with  wide  amber 
and  crimson  fringe,  the  whole  being  adorned  by 
spangles  of  silver  and  gold. 

The  bridle,  too,  is  no  less  remarkable,  being  mounted 


30  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASM. 

with  bosses,  pendents,  and  ornaments  of  turquoise 
cloisonnd  work.  At  the  back  of  the  head,  on  the  neck, 
rests  a  plate  of  turquoise  work,  from  which  hang  on 
either  side  8  strips,  similarly  jewelled,  the  reins  being 
of  white  leather.  One  of  the  bridles  is  now  in  the 
British  Museum. 

I  suppose  that,  had  I  been  an  Asiatic,  I  should  have 
been  clothed  with  one  of  these  robes  of  honour,*  and 
mounted  upon  the  horse  to  ride  through  the  street, 
*'like  unto  the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth  to 
honour "  ;t  but  I  was  excused  from  this,  though  the 
trappings  were  left  on  the  horses,  that  the  people 
might  see,  they  said,  that  I  had  received  a  present, 
whilst  "  the  changes  of  garments  were  laid  upon  his 
servants,  and  they  bare  them "  (with  the  horses 
walking)  before  me.^ 

It  was  well,  perhaps,  that  I  did  not  mount  my  pre- 
sent, for  subsequently  gay  clothing  was  found  to  cover 
but  sorry  steeds,  and  one  of  them  was  so  vicious  that 
none  liked  to  get  near  him.  One  horse  was  an  Arab, 
8  years  old,  the  other  a  Karabair,  the  two  together 
being  valued  at  ^8  !  We  had  now  done  the  honours, 
and  were  told  that  we  might  proceed  if  we  wished  ; 
and  upon  my  expressing  a  desire  to  hasten  forward, 
the  Emir  sent  us  his  carriage,  drawn  by  a  pair  of 
horses,  in  which  we  drove  through  the  market-place, 
out  of  the  town  towards  Shahr,  and  arrived  before 
evening. 

*  I  saw  this  done  on  the  following  day.  When  sending  a  watch  and 
chain  to  the  Bek  of  Shahr,  by  the  hand  of  Yakoob,  the  Bek  threw  over 
my  messenger's  shoulders  a  gaudy  robe,  in  which  Yakoob  came  parading 
back,  thus  illustrating,  I  suppose,  the  case  of  Mordecai,  who  '*went  out 
from  the  presence  of  thejking  in  royal  apparel  of  blue  and  white  "  (Esther 
viii.  15). 

f  Esther  vi.  ii. 

+  2  Kings  V.  23. 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

FROM  SHAHR  TO  KARSHI. 

Historical  associations  of  Shahr. — Visit  to  the  Bek,  and  his  inquiries 
concerning  Kuldja.  —  Information  from  courtiers.  —  Bokhariot 
weights  and  measures. — Return  of  certain  presents. — Untrustworthi- 
ness  of  Bokhariot  statistics. — Departure  from  Shahr. — The  Bekships 
of  Chirakchi,  Shir-a-bad,  Kobadian,  and  KiHf. — Hissar  moun- 
tains.— Visit  to  Bek  of  Chirakchi. — Burnes  at  Karshi  in  1832. — 
Handsome  guest-house, — Visit  to  public  bath. — The  slave  trade 
in  Bokhara. — Visit  to  Bek  of  Karshi. — Mosques  and  synagogues. 

THE  carriage  that  took  us  from  Kitab  had  been 
sent  from  Petersburg  by  the  Emperor  as  a 
present,  and  no  one  but  the  Emir  had  the  like  in 
Bokhara.  It  was  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the 
people  gazed  hard  at  the  two  Englishmen  in  plain 
clothes  seated  in  the  royal  chariot.  The  distance 
between  the  two  towns  that  make  up  Shahr-i-sabz 
(pronounced  Shakhr-i-sabz)  is  only  four  miles,  and 
the  route  lies  through  gardens  and  fields  edged  with 
trees,  crossing  about  midway  the  Ak-daria,  an 
affluent  of  the  Kashka-daria.  We  soon  saw  that  the 
people  knew  far  less  about  driving  than  riding. 
Draught  horses,  they  told  us,  were  rare  ;  hence  the 
Emir  had  lent  us  two  artillery  chargers,  somewhat 
large  and  heavy,  and  attached  to  our  delicate  carriage 
by  ropes  intended  to  draw  a  cannon,  whilst  each  horse 
was    mounted    by    a   turbaned    postilion,    who,   as    he 


S2  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

walked  or  at  most  ambled  his  horse  along,  kept 
smiling  at  his  fellow  as  if  he  thought  the  occasion 
a  novel,  if  not  an  important,  one.  Hence  we  had  a 
leisurely  afternoon  drive,  and  before  sunset  reached 
our  destination.  We  were  conducted  to  the  house 
where  embassies  are  received,  in  which  was  a  large 
room  carpeted,  with  niches  in  the  wall,  and  a  mode- 
rate-sized flower  garden  outside.  We  were  told  that 
the  Bek  would  receive  us  in  the  evening  in  the 
Ak-Serai,  a  reminder  that  we  were  on  historic  ground.* 
Accordingly,  after  sunset  we  went  to  visit  the  Bek. 
At  the  entrance  to  the  citadel  soldiers  were  drawn  up, 
who  presented  arms,  and  we  crossed  the  court  where 
Tamerlane's  feet  must  often  have  trod  ;  for  there  stood 
the  ruins  of  two  piers,  solidly  built  of  large  bricks,  of  the 
famous  Ak-Serai,  or  white  palace,  in  which  he  used 
to   repose   after  his  campaigns.     Their  height  is   140 

*  Shahr-i-sabz  was  widely  known  under  its  former  name  of  Kesh 
as  the  birthplace  of  the  great  Tamerlane.  Separated  from  Bokhara 
by  the  desert  through  which  we  were  to  travel,  and  from  Samarkand 
by  the  easily  defensible  mountain  pass  we  had  crossed,  the  position  of 
Shahr-i-sabz  offered  a  good  area  in  later  days  for  the  formation  of  an 
independent  government,  and  it  early  asserted  itself.  In  the  middle 
of  the  last  century,  Rahim  Bi,  of  Bokhara,  subdued  and  held  the  province  ^ 
for  five  years,  but  it  revolted.  From  181 1  to  1836  it  had  a  noted 
Governor,  Daniar  Atalik,  who  successfully  held  out  against  Mir  Haidar 
and  his  son,  Nasr  Ullah.  Nasr  Ullah,  however,  captured  the  place 
in  1856,  but  it  revolted  on  his  death,  and  his  successor,  the  present 
Emir,  did  not  at  first  succeed  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  "green 
city."  Baba  Bek  was  set  up  as  ruler  of  Shahr,  and  Jura  Kek  of 
Kitab,  and  with  these  Muzaffar  was  obliged  to  make  peace,  they 
giving  him  precedence  and  yearly  presents,  but  not  allowing  his 
interference  in  the  affairs  of  the  province.  These  relations  were  broken  i 
in  1866,  on  the  battle  of  the  Russians  and  Bokhariots  at  Irdjar,  after  ' 
which  certain  rebels  against  the  Hmir  were  harboured  in  Shahr-i-sabz, 
and  the  province  again  held  out  successfully  against  Muzaffar.  The 
final  blow  to  its  independence  was  given  by  the  Russians  in  1870, 
when  Kitab  was  taken  by  storm,  and  Shahr  immediately  surrendered ; 
whereupon  the  Russians  gave  up  the  province  to  the  Emir  of  Bokhara, 
as  a  proof  that  they  desired  no  further  conquest  of  his  territory. 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  2>2i 

feet,  and  their  pure  Arabic  style  and  ornamentation 
in  glazed  tiles  of  blue  and  white  porcelain,  inlaid  in 
arabesques,  and  Persian  and  Arabic  inscriptions,  make 
them  striking  objects.*  I  was  received  in  a  spacious 
hall  surrounded  by  mirrors  about  five  feet  high,  and 
suspected  that  my  reception  had  been  deferred  till 
after  dark  that  I  might  be  dazzled  with  the  (supposed) 
magnificence. 

The  Bek,  who  gave  me  his  name  as  Astanakul, 
Parmanatchi,  signifying  that  he  was  one  grade  below 
the  highest,  sat  near  me  at  the  table  on  which  refresh- 
ment was  served.  There  were  also  at  the  table 
Khoja  Abul  Fais,  and  the  Emir's  interpreter,  who  had 
been  sent  by  his  Majesty  to  amuse  us  during  the 
evening,  and  I  suppose  also  to  learn  of  us  what  they 
could.  The  Bek  was  much  more  communicative  than 
his  sovereign,  and  asked  if  I  had  a  father  and  brothers, 
but  made  no  such  inquiry  as  to  mother  or  sisters, 
which,  according  to  Bokhariot  ideas,  would  have  been 
unpolite.  He  wished  to  know  my  profession,  and 
that  of  my  father,  and  inquired  for  the  health  of  my 
family.  As  he  appeared  to  be  so  chatty,  I  took  the 
*  opportunity  to  ask  him,  and  those  at  the  table,  many 
questions,  and  to  jot  down  the  answers  I  received. 
He  gave  me  information  also  concerning  my  route, 
which  was  to  be  60  miles  to  Karshi,  95  more  to 
Bokhara,  and  loi  further  to  Charjui.  I  asked  him 
to  arrange,  if  possible,  that  our  journey  might  be 
expedited,  whereupon  he  summoned  his  scribe,  who 
wrote  a  letter  at  his  mouth,  which  the  Bek  authenti- 

*  This  is  the  building  of  which  the  Spanish  Clavijo  tells  us  the 
builders  had  been  engaged  upon,  in  1405,  for  20  years.  He  speaks  of 
a  broad  and  high  entrance  to  the  garden,  beautifully  adorned  with 
glazed  tiles,  in  blue  and  gold,  as  well  as  handsome  galleries  and 
reception  halls  decorated  with  gold,  azure,  silver,  and  ivory. 
VOL.  II.  3 


34  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

cated,  after  hearing  it  read  (not  reading  it  himself), 
by  impressing  his  seal  upon  it  ;^  while  the  messengers 
went  out  to  make  preparations  for  our  departure 
on  the  morrow.  When  the  Bek  heard  that  we  had 
come  from  Kuldja,  that  was  shortly  to  be  given 
back  to  the  Chinese,  his  eyes  sparkled,  evidently 
at  the  thought  of  the  Russians  having  to  disgorge 
some  of  their  prey,  and  he  inquired  particularly 
how  many.  Chinese  there  were  in  Kuldja,  and  how 
many  versts  westward  the  frontier  had  been  fixed. 
Before  leaving  I  presented  the  Bek  with  an  Arabic 
New  Testament,  and  a  portrait  of  myself,  whereupon 
he  asked  whether  I  had  given  the  like  to  his  Majesty. 
Then,  to  my  surprise,  they  brought  me  a  present,  by 
desire  of  the  Emir,  from  the  Bek,  of  more  khalats 
and  another  Arab  horse  with  saddle  and  bridle,  but 
not  so  gorgeously  ornamented  as  the  one  I  had 
received   in  the  morning. 

It  was  quite  dark  when  our  visit  was  over,  and  a 
crowd  outside  was  waiting  to  escort  us  back  with  torches 
and  lanterns.  The  Khoja  and  his  interpreter  accom- 
panied us  to  our  lodgings,  where  we  found  a  company 
of  batchas,  and  the  people  assembled  for  a  performance. 
I  did  not  decline  it,  but  gave  the  Khoja  to  understand 
that  it  would  be  a  far  greater  treat  to  me  than  seeing 

*  Like  Shaphan,the  scribe,  reading  before  the  king- (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  18), 
or  like  Mordecai  writing  letters,  sealing  them,  and  sending  off  messengers 
in  the  name  of  Ahasuerus  (Esther  viii.  8,  10).  The  Emir,  not  reading 
personally  the  letter  I  presented  to  him,  recalls  the  words  of  Artaxerxes, 
"The  letter  which  ye  sent  unto  us  hath  been  plainly  read  before  me  " 
(Ezra  iv.  18,  2}^).  The  carrying  a  signet  appears  to  have  been  customary 
with  dignitaries  in  patriarchal  times  in  Palestine,  if  we  may  so  under- 
stand the  case  of  Judah  (Gen.  xxxviii.  18);  and  later  in  Persia,  for  Darius 
sealed  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den  (Dan.  vi.  17).  So,  too,  in  Judaia  under 
Pilate,  who  "  made  the  sepulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone  "  (Matt,  xxvii. 
66).  We  read  of  none  of  these  affixing  their  sign  manual,  as  it  would 
be  with  us. 


36  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  batchas  if  he  would  allow  me  to  question  him 
about  the  country.  He  and  his  interpreter  were,  I 
saw,  intelligent  fellows,  and  it  was  an  opportunity  not 
to  be  missed.  When,  therefore,  the  batchas  were  well 
started  with  their  tomfooleries,  we  withdrew  into  the 
room,  to  my  table  and  note-book,  but  left  the  doors 
open  so  that  we  could  see  a  little  and  hear  only  too 
much  of  the  performance  outside.  I  fear  the  crowd 
thought  us  sadly  wanting  in  taste,  and  the  batchas, 
determined  that  we  should  not  lose  all  the  fun,  came 
every  now  and  then  putting  their  heads  inside,  and 
bawling,  at  the  top  of  their  voices,  some  portion  of 
song  for  our  special  benefit. 

Meanwhile  I  was  plying  my  visitors  with  questions, 
and  by  them  was  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of 
Bokhariot  weights  and  measures,  among  which,  in 
the  absence  of  a  recognized  standard,  the  glorious 
uncertainty  of  "  the  rule  of  thumb  "   is   as  nothing.-^ 

Among  the  messages  sent  me  by  the  Emir  was  one 
that  they  delivered  very  delicately,  and  accompanied 
by  some  of  my  presents  to  him.  The  Emir  feared 
that  I  should  want  again  my  hood,  collar,  and  jewels, 
adding  what  was  no  doubt  true,  that  I  should  not 
be  able  to  get  the  like  throughout  his  kingdom  ;  and 
with  regard  to  the  illustrated  book  of  travels,  it  was 
in  a  language  he  knew  not,  and  he  had  looked  at, 
but  could  not  understand,  the  pictures.  He  hoped, 
therefore,    I   should  not  be  offended  if  he  asked  me 

*  For  instance,  they  have  only  one  measure  of  capacity,  the  chuyeh, 
for  oil  and  honey,  and  that  seldom  used,  and  of  variable  size.  A  task 
equals  3  milles,  or  12,000  paces,  or  18,000  olchines.  The  olckzne  vf3iS 
spoken  of  roughly  as  equal  to  the  Russian  arshin,  and  measured  cubit- 
fashion  from  the  elbow  to  the  end  of  the  forefinger.  The  kulatch  is 
the  distance  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  when  the  arms  are  outstretched, 
whilst  the  giaz  is  from  the  centre  of  the  breast  to  the  end  of  the 
fingers. 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  37 

to  take  that  back,  but  as  for  the  reHglous  books — 
namely,  a  Persian  Bible  and  Arabic  New  Testament — 
he  accepted  and  revered  them.  Here,  then,  was  a 
rebuke  to  my  worldly  wisdom,  for  (to  make  confession 
for  once)  I  did  not  feel  at  all  sure  how  this  Mullah- 
potentate,  the  chief  champion  of  Islam  in  Central 
Asia,  would  be  pleased  at  the  idea  of  my  offering  him 
a  Christian  Bible.  On  the  other  hand,  the  book  of 
travels  was  gorgeously  bound,  and  full  of  pictures  of 
his  own  khanate  and  of  Central  Asia,  and  I  thought 
this  would  prepare  the  way  for  the  religious  books. 
I  suppose  the  real  reason  why  he  returned  the  book, 
with  my  portrait  also,  by-the-bye,  enclosed,  was  because 
of  the  Sunni  Muhammadan  law  against  pictures. 
Vambery  says  that  in  Bokhara,  in  1863,  ''  the  unhappy 
possessor  of  a  portrait  of  a  living  human  being  suffered 
the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law,"  so  that  his  Majesty 
could  hardly  keep  the  pictures  in  defiance  of  his  own 
regulations.*  1  do  not  know  whether  the  law  about 
possessors  of  portraits  has  been  relaxed.  If  not,  I  fear 
I  jeoparded  the  lives  of  a  good  many,  for  I  had  taken 
with  me  a  large  number  of  cabinet  portraits,  because 
convenient  to  carry,  and  I  gave  them  freely  in  the 
khanates.  It  was  not  till  I  was  getting  towards  the 
end  of  my  stock  that  I  accidentally  learned  of  the 
objection,  and  asked  Yakoob  what  he  thought  would 
be  done  with  the  photographs.  He  expected  that 
in  many  cases  they  would  be  destroyed.  Nevertheless, 
good  Mussulman  as  he  was,  I  had  by  this  time  so 
far  ingratiated  myself  with  him  that  he  seemed  to 
wish  for  a  memento,   and,   on  parting,   asked  for   my 

*  Burnes  wrote,  in  1832,  that  a  merchant  had  lately  imported  some 
pictures  from  China  into  Bokhara,  but  that  they  were  immediately 
broken,  and  their  value  paid  by  the  government. 


38 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


portrait  for  himself.     Moreover,  no  one  else  but   the 
Emir  returned  the  present. 

In  the  Emir's  case,  of  course,  I  took  back  the  things 
without  hesitation,  expressing  the  hope  that  I  might 
be  able  to  find  something  else  to  send  in  their  stead 
(which  I  did  on  reaching  Bokhara),  and  asking  also 
the  Khoja  and  his  interpreter  if  there  was  anything 
they   w^ould  like   me  to  send  them  from  England,  to 


THE  COURT   MOSQUK  AT    KITAB. 


which  they  replied,  with  Oriental  politeness,  that  they 
wished  for  nothing  but  to  please  me.  I  supposed  I 
must  have  created  a  favourable  impression  upon  the 
mind  of  the  Khoja,  for  before  parting  he  informed  me 
that  he  was  constantly  in  the  presence  of  the  Emir, 
and  took  his  meals  with  him,  so  that,  if  I  had  any 
favour  to  ask,  he  was  in  a  position  to  help  me.* 

♦  Reminding  one  of  Elijah's  words  to  the  Shunamite,  "  Wouldst 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  39 

I  had  no  wish  to  stay  at  Shahr,  which  is  said  to 
have  90  mosques  and  3  medresses.  I  secured  a  photo- 
graph of  the  Court  Mosque  of  Kitab,  but  it  is  an 
insignificant  building.  Dr.  Schuyler  suggests  a  popu- 
lation for  Shahr  of  20,000,  and  mentions  15,000  for 
Kitab.*  I  am,  however,  exceedingly  sceptical  as  to 
the  accuracy  of  Bokhariot  numbers,  especially  when 
they  mount  to  four  or  five  figures.  I  am  persuaded 
that  some  travellers  have  supplied  us  with  statistics  of 
population  in  the  khanate,  which  the  Emir  himself 
could  not  give  if  his  life  depended  on  it.  One  of  the 
questions  I  asked  at  Kitab  of  my  military  informant 
was  the  population  of  the  khanate,  but  he  could  not 
inform  me.  The  reader  will  therefore  kindly  bear  this 
in  mind  in  reference  also  to  my  own  figures,  supplied 
from  information  given  by  the  natives. 

The  Bek  sent  early  next  morning  to  inquire  for  my 
health.  His  present  of  the  previous  evening  had 
taken  me  by  surprise,  and  having  subsequently  heard 
that  his  son  was  at  the  Emir's  court,  though  not  pre- 
sent when  I  gave  presents  to  the  ministers,  I  sent  to 
the  Bek  a  watch  and  chain  for  his  son  or  any  one  else 
to  whom  he  chose  to  give  it.     He  threw  a  khalat  over 

thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  king?"  (2  Kings  iv.  13)  ;  also  of  various 
courtly  officers  who  were  in  "the  king's  presence"  ;  as  David,  who 
"  sat  with  the  king  at  meat  "  (i  Sam.  xx.  5) ;  "five  men  of  them  that 
were  in  the  king's  presence,"  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings 
XXV.  19)  ;  and  "seven  men  of  them  that  saw  the  face  of  the  king," 
taken  by  the  Bab3donian  monarch  (Jer.  Hi.  25)  ;  such  as  had  ability 
to  stand  in  the  king's  palace,  among  whom  was  Daniel  (i.  4);  and, 
again,  the  seven  counsellors  of  Artaxerxes  (Ezra  vii.  14), 

*  Mr.  Galkin,  in  1865,  estimated  the  population  of  the  bekship  at 
70,000  of  both  sexes.  More  recent  authorities  have  put  it  at  50,000, 
mostly  Kanigas  Uzbeks,  noted  for  their  valour.  The  same  author 
gives  the  names  of  4  forts  and  20  villages  and  settlements  in  Shahr-i- 
sabz.  Kitab  lies  on  a  hill,  at  an  altitude  of  1,910  feet,  but  Shahr  is  in 
a  marshy  plain,  somewhat  lower. 


40  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  shoulders*  of  my  messenger,  saying  that  he  would 
send  the  watch  and  chain  to  his  son,  after  detaching 
the  whistle  from  the  guard  for  himself,  and  thanked 
me. 

We  left  Shahr  at  9.20  a.m.  in  the  Emir's  carriage, 
the  road  to  Karshi  lying  through  the  Kashka-daria 
oasis,  t  We  drove  slowly  for  an  hour  through  gardens 
and  cultivated  fields,  and  then  came  to  the  open  steppe, 
sandy,  but  covered  with  vegetation.  Not  far  from 
Shahr  is  the  little  village  of  Sharmitan,  and  six  miles 
from  the  town  is  a  second  village,  but  we  stopped  at 
neither.  Several  streams  were  crossed,  and  on  our 
left  we  had  a  distant  view  of  mountains  belonging  to 
the   Hissar  system.  ^ 

About  a   mile  before  reaching  Chirakchi   we  were 

*  This  giving  of  raiment  reminds  one  of  Jonathan  stripping  himself 
of  his  garments  and  giving  them  to  David  (i  Sam.  xvii.  54),  a  custom 
that  lingered  in  Europe  in  the  sixteenth  century,  when  the  Tsar  honoured 
Yermak,  the  conqueror  of  Siberia,  by  sending  him  a  garment  from  his 
own  wardrobe. 

t  Part  of  the  upper  portion  of  the  oasis  comprises  the  Chirakchi 
bekship,  w^here,  in  1878,  they  reaped  thirtyfold  crops  of  corn.  The 
price  reached,  in  1877,  barley  2s.  6d.  to  2s.  ^d.  per  cwt.,  wheat  33".  4^2?. 
to  3J.  7^.  per  cwt.  Sheep,  when  lean,  cost  from  8i".  to  125-.,  and 
homed  cattle  from  20J".  to  24^".  a  head.  The  latter,  however,  can  be 
obtained  only  in  s.-nall  numbers.  Cattle  are  more  plentiful  in  the 
neighbouring  bekship  of  Hissar,  where  some  4,000  head  are  driven 
weekly  to  the  bazaars.  The  bekship  of  Shir-a-bad,  further  south,  is 
less  productive  than  either  of  the  former,  so  much  agriculture  only 
being  developed  as  suffices  for  the  needs  of  the  people.  In  the  neigh- 
bouring bekship  of  Kobadian  there  is  but  little  com  sown,  silk  being 
the  staple  produce.  The  settlement  of  Kilif  on  the  Oxus  does  not  pro- 
duce corn,  but  only  vegetables  and  lucerne.  They  get  corn  from 
Afghanistan  in  exchange  for  salt.  In  the  mountain  valleys  of  the 
Kilif  bekship  corn  is  produced,  but  they  lie  far  from  the  line  between 
Karshi  and  the  Oxus,  or  the  locality  where  a  post  could  be  established. 

X  This  high  range,  called  Hissar,  is  a  direct  prolongation  of  the 
Thian  Shan,  and  separates  the  valleys  of  the  Zarafshan  and  Kashgar- 
daria  from  the  Amu-daria.  The  Hissar  range,  with  its  offshoots,  serves 
also   for  the   northern   boundary   of    the    Bokhara   khanate  from  the 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  41 

net  by  half-a-dozen  cavaliers,  gaily  dressed,  who  said 
;hat  the  Bek,  who  was  the  Emir's  son,  had  sent  them 
:o  welcome  me,  and  inquire  for  my  welfare.  They 
preceded  us  to  the  town,  as  the  place  must  be  termed, 
since  it  is  surrounded  by  a  wall,  otherwise  it  might  be 
taken  for  a  kishlak  with  a  large  bazaar ;  and  they 
informed  us  that,  it  being  Friday,  the  Bek  was  gone  to 
the  mosque,  but  that  on  his  return  he  would  receive 
us.  We  called  about  two  hours  later,  and  found  the 
Bek's  house  standing  almost  on  the  bank  of  the  river. 
His  residence  is  within  a  quadrangle,  closed  in  with  a 
high  mud  wall,  and  divided  into  smaller  squares,  in  one 
of  which  a  row  of  chambers  stretches  along  the  wall. 
■<0n  entering,  an  official  first  received  my  presents,  and 
then  we  were  shown  into  a  room,  where  sat  a  youth  of 
18,  but  looking  much  older,  dressed  in  a  khalat  of 
cloth  of  gold,  with  a  pink  turban,  edged  with  gold  lace, 
the  grandest  get-up  I  had  yet  seen,  and  far  outdoing 
his  father,  whom  we  had  found  plainly  dressed.  He 
said  that  as  they  had  been  visited  by  no  Englishmen 
before,  he  was  glad  I  had  come  to  see  their  country. 
I  asked  if  he  would  come  to  England. 
"That,"  he  said,  "depends  entirely  on  my  father." 
He  had  heard  that  I  was  fond  of  antiquities,  and 
orders  had  been  sent  to  Bokhara  to  find  them  if 
possible.  I  suppose,  too,  he  had  heard  that  I  was 
an  author,  about  which  I  made  no  secret,  and,  in  fact, 
in  this  way  explained  why  I  was  taking  notes,  which 
is  a  deadly  crime  in  Oriental  eyes,  and  soon  laid  me 

meridian  of  Samarkand  to  its  eastward  boundary  on  the  Pamir,  a  line 
of  about  300  miles.  There  are  11  roads  and  passes  leading  over  the 
mountains,  some  for  foot  passengers  only,  and  some  for  pack- 
animals,  but  none  for  carriages.  The  most  convenient  for  communica- 
tion between  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Zarafshan  and  the  Hissar  villages 
is  (considered  to  be)  the  Anzob  Pass.  12,000  feet  high. 


42  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

open  to  suspicion.  I  suppose,  therefore,  he  had  been 
primed  to  say  what  he  afterwards  added,  namely,  that 
he  hoped  I  should  say  nothing  against  their  country. 
I  replied,  and  replied  truly,  that  I  should  have  a  great 
deal  to  say  about  the  hospitable  manner  in  which  I 
had  been   received. 

I  learned  that  a  horseman  had  arrived  from  Bokhara 
irom  the  Kush-beggi,  having  been  only  two  days  on 
the  road.  This  made  us  long  to  be  hurried  forward, 
for  we  had  that  day  accomplished  only  13  miles,  and 
were  to  go  no  further — a  great  contrast  to  our  travel 
in  the  Russian  Steppe,  where  we  expected  to  do  a 
similar  distance  in  little  more  than  an  hour.  Moreover, 
we  were  poorly  lodged  in  a  room  about  12  feet  by  8 
feet,  with  bare  mud  walls,  not  even  plastered,  wooden 
pegs  stuck  in  holes  to  hang  our  things  on,  and  two 
rickety  bedsteads  ;  and  also  there  was  nothing  in  the 
town  worth  delaying  our  journey  for.  Chirakchi  was 
formerly  a  dependency  of  Shahr-i-sabz,  but  is  now 
governed  by  this  boy-bek,  who,  report  said,  spent  his 
money  prodigally,  and  grumbled  at  his  father  because, 
in  his  annual  migrations  from  the  capital  to  his  summer 
residence  at  Kitab,  he  did  not  stay  with  his  son  on  the 
way. 

Several  sons,  some  of  them  quite  young,  the  Emir 

has    distributed    through    the    khanate    as    beks    or 

governors  of  provinces,  as  at  Chirakchi.*     I  observed, 

however,    that   this   youth  was  surrounded  with   aged 

*  I  presume  that  the  one  we  saw  is  the  same  that  Dr.  Yavorski, 
when  passing  through  in  1878,  speaks  of  as  the  youngest  son  of  the 
Emir,  so  that,  if  my  information  were  true,  the  Bek  could  have  been  then 
but  14  years  of  age.  The  position  and  conduct  of  the  Emir  illustrates 
the  expression  in  Psalm  xlv.  16,  "  Instead  of  thy  fathers,  thou  shalt 
have  children:  whom  thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all  lands,"  and 
Muzaffar  thus  emulates  the  example  of  Rehoboam,  who,  desiring  many 
wives,  "  dealt  wisely,  and  dispersed  of  all  his  children  throughout  all 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  43 

:ourtiers,  who  paid  him  the  utmost  deference.  After 
our  departure  there  was  sent  for  my  acceptance  another 
:aparisoned  horse  and  khalats. 

Next  morning  at  6.30,  soon  after  sunrise,  we  started 
for  Karshi,  a  distance  of  47  miles,  which  I  was  deter- 
mined, if  possible,  to  accomplish  that  day.  Several  of 
the  authorities  accompanied  us  out  of  the  town,  so  that 
our  cavalcade  numbered  fully  20  persons,  one  of  whom, 
an  old  man,  asked  if  we  could  give  him  a  little  quinine, 
which  I  promised  to  do  when  we  unpacked  at  the  next 
station.  Our  road  lay  along  the  valley  of  the  Kashka- 
daria  oasis,  descending  from  an  altitude  of  1,300  feet 
at  Chirakchi  to  800  feet  at  Karshi.  Between  Chirakchi 
■and  Karatigan  the  oasis  somewhat  thins  off  but  there 
is  everywhere  plenty  of  water,  forage,  and  fuel.  About 
two  hours  after  starting  we  traversed  low  flat-topped 
hills  near  the  river,  with  plains  between  us  and  the 
stream,  and  a  few  yourts  surrounded  by  plots  of  culti- 
vated land.  Further  on  the  road  we  passed  through  a 
better  cultivated  and  more  populous  district.  Wheat 
and  rice  fields,  cotton  plantations  and  vegetable  gar- 
dens extended  along  both  sides  of  the  road,  whilst  the 
winding  river  and  the  snowy  summits  of  mountains  in 
the  distance  helped  to  vary  the  scene.  We  passed 
two  kishlaks  on  the  right,  crossed  the  river  at  the 
village  of  Karabagh,  and  were  met  about  halfway  to 
our  destination  by  messengers  sent  by  the  Bek  of 
Karshi.  At  a  small  place  called  Chim,  or  Sham,  we 
stopped  two  hours  for  dinner,  and  then,  driving  on  to 
within  seven  miles  of  Karshi,  we  were  met  by  another 
messenger,   who   invited  us  to  take  refreshment,   and 

the  countries  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  unto  every  fenced  city"  (2  Chron. 
xi.  2^.  Also  the  youth  of  some  of  the  beks,  and  the  condition  of 
Bokhara,  is  a  commentary  on  Isa.  iii.  4,  "  I  will  give  children  to  be 
their  princes,  and  babes  shall  rule  over  them." 


44  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

provided  some  excellent  figs.  We  were  now  approach- 
ing a  fruitful  oasis,  noted  for  the  cultivation  of  tobacco, 
which  from  Karshi  is  as  famous  in  its  way  as  the  pome- 
granates of  Shahr-i-sabz  and  the  grapes  of  Kitab.  We 
then  pushed  on,  and  about  7  o'clock  on  Saturday  night, 
7th  October,  arrived  at  Karshi. 

The  first  Englishman  who  visited  Karshi,  or  the 
ancient  Nakhsheb,  was  Alexander  Burnes,  in  1832 
(murdered  in  1837  at  Cabul),  who  called  the  place  a 
straggling  town,  a  mile  long,  with  a  considerable  bazaar, 
and  about  10,000  inhabitants.  Vambery,  in  1863,  esti- 
mated the  population  at  25,000,  but  said  that  the  town 
was  without  walls.  Khanikoff,  however,  mentions  three 
concentric  walls,  and  I  certainly  rode  round  a  good 
portion  of  one  of  them.  Khanikoff  gives  the  town  a 
diameter  of  about  2  miles,  and  a  possible  circumference 
of  6  miles,  containing  4  medresses  and  the  grand 
Friday  mosque.  There  was  one  place  I  was  delighted 
to  hear  of  above  many  others,  and  that  was  a  public 
bath,  whither  we  gave  notice  that  we  wished  to  go 
next  morning. 

We  were  lodged  at  Karshi  in  a  guest-house  worthy 
of  the  second  town  in  the  kingdom.  Our  room  was 
large  and  handsome,  with  painted  ceiling  and  wains- 
cot, carved  door  and  windows,  a  beautiful  carpet, 
bed  coverlets  of  silk,  and  a  velvet  pillow.  Soon  after 
our  arrival  the  Bek  sent  to  welcome  us,  and  to  offer 
an  entertainment  with  batchas,  but  we  replied  that  we 
were  tired,  and,  having  heard  them  twice,  wished  to 
get  early  to  bed.  It  was  then  arranged  that  we  should 
see  the  Bek  next  day,  and  since  I  intended  to  spend 
Sunday  in  the  place,  I  intimated  that  one  of  us  was  a 
physician,  and  would  be  glad  to  be  of  use  to  any  sick 
there  might  be  in  the  town. 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHF.  45 

Early  next  morning  we  started  for  the  bath,  and 
on  our  way  passed  through  w^hat  I  supposed  to  be  a 
oart  of  the  bazaar,  where  the  Hne  of  shops  appropriated 
:o  the  wool  trade  is  said  to  be  nearly  600  yards  long. 
There  are  also  numerous  and  well-supplied  shops  for 
the  sale  of  butcher's  meat,  sweetmeats,  silk,  and  tobacco. 
For  the  production  of  silk  the  district  is  famous, 
as  also  for  the  manufacture  of  knives.  A  kind  of 
raisins  prepared  by  immersing  the  fruit  in  hot  water, 
•and  thence  known  as  Abjosh-i-Karshi,  is  specially 
esteemed.  The  town  used  to  be  a  market-place  for 
slaves,  and  we  saw  in  the  bazaar  some  Turkomans,  by 
whom  the  captives  used  to  be  brought  for  public  sale. 

On  reaching  the  bath-house  I  found  almost  a  fac-simile 
of  a  Turkish  bath  I  had  seen  in  Constantinople.  I 
had  hoped  that  Sevier  and  I  might  get  a  private 
room  wherein  to  undress — for  this  special  reason  if  for 
no  other,  that  I  had  around  my  waist  a  belt  of  money, 
which  I  preferred  should  not  be  seen  even  by  my 
own  native  attendants.  To  my  disappointment  they 
ushered  us  into  a  public  place  with  a  score  or  so  of 
other  bathers  in  various  stages  of  deshabille.  When, 
however,  my  wish  to  be  alone  was  made  known,  the 
people  were  ordered  out,  and  they  ran  off  laughing 
evidently  thinking  that  my  modesty  required  their 
absence.  Even  then  Yakoob  and  the  djiguitts  remained ; 
so,  seeing  there  was  no  help  for  it,  I  hid  my  belt  in 
my  clothes  and  entered  the  bath-room.  It  looked 
like  a  crypt  lighted  from  the  tops  of  domes,  and,  having 
placed  myself  on  a  hot  stone,  I  had  to  submit  to  the 
well-known  kneading  and  rubbing  of  the  Turkish  bath, 
previous  to  w^ashing  with  water.  I  did  not  like  it 
nearly  so  well  as  the  Russian  steam  bath,  though  glad 
of  an  opportunity  of  a  good  cleansing,  such  as  we  had 


46  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

not  had  since  leaving  Samarkand.  By  the  time  we 
returned  to  the  dressing  chamber,  some  more  natives 
had  been  admitted,  and  they  watched  us  with  not 
a  Httle  curiosity  as  we  finished  our  toilette  and  put  on 
our  European  garments.  A  tooth-brush  appeared  to 
them  quite  a  novelty.  I  am  not  so  sure  about  a  comb, 
but,  as  all  the  men  shave  their  heads,  hair  brushes  are 
to  them  unknown. 

Having  returned  to  our  house,  we  went  after 
breakfast  to  call  on  Astanakul  Bi,  Bek  of  Karshi. 
He  came  into  the  courtyard  to  meet  us,  a  young  man 
of  intelligent  countenance,  dressed  in  cloth  of  gold  and 
white  turban,  and  who,  when  we  reached  the  hall  of 
reception,  seemed  somew^hat  under  constraint,  and 
formal  in  the  presence  of  several  older  men  standing 
around.  I  invited  him  to  question  me  about  England, 
and  asked  if  there  was  anything  he  would  like  me 
to  send  him,  but  in  both  cases  he  answered  in  the 
negative.  His  bekship  extended,  he  said,  from  Chim, 
on  the  east,  to  about  40  miles  in  the  direction  of 
Bokhara.*  Thinking  to  draw  him  out,  I  told  him  of  my 
travels,  to  which  he  replied  that,  to  be  successfully 
accomplished,  such  journeys  needed  brains,  and  then 
he  added,  "  You  are  constantly  on  the  move,  and  see 
many  persons,  whilst  we  sit  still  and  see  nobody."  1 
told  him  he  should  come  to  England,  but  he  replied 
that  without  permission  he  might  not  so  much  as  leave 
his  bekship.  I  particularly  asked  that  the  remainder 
of  our  journey  to  Bokhara  might  be  accomplished  in 
two  days,  to  which  he  replied  that  it  rested  with  our- 
selves, and  should  be  done.     As  we  bade  him  farewell, 

*  The  bekship  of  Karshi  consists  of  the  districts  of  Karshi,  Khozar^ 
Shirabul,  Sadabad,  and  Chirakchi,  the  total  of  the  land  revenue  given 
Dy  Burnes  being  32,000  tillahs. 


\ 


FROM  SHAHR   TO  KARSHI.  47 

■le  accompanied  us  to  the  fortress  gate,  where  was  said 
to  be  a  prison,  and  he  told  us  we  might  see  It.  We 
were  conducted  certainly  to  a  room  in  the  guard-house, 
with  a  fireplace  and  matting  on  the  floor,  lighted  from 
above,  which,  if  It  were  the  prison,  was  tolerably  good 
for  Bokhara ;  but  one  native  of  our  party  thought  that 
they  were  deceiving  us,  and  that  the  real  prison  was 
underground.  At  the  time  I  did  not  believe  him, 
though  my  subsequent  experience  taught  me  that  he 
was  very  likely  right.  They  had  no  prisoners,  they 
said,  just  then,  the  Emir  on  his  last  journey  having 
released  the  few  they  had.  Near  the  so-called  prison 
was  a  guard-room,  and  on  the  walls  were  hung  old 
firearms  of  unknown  antiquity,  one  long  blunderbuss 
affair  being  supported  on  legs,  and  fired  with  a  fuse. 

I  had,  as  usual,  sent  a  present  to  the  Bek,  and  after- 
wards he  sent  me  some  loaves  of  sugar  and  boxes  of 
sugar-candy  ;  but  the  messengers  said,  in  reply  to  my 
inquiry  for  the  sick,  that  there  were  none !  Thus 
we  were  disappointed  of  getting  Into  the  houses  of  the 
people,  as  we  had  hoped  to  do,  to  see  something  of 
their  domestic  life.  I  then  asked  to  be  permitted  to 
visit  the  lepers'  quarter,  but  this  the  Bek  did  not  dare 
allow  without  the  permission  of  the  Emir.  I  next 
asked  that  we  might  be  shown  the  town,  thinking  that 
we  should  possibly  see  some  sick  people,  and  also  visit 
the  Jews.  Accordingly  we  were  taken  to  see  the  chief 
medresses,  of  which  there  are  four,  and  by  a  round- 
about road,  outside  the  walls,  we  were  conducted  to  a 
large  mosque  I  have  called  In  my  note-book  Kok- 
Chum-Bass,  built  320  years  ago  by  Mir  BIka,  who  was 
made  governor  of  Karshi  by  Abdullah  Khan.  It  is 
the  oldest  building  In  Karshi,  and  Is  chiefly  used 
during  the   month   of  Ramazan,    and   the  other  great 


48  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Muhammadan  festival  of  Kurban,  at  which  time  the 
adjoining  gardens  are  filled  with  people,  who  come  not 
only  to  pray,  but  to  feast  and  play.  We  rode  through 
the  gardens,  but  on  approaching  the  mosque  they  re- 
quested us  to  dismount,  though  there  was  not  enough 
within  to  repay  one  for  the  slight  trouble,  the  nine 
stone  vaults  being  very  plain.  The  front  of  the 
building  was  ornamented  with  blue  and  white  tiles 
formed  into  texts  from  the  Koran,  but  the  whole  of  it 
appeared  to  be  in  a  very  dilapidated  condition. 

F'rom  this  Muhammadan  temple  we  asked  to  be 
conducted  to  a  despised  place,  where  the  Jews  meet 
to  worship.  It  was  hardly  a  synagogue,  but  rather 
a  shanty,  approached  through  a  dirty  yard,  and  the 
poorest  place  of  Jewish  worship  I  ever  saw.  It  ap- 
peared that  the  Jews  came  to  the  town  about  40  years 
ago,  and  there  were  usually  only  from  30  to  40 
persons,  and  of  these  only  3  or  4  families  resident. 
They  had  a  few  old  and  dirty,  but  not  ancient,  books, 
and  I  promised  to  give  the  man  who  received  me  a 
book  in  his  own  tongue  if  he  would  come  to  my 
lodging.  Three  came,  to  whom  I  gave  two  Hebrew 
New  Testaments  ;  one  to  a  rabbi,  who  said  he  had  not 
seen  the  book  before,  and  kissed  it. 

In  the  evening  the  Bek  again  offered  us  amusement 
by  batchas,  but  we  declined  on  religious  grounds, 
saying  that  it  was  our  Sunday,  and  got  off  early  to 
bed,  intending  to  leave  the  next  day. 


CHAPTER  XLVIIL 

FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE  OXUS  AND  BOKHARA. 

Khanate  of  Bokhara  :  dimensions,  soil,  and  divisions. — Recent  explora- 
tion of  mountain  districts. — ^Maieff's  journeys  to  Upper  Oxus, — 
Bokhariot  recovery  of  old  territory  and  annexation  of  new. — 
Oshanin's  exploration  of  Karategin. — Darvvaz. — Bokhariot  commu- 
nications.— Our  departure  from  Karshi, — Kishlaks  of  semi-nomads. 
— Khoja-Moburak. — Scamper  on  my  horse  "  Diotrephes." — Kakir 
cistern. — "Unfurnished  apartments"  and  oven, — Karaul  bazaar. 
— Lake  Kunja. — Stay  at  Chitarik. — Approach  to  Bokhara. 

THE  Bokhara  khanate,  as  at  present  constituted, 
bears  on  the  map  a  rough  resemblance  to  a 
huntsman's  horn,  of  which  the  outer  curve,  800  miles 
long,  formed  by  the  Amu-daria,  indicates  the  southern 
and  western  boundaries.  The  inner  curve,  400  miles 
in  length,  formed  by  the  Hissar  mountains,  constitutes 
a  part  of  the  northern  boundary,  whilst  the  remainder 
of  the  northern  frontier,  corresponding  to  the  wide 
mouth  of  the  instrument,  and  about  250  miles  in 
length,  is  bounded  by  the  Kyzyl- Kum  desert.* 

*  A  straight  line  drawn  from  the  easternmost  part  of  Darwaz  to  the 
north-west  corner  at  Uch-Uchak  measures  650  miles,  but  east  of  Karshi 
the  average  width  of  the  khanate  from  north  to  south  is  100  miles,  and 
at  Katte- Kurgan,  where  the  Zarafshan  enters,  the  width  east  and  west 
is  about  200  miles.  Reclus  gives  it  an  area  barely  half  as  large  as  that 
of  France.  On  the  north-east  the  country  is  bounded  by  huge  moun- 
tain chains,  but  on  the  north  the  hills  are  unimportant,  being  called 
after  the  wells  in  the  valleys.  Towards  the  west  and  south  the  surface 
VOL.  IL  4 


50  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

On  arriving  at  Karshi,  midway  in  the  khanate,  we 
were  about  to  turn  westward  into  the  plain ;  but, 
before  describing  this  part  of  our  journey,  a  few 
words  must  be  said  about  the  mountainous  region 
eastwards,  which  was  wholly  unknown  to  science 
when  the  last  Englishman  before  me  travelled  through 
Karshi,  and  which  had  not  been  explored  until  within 
the  past  ten  years.* 

The  district  of  Shahr-i  -sabz  and  the  adjoining  bek- 
ships  of  Hissar  and  Kulab  were  explored  by  Colonel 
Maieff,  who  made  two  journeys  in  this  direction  to  the 
Oxus,  and  M.  Oshanin,  whom  I  met  at  Tashkend, 
told  me  of  his  recent  journey  into  Karategin.  Dr. 
Regel  and  his  companions  have  been  along  the  part 
of  the  Upper  Oxus  that  bounds  the  west  of  Darwaz, 
but  M.  Oshanin  I  gave  his  intelligence  concerning  this 
last-named  district  at  second-hand. 

Colonel  Maieff,  in  1875,  took  from  Samarkand  the 
route   I   followed  as  far  as   Karshi,  whence  he  went  to 

slopes  towards  the  Amu-daria,  the  plains  being  broken  only  by  dry  clay 
hillocks  from  5  to  20  feet  high,  and  from  6  to  200  yards  broad.  The 
soil  is  almost  entirely  clay,  infiltrated  with  salt,  and  covered  more  or 
less  by  shifting  sand,  sometimes  overgrown  by  tamarisk  and  saxaul ; 
consequently  cultivation  is  confined  to  the  river  banks.  Thus  the  two 
physical  divisions  of  the  country  are  the  eastern  or  mountainous,  and 
the  western  district,  a  great  level  plain. 

*  The  two  great  mountain  range  3  of  Eastern  Bokhara  are  those  of 
Hissar  and  Peter  the  Great,  the  latter  being  the  higher,  and  having  the 
three-headed  peak  of  Sar-i-Kandal,  estimated  by  M.  Oshanin  at 
24,000  feet.  This  range  is  crossed  by  three  passes,  in  that  portion 
lying  east  of  the  point  where  it  is  pierced  by  the  River  Khulias.  These 
passes  are  open  only  in  summer.  The  Hissar  and  Peter  ranges  are 
separated  by  the  River  Surkhab,  an  affluent  of  the  Oxus;  other  affluents 
further  west  of  the  same  river  being  the  Kafirnihan  and  Surkhan. 

f  See  "  Hissar  and  Kulab,"  by  N.  Maieff,  p.  326,  Geographical 
Magazine^  1876.  "  Oshanin's  Travels  in  Karategin  and  Darwaz," 
Proceedings  0/  Russian  Geographical  Society  far  1881,  Vol.  xvii., 
No.  I.  "The  Russian  Pamir  Expedition  of  1883,"  with  map,  p.  135, 
Proceedings  of  Royal  Geographical  Society,  1884. 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE   OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    51 

Derbent,  passing  through  the  famous  ''  Iron  Gates."* 
He  reached  the  Oxus  at  Chushka-Huzar,  where  it  is 
700  feet  wide,  with  three  passages  near.  From  Chushka- 
Huzar  his  party  went  on  to  Baisun,  Deh-i-nau,  and 
Karatagh,  on  the  sources  of  the  Surkhan,  to  Hissar, 
on  the  River  Kafirnihan.  Passing  on  from  Hissar,  the 
expedition  came  to  Kafirnihan,  whence  Karategin  is 
approached,  and  Baljuan,  whither  there  was  said  to 
be  a  route  of  two  or  three  days'  journey  to  Darwaz, 
but  the  road  is  very  difficult  and  across  snow  ranges. 
Kulab  is  situated  on  a  small  river  of  that  name, 
and  from  this  point  Maieffs  party  returned  through 
Kobadian  and  ,Baisun  to  Derbent. 

Colonel  Maieffs  second  journey  t  was  through 
Chirakchi,  Huzar  and  Shirabad,  to  Kilif  and  Kara 
Kamar  Terry,  both  on  the  Oxus,  and  after  this  he 
returned  to  Huzar  by  the  direct  road,  t  The  people 
would  seem  to  be  living  in  Eastern  Bokhara  in  primi- 

*  This  defile,  in  the  days  of  Hiouen  Thsang,  the  Buddhist  missionary, 
was  closed  by  double  gates,  fixed  with  ironwork,  and  ornamented  with 
little  tinkling  bells.  Eight  centuries  later,  Clavijo  passed  through  the 
"Iron  Gates,"  but  the  gates  were  gone,  and  now  the  defile  is  called 
simply  the  Buzgol-Khan  pass.  It  is  diiScult  to  conceive  anything 
more  solemn  and  magnificent  than  this  huge  cleft  in  the  frowning  rocks 
hanging  overhead — a  gloomy,  tortuous  defile,  a  mile  and  a  quarter  long, 
varying  from  5  to  35  paces  wide,  and  apparently  liable  to  be  choked  at 
any  moment  by  a  falling  rock.  Soon  after  emerging  from  this  defile 
Derbent  is  reached.  Another  town  of  interest,  within  35  miles  of  the 
Oxus,  is  Shir-abad  (or  "Lion  Town"),  from  whose  walls  the  bookworms 
say  were  seen  the  phalanxes  of  A-lexander  of  Macedon.  The  town  was 
then  called  Shahr-i-Khyber,  and  was  peopled  by  Tajik  fire-worshippers. 

t  See  "  Routes  compiled  by  Colonel  Maieff  on  the  occasion  of  his 
second  journey  in  Bokhara,"  ^our?zal  of  the  Imperial  Rzissian 
Geological  Society,  1878,  Part  iv. 

X  Thus  from  Huzar  to  the  Oxus  at  Kilif,  there  exist  two  principal 
roads,  one  about  150,  and  the  other  100  miles  long;  but  the  advantage 
of  the  shorter  road  is  cancelled  by  passing  through  45  miles  of  a  tract 
devoid  of  fresh  water.  On  comparing  the  quantity  and  difficulty  of 
work  required  for  rendering  the  two   roads  practicable  for  wheeled 


52 


RUSSIA2V  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


tive  simplicity,  and  so  ready  is  their  hospitality  that 
Colonel  Maieff  told  me  it  costs  a  traveller  nothing 
there  for  board  and  lodging.* 

On  the  capture  of  Samarkand  by  the  Russians,  the 
south-east  provinces  of  the  khanate,  seeing  their  Emir 
beaten,  seceded  from  him.  I  have  already  mentioned 
that  Shahr-i-sabz  was  restored  by  the  arms  of  the 
invaders.  The  Russians  also  encouraged  the  Emir 
in  reasserting  and  extending  his  authority  over  the 
bekships  in  the  Surkhan  and  Kafirnihan  valleys,  which 
he  formed  into  a  province  or  vice-royalty  known  as 
that  of  Hissar. 

This  arrangement  did  not  last  long,  the  Hissar 
province  being  eventually  broken  up  into  a  number  of 
bekships,  of  which  the  rulers  are  directly  responsible 
to  the  Emir.  Further  east  were  the  two  poor  and 
insignificant  principalities  of  Karategin  and  Darwaz, 
governed  at  this  time  by  hereditary  chiefs,  in  a  manner 

traffic,  there  appears  to  be  little  to  choose.  As  reg-ards  fuel  and  forage 
the  shorter  road  is  muich  the  worse.  The  stations  and  places  on  the 
two  routes  from  Huzar  to  the  Oxus,  with  distances  Ipetween  in  miles, 
are  as  follows  : — 


Huzar — 

Kush-lush       .         .         .         . 

II 

Tenga  Khoram 

13 

Chashma-i-Hafizjan 

15 

Shur-ob  .... 

^7 

Ser-ob     .... 

17 

Igertch  .... 

10 

Lailakan 

8 

Shirabad 

10 

Guz-Kishlak  . 

17 

Kempyr-bulak 

.     II 

Kilif       .... 

.     24 

153 

Kilif— 
Halluk    . 
Khoja  Kara    . 
Kuitan    . 
Karchak 
Well  of  Batkak 
Well  of  Takashur 
Huzar     . 


18 
14 
13 
10 

14 
8 

100 


*  Here,  therefore,  the  direction  would  not  sound  so  hard  as  it  would 
in  modern  Europe,  "  Provide  neither  gold  nor  silver  nor  brass  in  your 
purses,  nor  scrip  for  your  journey  "  (Matt.  x.  10). 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE   OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    53 

independent,  but  also  subject  sometimes  to  Khokand, 
and  at  others  to  Bokhara,  as  one  or  the  other  of  these 
happened  to  be  supreme.  Accordingly,  after  the  fortu- 
nate campaign  of  the  Emir  in  Hissarand  Kulab  in  1870, 
Karategin  and  Darwaz  acknowledged  themselves  his 
\assals,  and  their  rulers  brought  nominal  presents  and 
came  annually  to  salaam  the  Emir.*  This  opened  the 
way,  with  the  Emir's  permission,  for  the  Russians  to 
explore  another  portion  of  the  mountain  region, 
towards  which  British  travellers  had  worked,  for  many 
years  past,  from  the  south,  so  that,  thanks  to  the 
exploration  of  Dr.  Regel  to  the  west,  and  of  Captain 
Pistiata  and  others  to  the  east  of  the  Pamir,  connec- 
tion has  been  established  between  the  Russian  labours 
and  the  route  maps  of  English  travellers. 

Karategin  lies  to  the  south  of  Ferghana,  along  the 
central  course  of  the  Surkhab,  a  district  about  30 
miles  wide,  and  extending  about  100  miles  west  from 
Little  Karamuk.  On  the  south  it  touches  Darwaz, 
and  on  the  west  the  Kulab  and  Hissar  bekships.  M. 
Oshanin  entered  the  territory  from  the  west,  near  the 
source  of  the  Ab-i-Gharm,  in  August  1878,  and  re- 
crossed  the  Russian  frontier  a  fortnight  later  at  Fort 
Karamuk.  His  description  of  the  rickety  bridges  over 
the  Surkhab  indicates  that  a  traveller  need  have  good 
nerves  to  cross  them.  There  are  no  carts  in  Karategin, 
and  the  bridges  are  fit  for  the  passage  of  one  horseman 
only  at  a  time.     They  shake  at  the  approach  of  a  man 

*  The  Emir  appointed  a  new  Governor  of  Karategin,  who  took  the 
title  "  Shah  "  Hke  his  predecessors,  but  seven  years  later  he  was  deposed, 
and  Karategin  came  completely  under  Muzaffar-ed-din,  who  sent  there 
his  own  Bek  to  govern  the  country.  The  ruler  of  Darwaz  then  pro- 
claimed his  own  independence,  and  refused  to  send  the  Emir  the  tartuk, 
or  mark  of  tribute.  Thereupon  the  Bek  of  Karategin,  with  a  Bokhariot 
force,  subjugated  the  Darwazis  and  imprisoned  their  Khan. 


54  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

even  on  foot,  and  are  never  furnished  with  a  hand-rail 
to  prevent  one  tumbHng  below.* 

M.  Oshanin  describes  Darwaz  as  a  mountainous 
country,  consisting  of  the  valley  of  the  Panja  or  Upper 
Oxus  from  the  Shignan  border  as  far  as  Kulab,  and 
the  valleys  of  the  two  large  rivers  Wanj  and  Khullas.f 

Thus  It  will  be  seen  that  the  means  of  communication 
in  Eastern  Bokhara  are  exceedingly  poor,  and  they  are 
not  grand  even  In  the  west.  There  Is  no  regular 
postal  communication  In  the  country,  and  when  In 
winter  the  passes  are  closed  by  snow,  many  of  the 
mountain  villages  are  completely  cut  off  from  the  rest 
of  the  world.  The  roads  practicable  for  wheeled 
vehicles  are  from  Karakul  through  the  capital  and 
Katte- Kurgan  to  Samarkand,  whilst  from  Samarkand 
carriages  can   travel  through    Jam    or  from    Bokhara 

*  M.  Oshanin  mentions,  among-  the  staple  articles  of  food  in  this 
region,  crushed  mulberries  dried  in  the  sun  or  in  an  oven.  Trade  is 
carried  on  chiefly  by  barter,  there  being  little  coined  money  in  the 
country.  Grain  is  sold  by  measure,  the  unit  being  the  batman,  which 
here  is  equal  to  15  chashkas  or  bowls,  or  45  tibeteikas^  that  is  capsful ; 
and  though  this  latter  must,  of  course,  vary  considerably,  the  measure  is 
adhered  to  throughout  Karategin.  Very  many  of  the  Karategin  Tajiks 
hire  themselves  out  as  porters  in  the  large  towns  of  Turkistan,  and  as 
their  great  strength  enables  them  to  cany  up  to  360  lbs.,  they  drive 
other  competitors  out  of  the  market.  All  the  routes  in  Karategin  are 
for  pack-animals  only,  and  there  is  not  sufficient  forage  obtainable  for 
a  considerable  detachment  of  soldiers,  nor  for  a  large  caravan,  though 
the  route  to  Kashgar  would  do  for  30  or  40  baggage  animals. 

t  Its  scattered  population  consists  chiefly  of  Tajiks,  with  a  few 
Kara-Kirghese  in  the  uplands.  In  these  regions  it  is  said  that  grain 
is  the  occasional,  and  dried  mulberries  the  staple,  food,  whilst  the 
leaves  of  the  mulberry  tree,  since  sericulture  is  not  practised,  serve  as 
food  for  cattle.  Gold  and  iron  are  exported,  the  latter  being  dug  from 
mines  near  Fort  Wanj.  M.  Oshanin  was  told  that  there  is  a  whole 
mountain  of  it  there  !  Darwaz,  according  to  all  accounts,  appears  to 
be  a  country  extremely  difficult  of  access,  there  being  only  two  prac- 
ticable roads,  except  tracks  for  pack-animals,  and  footpaths  that  need 
long  acquaintance  to  know  how  to  follow  them.  The  chief  difficulties 
appear  to  lie  in  the  numerous  narrow  gorges,  with  almost  perpendicular 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE   OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    55 

Itself  to  Karshi.*  But  having  now  pointed  out  to 
an  ambitious  traveller  a  region  where  he  may  win  his 
spurs,  and  having  indicated  the  roads  thither,  I  shall 
proceed  with  my  own  journey  from  Karshi. 

I  directed  on  Sunday  night  that  we  should  start  next 
morning  at  sunrise,  In  accordance  with  which  I  stirred 
up  Yakoob  at  4  o'clock,  but  a  delay  arose  in  connec- 
tion with  the  tarantass.  The  men  had  brought  it 
from  Samarkand  through  Jam,  but  their  experiment 
of  mounting  it  on  an  arba  had  not  been  a  complete 
success.  Fearing  that  their  machine  might  break 
down,  they  had  brought  a  second  conveyance,  and  for 
some  reason  had  been  obliged  to  break  my  seals.  As 
my  parcels  were  In  full  tale,  I  paid  the  men  off,  as  also 
the  man  who  had  accompanied  us  with  the  sumpter 
horse,  and  distributed  to  them,  and  to  Yakoob  and  the 
rest  of  my  suite,  presents  and  khalats.  The  difficulty 
that  now  arose  was  In  harnessing  our  troika.  Had 
I  needed  several  scores  of  pack-horses  for  a  large 
caravan,  no  doubt  they  could  easily  have  been  hired 
with  saddles  complete  at  a  tenga  per  tash,  or  about  a 
penny  a  mile  ;  for  Karshi  being  on  the  high  road  from 
India,  and  all  the  imports  from  the  south-east  having 
to  pass  that  way,  the  local  provision  for  land  carriage  is 
considerable  ;  but  to  procure  horse-collars  and  proper 
harness,  not  for  an  arba  merely,  but  for  a  Riissian 
tarantass,  was  not  at  all  so  easy.  What  was  more,  when 

sides,  where  the  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  have  recourse  to  skilfully 
constructed  galleries,  clinging  to  the  side  of  the  overhanging  crags. 

■*  These,  however,  are  not  marked  on  my  large  Russian  map  as 
"  chaussee  "  roads,  but  as  ""  great  caravan  "  routes.  A  communication 
of  this  character  is  indicated  as  proceeding  south  from  Karshi,  through 
Derbent  to  the  Oxus  at  Karakamar  Ferry,  and  also  branching  off  from 
Derbent  to  Kafirnihan.  One  other  great  caravan  route  leaves  the 
capital  northwards,  and  all  the  remaining  tracks  in  the  country  are 
marked  "  small  caravan  routes." 


56  IIUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  harness  was  forthcoming,  no  one  appeared  to  know 
how  to  put  it  on,  and  this  business  took  so  long  that 
we  were  not  out  of  the  city  till  nearly  8  o'clock. 

In  the  suburbs  we  crossed  a  long  bridge  of  nine 
brick  arches,  spanning  the  Kashka-daria,  and  had  not 
got  far  when  messengers  came  galloping  after  us, 
saying  that  the  Bek  had  only  just  heard  from  the 
Emir  that  he  was  to  give  for  myself  and  Sevier  the 
presents  they  were  now  bringing.  The  gift  consisted 
of  pieces  of  silk  and  velvet  of  native  manufacture,  the 
latter  remarkable  by  reason  of  their  variegated  colours 
and  patterns.  Sevier  and  I  decided  to  ride  the  first 
stage,  which  was  pleasant  enough,  for  the  road  passed 
through  the  continuously  inhabited  district  of  the 
Karshi  oasis.  At  first  we  kept  beside  the  carriage, 
behind  our  own  attendants  and  a  cavalcade  that 
escorted  us  from  Karshi,  but  I  soon  became  disgusted 
at  our  slow  pace.  The  postilions  seemed  to  have  no 
notion  of  putting  the  horses  at  a  respectable  trot,  and 
I  foresaw  that  we  should  be  a  long  time  getting  to 
Bokhara,  unless  I  urged  them  on.  Precept  seemed  to 
have  no  effect,  so  I  determined  to  try  the  force  of 
example  ;  and,  setting  at  nought  their  notions  of  pro- 
priety that  I  should  ride  in  state  behind,  I  told  one  of 
the  djiguitts  to  keep  with  the  carriage  whilst  I  galloped 
on  and  left  them  to  follow,  and  thus  we  reached  Kassan.* 

Kassan  is  a  large  commercial  village,  situated  at  the 
extreme  western  point  of  the  oasis.  Beyond  Kassan 
the  steppe  begins,  with  vegetation,  however,  and  kish- 

*  The  stations  from  Karshi  to  Bokhara,  with  distances  between  in 
miles,  are : 


Karshi— 

Kassan  .         .  .  .  .16 

Khoja-Moburak  .  .  .20 

Kakir  Cistern.  .  .  .18 


Karaul  Bazaar      .         .        .13 
Bokhara        .         .         .  27 


94 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE  OXUS  AND  BOI^HARA.    57 

I  elks  here  and  there— one  of  them,  Maimene,  being  the 
residence  of  the  Amliakdar,  or  tax-gatherer  under  the 
Bek.  The  inhabitants  of  these  kishlaks  water  their  fields 
by  means  of  aryks,  or  canals,  from  the  River  Kashka- 
daria,  which  is  full  only  in  early  spring,  and  afterwards 
becomes  narrower  and  shallower,  inclining  to  the 
north-west,  and  seven  miles  from  Karshi  it  reaches 
the  Maimanak  hills,  where  it  is  lost  in  the  sands. 
Together  with  the  Kashka-daria  the  gardens  also 
disappear,  so  that  we  continued  on  a  flat,  bare,  and 
waterless  steppe,  the  scrubby  vegetable  growth  con- 
sisting of  clumps  of  Issirik  grass,  used  by  the  Bokhariots 
for  all  diseases,  and  sold  in  their  bazaars.  They  dry 
the  grass  and  burn  it  on  coal,  the  sick  man  or  animal 
inhaling  the  smoke.  In  passing  along  from  Karshi 
we  had  seen  what  I  judged  to  be  good  specimens  of 
kishlaks,  or  winter  habitations  of  semi-nomads,  for  in 
some  cases  the  whole  collection  of  houses  appeared  to 
be  deserted,  and  we  were  told  that  the  inhabitants 
were  gone  to  the  mountains  for  the  summer,  whilst  in 
other  cases  cultivated  places  were  seen,  with  the  people 
living  by  in  tents.* 

At  Kassan,    where  we  arrived    about    midday,  and 
rested  for  a  couple  of  hours,  we  obtained  two  fresh 

*  It  is  interesting-  to  note  in  the  book  of  Genesis  how  naturally  the 
patriarchs  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  pass  from  nomad  to  settled  life. 
We  do  not  read  that  the  first  ever  built  a  permanent  dwelling  for  a 
house,  but  lived  in  a  tent — a  nomad  pure  and  simple  (unless  TBIN  nnp3 
Gen.  xxiii.  2,  points  to  the  contrary).  Lot,  on  the  other  hand,  seems 
to  have  forsaken  the  tent  on  settling  in  Sodom,  so  that,  when  driven  by 
fear  to  the  mountain,  he  dwelt  in  a  cave,  and  not  in  a  tent  (Gen.  xix.  19, 
30).  Isaac  in  middle  life  perhaps  had  a  house  (xxvii.  15),  like  a  semi- 
nomad,  and  he  appears  to  have  died  a  settler  in  a  town  (xxxv.  2^]). 
Jacob  was  "  a  plain  man  dwelling  in  tents  "  when  young  (xxv.  i']),  but 
on  returning  from  Laban  he  built  a  house  (xxxiii.  17),  though  not  for- 
saking the  tent  (xxxv.  21)  till  settled  in  old  age  in  his  patrimony, 
whence  he  sent  out  his  sons  to  tend  his  flocks  (xxxv.  2^  ;  xxxvii.  14). 


58  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

horses,  but  the  third  had  to  go  further,  our  troika 
being  mounted  by  three  turbaned  riders.  Sevier  and 
I  got  into  the  tarantass  for  the  next  stage,  and  after 
proceeding  about  half  the  distance,  we  passed  Kara- 
Kum,  where  is,  I  think,  a  dry  well,  as  also  near,  on 
the  left,  the  ruins  of  the  town  Maimanak.  We  had 
no  trotting  until  we  approached  Khoja-Moburak,  which 
we  reached  at  6.30,  and  found  it  a  village  of  60  or  70 
houses,  affording  a  resting-place  for  caravans  between 
Bokhara  and  Karshi.  I  cannot  say  that  I  was  satisfied 
with  having  accomplished  36  miles  only  for  a  day's 
journey,  and  I  therefore  desired  that  we  should  go  on  to 
the  next  station  ;  but  our  escort  said  the  horses  were 
too  tired,  and,  indeed,  the  men  appeared  horrified  at 
the  notion  of  travelling  by  night  in  the  steppe.  I 
thought  at  the  time  this  was  only  an  excuse,  but  expe- 
rience taught  me  further  on  that  ''perils  of  robbers  " 
was  here  a  thing  by  no  means  to  be  risked. 

The  chief  man  of  Khoja-Moburak  came  out  to  meet 
us,  and  conducted  us  to  a  poor  but  nicely-carpeted 
lodging,  where  our  room  measured  about  12  feet  by  8. 
Here  I  nearly  had  an  accident,  for  taking  a  light  to 
get  something  out  of  the  tarantass,  the  man  to  whom  I 
gave  the  candle  to  hold,  set  fire  to  the  cotton  lining  of 
the  apron,  which  fortunately  I  managed  to  extinguish 
quickly,  or  we  might  have  had  serious  loss.  The 
Inhabitants,  however,  were  determined  that  we  should 
not  suffer  from  either  fire  or  pillage,  for  they  set  10 
men  to  watch  the  tarantass  through  the  night,  and  I 
told  Kolutch  to  sleep  Inside.  I  asked  a  few  questions 
concerning  taxes,  and  was  told  that  from  1 2  surround- 
ing villages  are  collected  annually  100,000  tengas,  or 
;^2,5oo,  whilst  the  population,  chiefly  Tajiks,  with  a  few 
Uzbegs,  was  guessed  at  100,000  !    I  record  this,  though 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE  OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    59 

I  do  not  think  the  figures  trustworthy.  Colonel  Maleff, 
in  a  similar  case,  says  he  was  told  by  the  Amliakdar  of 
Karakia,  in  the  bekship  of  Chirakchi,  that  there  were 
sown  in  his  Amliakdarship  alone  250  tons  of  wheat 
and  125  tons  of  barley. 

As  we  could  not  go  further  the  first  day  from 
Karshi,  I  resolved,  if  possible,  to  start  early  the  next 
morning,  and  was  rewarded  for  turning  out  by  getting 
my  first  sight,  on  October  loth,  in  the  direction  of  the 
''  Great  Bear,"  of  the  beautiful  comet  of  1882,  with  its 
enormously  expanded  tail.  The  natives  said  it  had  been 
visible  for  the  previous  20  days,  and  that  the  world 
was  now  coming  to  an  end.*  As  we  drove  out  of  the 
miserable  village  of  Khoja-Moburak  we  saw  a  beautiful 
sunrise  over  the  barren  steppe,  and  we  jogged  along 
a  road  destitute  of  anything  green,  until  the  postilions 
wanted,  for  some  reason,  to  re-arrange  their  troika ; 
whereupon  Sevier  and  I  mounted  our  horses  for  a 
ride.  It  was  a  magnificent  morning.  The  wind  was 
fresh,  but  not  much  laden  with  sand.  The  previous 
day  had  been  hot,  and  my  minimum  thermometer  had 
gone  down  in  the  night  only  to  55°;  but  at  this  early 
hour  there  was  just  so  much  of  autumnal  freshness  in 
the  air  as  to  make  it  perfect  for  horseback  travel. 

My  little  horse  had  manifested  a  strong  liking  to 
get  before  everyone  else  in  the  cavalcade,  wherefore 
I  named  him  Diotrephes,  and  let  him  have  his  way. 
By  this  time,  too,  we  understood  each  other  pretty 
well,  and  I  had  got  firmly  into  my  seat.  Upon 
giving  my  horse  his  head,  Sevier  came  on,  and 
Kolutch,  not  liking  to  be  outstripped,  joined  in  the 
run.     So  did  several  others,  and  away  we  scampered 

*  Illustrating  Jeremiah  x.  2  :  "  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  heathen,  and 
be  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  heaven  ;  for  the  heathen  are  dismayed 
at  them." 


6o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

like  a  party  of  huntsmen.  Soon  we  overtook  a  horse- 
man, who  looked  round  at  our  approach  with  dismay, 
for  he  had  been  sent  on  ahead  to  the  next  station  to 
prepare  for  our  coming.  He  trotted  on  after  another 
horseman  still  further  ahead,  sent  on  a  similar  mission. 
This  latter  was  a  stout  fellow,  well  advanced  in  years, 
who  had  packed  on  his  horse  a  number  of  carpets  and 
other  things  for  our  accommodation,  on  the  top  of 
which  he  had  mounted.  He  had  supposed,  doubtless, 
that  we  should  jog  along  in  the  slow  fashion  that  is 
thought  dignified  by  the  Bokhariot  officials;  but  when 
he  discovered  that  we  were  upon  his  heels,  he  made 
the  most  frantic  efforts  to  keep  ahead.  As  seen  from 
behind,  the  broad  back  and  base  of  this  individual,  and 
his  vigorous  application  of  whip,  had  a  most  ludicrous 
effect,  and  we  fairly  roared  with  laughter.  With  the 
start  he  had,  he  managed  to  keep  ahead  for  a  time  ; 
but  his  whipping  was  vain,  and  he  was  outstripped. 

A  diversion  of  another  kind  now  took  me  aside  for 
a  moment,  for  we  saw  off  the  track  two  small  eagles 
sitting,  which  did  not  pretend  to  rise  on  our  approach. 
I  was  minded  to  get  as  near  as  possible,  and  was 
allowed  to  approach  easily  within  pistol  shot,  and  had 
a  good  view  of  one,  but  I  had  not  my  revolver  with 
me,  and  so  could  not  have  secured  a  skin,  even  had  I 
known  how  to  dress  it.  We  met  only  one  or  two 
horsemen  during  our  five  miles'  run  to  Kakir,  the 
distance  being  accomplished  in  35  minutes,  at  the  cost, 
however,  of  a  wide-mouthed  bottle  with  prussic  acid, 
fitted  for  killing  moths,  which  broke  in  my  saddle-bag. 

Sevier  and  I,  and  a  few  more,  had  now  reached 
Kakir,  where  is  a  sardaba  or  cupola-covered  cistern, 
erected  in  the  i6th  century  by  Abdullah  Khan.'^ 

*  Bumes   tells  a   story   that  Abdullah   had   made  a  pilgrimag^e  to 


FROM  KARSHI  TO   THE  OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    6i 

Besides  the  cistern  at  Kakir  there  is  a  large  building 
that  had  served  as  a  mosque,  but  was  now  used  as  stables 
for  caravans.  It  seemed  also  to  serve  as  a  guard-house, 
for  we  saw  several  old  matchlocks  and  firearms  of  a 
bygone  generation  hanging  about.  After  the  speed 
at  which  we  had  come  we  were  hot,  and  it  was  grateful 
to  turn  into  the  cool  corridors  of  what  Kostenko 
speaks  of  as  a  house  for  the  Emir  in  the  event  of  his 
crossing  the  steppe.  Already  we  had  noticed  raised 
platforms  of  earth  by  the  wayside,  on  which  we  were 
told  his  tent  was  spread  with  that  of  such  of  his  wives 
as  were  chosen  to  accompany  him.  On  passing  round 
the  passage  we  came  to  a  spacious  chamber  with  four 
windows,  that  when  properly  prepared  would  serve  for 
his  Majesty,  and,  therefore,  for  ourselves.  But  as 
we  had  outstripped  our  forerunners,  our  "furniture" 
was  not  come,  and  we  thus  had  the  opportunity  of 
seeing  what  an  ''unfurnished"  room  was  like  in  the 
East,  namely,  four  bare  walls  and  a  mud  floor,  the 
chief  difference  between  a  furnished  and  an  unfur- 
nished room  being,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  that 
one  was  strewn  with  carpets  and  the  other  not.*  The 
introduction  of  chairs  and  tables    I    took  to   be  quite 

Mecca,  but  imbibed  an  idea  that  it  had  not  proved  acceptable  to  God, 
on  account  of  which,  and  in  order  to  propitiate  the  Divine  favour,  he 
set  about  the  construction  of  caravansaries  and  cisterns  in  all  parts  of 
his  dominions — a  later  Uzziah,  who  "  built  towers  in  the  desert,  and 
digged  many  wells"  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  10).  The  cisterns  are  becoming 
dilapidated  and  unfit  for  use  ;  but  there  is  water  still  in  two  of  them  :  in 
one,  three  miles  from  our  last  station,  and  in  this  one  at  Kakir.  This 
sardaba  is  35  feet  high  to  the  top  of  the  cupola,  and  about  25  feet  in 
diameter.  The  water,  approached  by  steps,  was  said  to  be  12  feet 
deep  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  and,  when  full,  about  three  feet  deeper. 
In  winter  the  cistern  is  empty,  and  they  clean  it,  the  fresh  supply  of 
water  being  run  down  from  the  hills  in  May. 

*  This  seems  to  me  to  throw  light  upon,  though  perhaps  not  exhaust- 
ing, the  meaning  of  a  word  in  Luke  xxii.  12,  "He  shall  show  you  a 
large  upper  room  furnished"  (eo-rpcoixevov)  or  literally  "  strewed." 


62  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

foreign.  Those  we  saw  had,  for  the  most  part,  been 
made  for  us,  or  for  Russian  visitors,  and  it  was  not  a 
little  ridiculous  on  one  or  two  occasions  to  see  our 
chairs,  stowed  away  with  a  man  on  horseback,  going 
before  to  the  next  station.  As  for  the  tables,  they 
generally  consisted  of  boards  put  on  rickety  supports, 
and  covered  with  calico.  The  moment  we  finally  quitted 
apartments  we  had  occupied,  our  carpets,  rugs,  etc.,  were 
folded  up,  and  the  room  speedily  "unfurnished." 

Near  the  building  at  Kakir  was  a  small  bazaar,  but 
it  was  not  market  day,  and  many  of  the  houses  were 
empty.  I  busied  myself,  therefore,  whilst  the  tarantass 
was  coming  up,  in  looking  about  for  objects  of  interest, 
and,  among  others,  examined  a  native  oven.* 

When  at  length  our  carriage  came  up  we  had  some 
little  to  do  in  starting  with  fresh  horses,  for  one  fell, 
and  had  to  be  taken  out.  Sevier  and  I  preferred 
still  to  ride  to  the  next  station,  the  wind  becoming 
stronger,  and  our  horses  being  not  too  tired  for  another 
gallop.  Yakoob  had  picked  up  for  us,  without  my 
directions,  a  ragged  hanger-on,  whom  I  supposed  to 
be  going  to  Bokhara  on  his  own  account,  but  glad 
to  do  so  on  one  of  my  spare  horses,  as  a  recompense 
for  acting  as  groom  and  making  himself  generally 
useful.  This  fellow  had  mounted  the  savage  horse 
given  me  by  the  Emir,  and  we  had  a  short  race  ;  but 
1  soon  found  that  the  long-legged  creature,  vicious  as 

*  It  recalled  to  my  mind  two  passages  of  Scripture,  being  like  an 
earthenware  crock,  laid  upon  its  side  and  built  about,  except  in  front, 
with  earth,  into  the  mouth  of  which  was  put  the  grass  or  other  fuel 
(Matt.  vi.  30  ;  James  i.  11).  Yakoob  explained  to  me  how  they  bake 
the  bread ;  namely,  by  making  cakes  of  dough  about  the  size  and 
thickness  of  a  captain's  biscuit,  and  then  clapping  this  on  the  side  of 
the  oven,  where  it  sticks  till  one  side  is  done,  the  same  process  being 
repeated  with  the  other  side.  Hence  a  half-hearted  person,  as 
"  Ephraim,  is  a  cake  not  turned  "  (Hosea  vii.  8). 


i 


FROM  KARSHI  TO   THE  OX  US  AhW  BOKHARA.    63 

he  was,  with  a  rider  who  knew  how  to  manage  him, 
could  hold  his  own,  and  more,  against  Diotrephes. 

After    passing    Kash-sardaba,    and    some    distance 

before  w^e  reached  Karaul  Bazaar,  we  saw  the   latter 

\  building  standing  out  against  the  sky  like  some  lofty 

5  Russian  cathedral,  or  medresse.     This  also  was  built  by 

\  Abdullah  Khan,  for  his  soldiers,  and  intended  for  the 

;  great  central   caravansary   of   the    Karshi  steppe.      It 

:  was   used    as    a    guard-house,    whence    escorts    were 

provided  for  passengers  and  caravans.      Dr.  Schuyler, 

in   1873,   was   provided  with   a   guard    in    this    place, 

and  we  heard  that  30  soldiers  are  still  kept  on  the  spot, 

but  w^e  neither  asked  for,   nor  received,  any  addition 

to  our  company.    We  saw  several  old  firearms  hanging 

at   the  entrance,    but  not   promising  much  help  to  a 

besieged  traveller.      The    principal    building   consists 

of    a    square    court,     surrounded    by    cloister-looking 

corridors  with  vaulted  chambers,   surmounted  by  low 

domes.      From    within  the  court  are   seen   four  lofty 

facades,  on  which  there    still  remain    a    few  coloured 

bricks  to  testify  of  departed  grandeur,  but  the  entire 

building  is  fast  going  to  ruin. 

Near  the  caravansary  is  a  cistern  with  what  is  said 
to  be  good  water,  and  also  a  deep  well  of  brackish, 
disagreeably-tasting  water,  to  which  they  were  letting 
down  skins  to  fill,  and  hauling  them  up  by  four  men 
walking  away,  and  drawing  the  rope  over  a  round 
piece  of  wood  at  the  mouth  of  the  well.  There  were 
also  some  small  houses,  in  one  of  which  we  made  a 
light  meal,  and  then  I  insisted  on  proceeding,  so  as,  if 
possible,  to  get  to  Bokhara  that  night,  a  distance  of 
26  miles.  From  the  Kakir  cistern  to  Karaul  Bazaar, 
and  for  a  mile  beyond,  there  was  a  continuation  of 
steppe,   with    some    pretence  to  vegetation  here    and 


64  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

there,  so  that  we  had  had  in  all  from  KarshI  about 
53  miles  of  this  character  to  pass  through  along  a 
level  road,  the  altitude  of  Karshi  being  730  feet,  and 
that  of  Karaul  660  feet. 

Now  the  character  of  the  steppe  changed,  the  soil 
became  stony  and  sandy,  and  all  vegetation  completely 
disappeared.  We  were  in  a  desert  pure  and  simple  ;  * 
sand,  sand  everywhere,  and  blowing  withal  in  our 
faces,  so  that  we  were  glad  to  get  into  the  tarantass. 
and  shut  it  up  closely  to  keep  ourselves  from  being 
covered.  This  kind  of  steppe  continues  over  some 
high  ground  and  beyond  the  ruins  of  Sarai-Mama- 
Jugarta,  and  onwards  to  the  salt  lake,  from  whose 
shore  there  continues  a  salt  tract  almost  up  to  Bokhara. 
The  name  of  the  lake  on  the  map  is  Kunja-Kul,  but 
the  local  name  was  given  me  as  Kulimai.  f 

From  the  high  ground  of  Mama-Jugarta  to  Bokhara 
is  only  1 1  miles,  but  my  hopes  of  getting  there  that 
night  were  to  be  disappointed,  for  it  was  not  till 
7  o'clock  we  came  to  Chitarik,  where  a  djiguitt  from 
the  Kush-beggi  came  out  from  Bokhara  to  meet  us 
and  apologize,  saying  that  they  had  received  the  letter 
from  Karshi  to  announce  our  coming  only  that  day 
at  noon  ;  and  hence  the  poor  reception  made  for  me 
at  the  last  two  stations.       I   had,    however,   put    this 

*  Witnessed  to  here  and  there  by  the  bleached  bones  of  horses  and 
camels  fallen  and  left  as  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  and  for  the 
beasts  of  the  earth  (Jer.  xvi.  4),  to  which  the  eagle  flies,  hastening  to 
eat  (Habak.  i.  8). 

t  Yakoob  said  it  took  its  name  from  kiaiji,  a  corner,  because  the 
shore  is  irregular,  and  ?nai,  fish.  They  gave  me  its  length  as  about 
6  miles,  which,  according  to  my  Russian  map,  is  full  measure.  It  was 
said  to  be  from  25  to  50  feet  deep,  and  frozen  in  winter  to  the  thickness 
of  a  foot,  so  that  camels  may  cross  it.  I  could  hear  nothing  of  boats 
thereon,  but  fish  is  caught  with  shore  nets  and  sold  in  Bokhara  at  from 
id.  to  ^d.  per  lb. 


FROM  KARSHI  TO  THE    OXUS  AND  BOKHARA.    65 

down  to  my  own  perverseness  in  getting  ahead  of 
those  sent  forward  to  prepare  for  my  comfort.  At 
Chitarik  we  were  put  up  for  the  night,  and  our  host 
brought  forth  at  our  evening  meal  a  rather  pretty 
china  plate.  I  had  the  curiosity  to  look  at  the  bottom, 
•and,  to  my  amazement,  saw  written  In  my  own  tongue 
'■  Real  Ironstone  China."  No  Englishman  had  been 
along  that  road,  so  far  as  I  know,  since  Alexander 
Burnes,  half  a  century  before,  and  I  wondered  how 
it  came  there. 

The  temperature  fell  during  the  night  to  55°,  and 
at  7.30  we  were  again  on  the  move.  The  salt  tract 
soon  ceased,  and  the  country  began  to  show  signs 
of  life  and  cultivation.  After  5  miles  of  travel  we 
came  to  the  village  of  Kagan,  where  the  Bokharlot 
oasis  begins.  Although  we  had  noj:  long  since  break- 
fasted, we  were  expected  to  stop  here  for  tea  and 
refreshments,  partly  also,  I  fancy,  because  our  nimble 
movements  rather  outran  the  local  arrangements. 
Henceforward,  for  the  remaining  five  miles,  w^e  drove 
through  fields  and  gardens,  till  we  stood  before  a  city 
with  a  wall  great  and  high,  having  1 1  gates,  rigorously 
closed  by  night,  which  city,  when  I  had  entered,  I 
found  one  of  the  most  interesting,  and  certainly  the 
most  curious,   I   have  ever  seen. 


VOL.  II. 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

THE    CITY    OF    BOKHARA. 

Bokhara  from  the  earliest  times,  and  aftenvards  under  the  Samanids, 
Seldjuks,  and  Uigurs.— Bokhara  conquered  by  Jinghiz  Khan, 
Tamerlane,  and  the  Uzbegs. — The  Sheibanids,  Astarkhanids, 
and  Manghits. — The  late  Emir  Nasr-Ullah. — ^Visit  of  Burnes  to 
Bokhara. — Stoddart  sent  as  British  envoy. — Concurrent  Russian 
missions. — Conolly  enticed  to  Bokhara  and  imprisoned. — Stoddart 
and  Conolly  killed. — Brave  journey  of  Dr.  Wolff. — My  entry  into 
Bokhara.  —  Its  ancient  appearance  and  customs.  —  Sumptuous 
lodging  and  garden. — Bokhariot  fruit-trees  and  horticulture. 

NOT  a  little  of  the  interest  attaching  to  the  city 
we  had  now  approached  is  connected  with  its 
history,  and  without  some  slight  sketch  of  it  my 
description  would  be  very  imperfect.  The  earliest 
tradition  peoples  the  country  with  a  Turkish  race  who 
had  much  intercourse,  alternately  friendly  and  hostile, 
with  China.  The  natives  even  told  me  that  the  present 
walls  of  Bokhara  were  built  by  the  Celestials,  though  I 
saw  not  a  single  sign  of  it,  nor  of  anything  Chinese 
throughout  the  city.  In  seeking  for  documentary 
evidence,  we  cannot,  as  in  the  case  of  Samarkand,  fix 
upon  a  date  for  a  starting-point  so  early  as  the  days  of 
Alexander  ;  but  it  seems  pretty  certain,  according  to 
Gibbon,  that  in  the  time  of  Justinian  there  was  a 
khakan,  or  emperor,   of  the   Eastern   Turks  reigning 


■ 


THE  CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  67 

in  Mavera-un-Nahr — that  is,  between  the  Oxus  and 
Jaxartes — who  was  overthrown  by  Naushirvan,  from 
which  time  the  prevaiHng  race  and  language  became 
Persian.  At  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century 
came  the  Arabs,  who  found  the  people  fire- worshippers 
and  Buddhists,  but,  at  the  end  of  a  century  and  a  half, 
left  them  Muhammadans.  During  the  Arab  occupa- 
tion, Bokhara,  being  more  or  less  under  the  Khalifs,  was 
treated  as  a  part  of  the  province  of  Khorasan,  and  had 
to  yield  obedience  to  commands  issued  from  what  was 
then  called  Mervi-Shah-Djihan,  or  Merv,  the  queen  of 
the  world. 

The  rule  of  the  Samanids,  who  were  next  masters  of 
Bokhara,  commenced  about  874,  in  the  person  of  a 
nobleman,  named  Saman,  a  ruler  of  Belkh,  and  one  of 
the  remaining  followers  of  Zoroaster,  who,  in  gratitude 
for  help  received  from  the  Viceroy  of  Khorasan, 
embraced  the  creed  of  Islam.  Of  one  of  his  successors, 
Ismail,  is  told  the  magnanimous  story,  that  having  con- 
quered the  generals  of  Amrubin  Leith  from  Khorasan, 
instead  of  taking  the  whole  army  prisoners,  according 
to  the  custom  of  those  days,  he  loaded  the  men  with 
presents,  and  set  them  free  to  return  home  ;  and  when 
his  own  people  expressed  their  astonishment,  he  said, 
'AVhy,  what  would  you  do  with  these  poor  men  ?  Let 
them  go  quietly  home,  and  they  will  never  fight  us 
again."  Under  Ismail,  Bokhara  became  virtually  the 
capital  of  all  the  states  of  Central  Asia,  Merv  included  ; 
but  the  Samanids,  who  succeeded  Emir  Ismail  until 
1004,  were,  for  the  most  part,  helpless  puppets,  who  at 
length  made  way  for  the  Seldjuks. 

Seldjuk  was  commander  of  an  army  of  the  Turkish 
hordes  of  Transoxiana,  under  a  prince  named  Pigu,  and, 
being  expelled   from   his    native   steppe,    settled   near 


68  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

Djend,  north  of  Bokhara,  where,  with  all  his  followers, 
he  embraced  Islamism.  Seldjuk  acquired  some  amount 
of  influence  by  protecting  the  peaceable  inhabitants  of 
the  neighbourhood  from  his  heathen  kinsmen.  He 
also  took  the  part  of  the  later  Samanids,  and  gradually 
obtained  the  position  of  one  of  the  independent 
princes  of  Transoxiana.  His  successors,  forced  to 
quit  Turkistan  in  1030,  conquered  Merv  five  years 
later,  and  Khorasan  also  ;  after  which  the  power  of  the 
Seldjuks  continued  till  the  second  quarter  of  the  twelfth 
century. 

The  last  of  the  Seldjuks  w^as  overthrown  by  the 
Uigur  Khurkan  from  the  district  north-east  of  Kho- 
kand,  and  Bokhara  now  became  an  apple  of  discord 
between  the  Uigur  Khurkan  in  the  east,  and  the 
princes  of  Kharezm,  or  what  is  now  Khiva,  in  the 
west.  So  things  continued  for  nearly  a  hundred  years, 
when  the  greatest  of  Asiatic  conquerors  arose  in  the 
east,  born  as  Temuchin  in  11 55. 

The  progress  of  Temuchin  in  subduing  the  nomads 
of  Gobi  was,  up  to  1206,  comparatively  slow.  At  this 
date,  he  assumed  the  new  title  of  Jinghis  (or  Chingis, 
Genghis,  or  Jenghiz)  Khan,  and  soon  afterwards  sub- 
dued all  eastern  Mongolia,  and  the  country  south  to 
the  Chinese  wall,  and  the  frontier  of  Tibet.  In  12 18, 
this  Mongol  conqueror  set  off  on  a  campaign  against 
Transoxiana.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  three  sons, 
Jagatai,  Oktai,  and  Djudji,  with  600,000  men.  Jinghiz 
himself,  with  the  dlite  of  his  army,  marched  direct  on 
Bokhara.  Entering  the  Friday  mosque,  he  went  up 
the  steps  of  the  pulpit,  and  said  to  his  soldiers,  ''  The 
hay  is  cut,  give  your  horses  fodder."  The  Mongols 
plundered  the  town,  and  afterwards  set  it  on  fire,  so 
that  only  a  few  mosques  and  palaces  of  brick  remained. 


THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  69 

Ihe  garrison,  however,  in  the  citadel  continued  to  hold 
out,  nor  was  it  till  the  moat  was  literally  choked  with 
the  corpses  of  men  and  animals  that  the  stronghold 
was  taken  and  its  defenders  put  to  death.  More  than 
30,000  men  were  executed,  and  the  remainder  reduced 
to  slavery.  Samarkand  shared  a  similar  fate,  and,  in 
1220,  Merv  was  sacked  by  the  Mongols,  and  100,000 
people  slain.  This  Mongolian  invasion  put  an  end, 
for  the  time,  to  the  intellectual  life  of  Central  Asia, 
and  Bokhara  and  Samarkand  never  regained  their 
former  position.  Jinghiz,  in  1224,  divided  his  immense 
empire,  stretching  all  across  Asia,  between  his  three 
sons  ;  Turkistan  and  Transoxiana  falling  to  the  share 
of  Jagatai,  whose  descendants  ruled  the  country  for 
nearly  150  years,  towards  the  end  of  which  time  the 
Turks,  who  had  come  west  with  the  Mongols  and 
served  them  so  long  as  they  were  powerful,  gradually 
usurped  the  place  of  their  masters,  and  the  empire  of 
the  Djengezids  gave  way  to  that  of  the  Timurids. 

The  house  of  Berlas  planted  the  flag  of  independence 
at  Kesh,  w^here,  as  I  have  said  before,  the  great 
Tamerlane  was  born  in  1333,  and  though  he  made 
Samarkand  his  capital,  he  often  went  to  Bokhara. 
The  sway  of  the  Timurids  lasted  barely  a  hundred 
years.  During  that  time,  however,  Bokhara  and 
Samarkand  again  rose,  as  I  have  shown  in  a  previous 
chapter,  to  considerable  civilization  and  culture,  but 
with  the  last  of  the  Timurids  in  1506,  Central  Asia 
began  to  gravitate  towards  the  slough  of  ignorance 
and  barbarism,  from  which  it  has  never  yet  recovered 
itself. 

A  new  dynasty  was  now  arising  among  the  descen- 
dants of  some  of  the  Turko-Mongol  tribes,  living  in 
the  north-west  country  between  the    Volga  and  Aral. 


70 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


THE  CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  71 

They  had  assumed  the  political  name  of  Uzbegs,  or 
Ozbegs,  in  honour  of  Ozbeg,  the  ninth  ruler  of  the 
house  of  Djudji,  son  of  Jinghiz  Khan  ;  and  when  the 
Muscovite  power  was  beginning  to  drive  out  the 
Tartars  from  Russia,  these  Uzbegs  gradually  retired 
eastwards  under  Ebulkhair.  Being  appealed  to  for 
help,  they  lent  their  warlike  powers  to  the  successors 
of  Timur,  who  were  fighting  each  other,  till,  under 
Sheibani,  the  grandson  of  Ebulkhair,  Baber,  the  last 
of  the  Timurids,  was  driven  from  his  throne,  and  the 
Uzbeofs    became    masters    of    Transoxiana.      Sheibani 

o 

was  conquered  and  killed  in  15 10  by  Shah  Ismail, 
after  which  the  Sheibanids  reigned  for  nearly  a 
century. 

The  greatest  monarch  of  this  line  was  Abdullah 
Khan,  born  in  1533.  It  was  during  his  lifetime  that 
trade  relations  were  proposed  by  ambassadors  sent 
in  1552  from  Bokhara  and  Samarkand  to  John  the 
Terrible ;  and  six  years  later  the  English  merchant, 
"  Master  Anthony  Jenkinson,"  landed  at  Mangishlak  on 
the  Caspian,  and  having  travelled  across  the  Turko- 
man desert  to  Bokhara,  returned  the  following  year. 
To  Abdullah  Khan  is  attributed  the  building  of  many 
caravansaries,  bridges,  cisterns,  and  other  works  of 
public  utility  in  Bokhara.  The  part  of  the  bazaar  at 
Bokhara  that  is  now  best  preserved  was  built  by  him 
in  1582,  so  was  the  bridge  at  Kermineh,  besides  the 
one  I  crossed  at  Karshi.  His  tomb  is  near  that  of 
Baha-ud-din,  the  patron  saint  of  Bokhara,  a  short 
distance  out  of  the  town.  His  reign,  Vambery  says, 
may  with  truth  be  called  the  last  ray  of  the  glory 
which  had  at  various  times  surrounded  the  throne  of 
Transoxiana. 

The  succeeding   Sheibanids  reigned    till   1597,  and 


72  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

were  succeeded  by  a  new  line  of  sovereigns,  called 
Astarkhanids,  who  maintained  their  rule  for  nearly 
200  years.  Driven  from  the  khanate  of  Astrakhan 
on  the  lower  course  of  the  Volga,  the  Astarkhanids 
were  welcomed  in  Transoxiana  by  the  Sheibanids, 
both  being  descendants  of  J  inghiz  Khan.  They  helped 
the  ruling  dynasty  as  Sheibani  did  before  them,  and 
with  similar  results,  for  they  also  succeeded  to  the 
throne,  and  retained  it  till  1737,  when  their  powder  was 
permanently  broken  by  Nadir  Shah.  The  material 
prosperity  of  the  country  declined  greatly  under  the 
Astarkhanids.  Old  buildings  were  suffered  to  fall  into 
ruin  for  want  of  necessary  repairs,  whilst  the  buildings 
of  the  Astarkhanids  themselves  were  only  the  college 
of  Yelenktosh,  built  in  1 6 1 1 ,  opposite  the  already 
ruined  college  of  Ulug  Beg  ;  a  mosque  and  a  college 
in  Bokhara,  raised  by  the  wealthy  Nezr  Divanbeghi  in 
1620;  and  lastly,  two  reception  saloons,  which  Baki 
Mehemmed  Khan  had  built  in  Bokhara  and  Samarkand 
in  1605.  It  was  under  this  dynasty  that  the  Italian 
Florio  Benevini  arrived  at  Bokhara  on  a  mission 
from  Peter  the  Great ;  and  with  difficulty  made  his 
escape  four  years  afterwards. 

The  Astarkhanids,  in  1784,  were  succeeded  by  the 
family  of  Manghit ;  Uzbegs  who  came  from  the  wooded 
country  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Lower  Oxus,  where  they 
helped  the  Khivans.  Some  of  them  were  taken  into 
the  pay  of  the  Sheibanids,  and  these  settled  later  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Karshi.  Here  others  of  their 
number  afterwards  rose  to  power  under  the  later  Astar- 
khanids, with  whom  they  intermarried,  and  the  crown 
was  at  length  placed  upon  the  head  of  one  Emir 
Maasum,  of  the  family  of  Manghit,  who  passed  much 
of  his  time  in  religious  meditation,   living  in  retirement 


THE   CITY  OF  BOICHARA.  ^2, 

in  the  great  mosque,  and  wearing  the  mantle  of  a 
dervish.  Later  on,  however,  he  turned  warrior,  laid 
waste  Merv,  and  transferred  its  inhabitants  that  were 
not  killed  to  Bokhara.  It  was  this  prince  who  revived 
the  office  of  the  Re'is-i-ShaiHat,  guardian  of  the  law 
of  religion,  whose  office  it  was  to  pass  through  the 
streets  attended  by  police  with  a  whip,  to  thrash  those 
who  could  not  pass  a  proper  examination  in  religious 
matters,  or  who  did  not  attend  to  their  religious  duties. 
Drinkers  of  wine  and  smokers  of  tobacco  were  treated 
in  like  manner.  Emir  Maasum  was  succeeded  by  his 
son  Emir  Said,  in  1803,  who  remained  a  mullah  all 
his  life,  and  at  his  death,  in  1826,  passed  on  his  throne 
to  his  son  Nasr-Ullah-Bahadur  Khan. 

I  have  thus  rapidly  oudined  the  history  of  Bokhara, 
so  that  in  describing  the  capital  and  objects  seen  in 
passing  through  the  khanate,  references  to  the  past 
may  not  seem  quite  a  blank.*  We  now  come  to  a 
despot  whose  name,  Nasr-Ullah,  father  of  the  present 
Emir,  was  well  known  forty  years  ago  in  England  in 
connection  with  those  of  Lieutenant  Burnes,  Colonel 
Stoddart,  Captain  Conolly,  and  Dr.  Wolff,  and  with 
others  who  proceeded  to  Bokhara  from  Russia.  The 
mutual  rivalries  of  the  two  nations  at  that  time  gave 
the  affairs  of  Bokhara  a  wider  interest  than  had  been 
previously  felt  in  Europe.  The  first  English  officer 
who  travelled  into  Bokhara  was  Lieutenant  Burnes. 
Leaving  Peshawur,  he  passed  through  Cabul,  Balkh, 
cind  Karshi,  in  1832,  and  thence  continued  to  Bokhara 
by  the  route  described  in  the  preceding  chapter.      He 

*  For  fuller  information  see  Howorth's  "  History  of  the  Mongols," 
and  Vambery's  "  History  of  Bokhara,"  from  which  I  have  for  the  most 
part  derived  my  information  ;  but  in  connection  with  the  latter  should 
be  read  the  criticism  thereon  of  Professor  Grigorieff,  translated  in 
Schuyler's  work,  Appendix  H. 


74  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

travelled  as  a  private  individual,  but  with  documents 
showing  that  the  British  Government  was  interested  in 
his  good  treatment.  He  was  suspected,  of  course,  and 
forbidden  to  use  pen  and  ink  ;  but  on  the  whole,  thanks 
to  the  court  officials,  he  was  kindly  received,  and  on 
reaching  England  published,  in  1834,  an  account  of 
his  travels. 

Russia  had  carried  on  intercourse  with  Bokhara,  as 
I  have  stated,  since  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury, and  in  1820  Russian  literature  was  enriched  by 
books  on  Bokhara  and  Khiva,  by  Muravieff,  Meyen- 
dorff,  and  Eversman.  Howorth  suggests  that  perhaps 
the  journey  of  Burnes  incited  the  Russians  to  send  to 
Bokhara  Dr.  Demaisons  in  the  guise  of  a  mullah,  in 
1834,  and  Vitkovitch  disguised  as  a  Kazak  in  the 
following  year,  to  learn  what  the  Englishman  had  been 
about.  In  1836,  the  Governor  of  Orenburg  asked  by 
letter  for  the  friendship  of  Bokhara,  whereupon  an 
envoy  from  the  Emir  was  sent  to  Petersburg  to  reci- 
procate these  friendly  advances,  and  to  say  that  the 
English  had  sent  agents  to  try  to  open  trade  with 
Bokhara. 

Russia  and  England  had  been  for  some  time  in^ 
triguing  at  the  Persian  court,  whence  the  British  Am 
bassador  deemed  it  prudent,  in  1838,  to  send  Colone 
Stoddart  as  an  envoy  to  Bokhara  to  endeavour  to  stoj 
the  pillage  on  the  Persian  frontier  and  the  capture  o 
slaves,  to  release  any  Russian  prisoners  he  might  fine 
at  Bokhara,  and  to  make  a  friendly  treaty  with  th( 
Emir.  On  his  arrival  at  the  gate  of  the  city  he  wai 
received  with  distinction  ;  but  when,  soon  after,  h 
refused  to  conform  to  local  usages  and  etiquette,  rod 
his  horse  in  the  Rhigistan,  which  none  but  the  Emi; 
then   might  do,    did   not   dismount  when   his    Majesty 


THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA,  75 

passed,  and  finally,  when  about  to  be  presented  to  the 
sovereign,  he  knocked  down  the  master  of  the  ceremo- 
nies, who  presumed  to  feel  if  he  had  arms  concealed  ; — 
after  all  this  the  Emir  had  him  let  down  to  an  under- 
ground prison,  20  feet  deep,  and  kept  him  there  for 
two  months,  with  two  thieves  and  a  murderer.  Captain 
Grover  states  that  this  dungeon  swarmed  with  ticks 
and  vermin,  specially  reared  to  annoy  the  wretched 
prisoners,  and  that,  if  no  prisoners  were  there,  the 
vermin  were  supplied  with  rations  of  raw  meat.  On 
the  second  day  the  executioner  descended  with  an 
order  from  the  Emir  instantly  to  kill  the  Englishman  if 
he  did  not  embrace  Islamism.  Stoddart  made  the  pro- 
fession of  faith  ;  but  at  the  end  of  two  months,  being 
removed  to  the  house  of  the  Mir-sheb,  or  head  of  the 
police,  he  announced  his  return  to  Christianity,  and 
that  his  avowal  of  Islamism  was  forced  from  him.  He 
was  now  informed  that  one  Naib-Abdul-Samut,  once 
in  English  pay,  but  expelled  from  India  for  his  crimes, 
and  now  lieutenant  to  Nasr-Ullah,  had  been  the  prin- 
cipal cause  of  his  imprisonment,  having  represented 
him  to  the  Emir  as  a  spy.  During  1839-40,  Stoddart 
was  alternately  in  prison  and  in  favour,  and  after  his 
third  imprisonment  was  removed  to  the  palace,  and 
then  to  the  house  of  Naib-Abdul-Samut. 

Meanwhile  some  Russians  arrived  at  Bokhara.  In 
August,  1838,  the  Emir  had  sent  to  the  Tsar  a  present, 
and  asked  that  some  mining  engineers  might  be  sent 
to  search  his  country  for  minerals.  In  April,  1839,  a 
caravan  started,  but,  being  threatened  on  the  way  by 
the  Kazaks,  the  Russian  officers  did  not  proceed.  In 
1840,  another  mission  was  sent  to  the  Tsar.  In  reply 
to  this,  Buteneff"  was  charged  to  proceed  to  Bokhara, 
in  company  with  Khanikoff",  Lehmann,  and  others,  and 


;6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

to  compass  among  other  things,  if  possible,  the  release 
of  Stoddart.  On  their  arrival  the  Russian  mission  was 
treated  very  coolly  by  the  Emir,  but  Stoddart  was 
permitted  to  live  with  Buteneff  The  Emir  even 
offered  Stoddart  to  return  with  the  Russian  embassy, 
but  this  he  declined  on  the  ground  that  he  had  not 
received  orders  from  his  government  to  withdraw. 
One  principal  reason  that  made  the  Emir  so  wavering 
was  the  alternation  of  success  and  defeat,  at  that  time, 
of  the  English  in  Afghanistan.  Matters  were  further 
complicated  in  1840  by  the  arrival  of  the  English 
officers,  Abbott,  Shakespear,  and  Conolly,  at  Khiva. 
Conolly  was  ordered  to  explore  Khokand,  and  appa- 
rently also  to  attempt  to  checkmate  the  Russian 
advance  thither.  He  travelled  north  of  Bokhara,  but 
on  receiving  a  letter  from  Stoddart,  inviting  him  to  go 
there,  he  determined,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  his 
Khivan  and  Khokandian  friends,  to  go  to  Nasr-Ullah's 
camp,  and  try  to  persuade  him  to  join  with  the  Uzbeg 
princes  in  a  league  against  Russia.  The  Emir  wished 
to  gain  possession  of  Conolly,  and  at  once  made  him 
prisoner  in  the  house  of  Abdul  Samut,  where  he  was 
joined  by  Stoddart. 

The  Emir  now  became  very  hostile  to  the  English, 
as  well  as  insulting  to  the  Russian  embassy,  whom  he 
dismissed,  and  said  that  he  would  send  the  Englishmen 
to  their  country  direct.  Instead  of  this,  the  Afghan 
campaign  having  ended  in  the  massacre  of  the  English, 
from  whom  he  thought  he  had  no  longer  anything  to 
fear,  and  embarrassed  by  requests  for  the  release  of 
his  European  prisoners  from  Persia,  Khiva,  Constanti- 
nople, Cabul,  and  Herat,  Nasr-Ullah  determined  to 
put  Stoddart  and  Conolly  to  death,  which  he  did  on 
the  24th  June,  1842. 


THE  CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  -jj 

j      A  vague  report  of  this  reached  England,  but  much 
I  uncertainty    hung    over    the    matter    for    some    time, 
I  whereupon    Captain    Grover,    a  friend    of   Stoddart's, 
I  determined    to    go    out    to    Bokhara    to    clear  up  the 
mystery,    and    had    applied    to    the     Government     in 
London    for    official    papers   of   protection,    when   Dr. 
Wolff,    a    Christian    Israelite  and   English  clergyman, 
who  as  a  missionary  had  visited  Bokhara  in  1831,  and, 
»  going    on    to    India,    had    made    the    acquaintance    of 
I  Captain  Conolly,   issued  a  challenge,  in  July,    1843,  to 
the  "brave  officers  of  England,"  that  if  one  of  them 
;  would  accompany  him,  or  even  pay  the  expenses,  and 
no  more,  of  his  journey  to  Bokhara,   he  hoped  to  be 
1  able  to  release  the  prisoners,  whose  execution  he  con- 
\  sidered  exceedingly  doubtful.     This  led  to  the  forma- 
I  tion  of  a  Stoddart  and  Conolly  Conimittee,  and  in  the 
I  following  October  Dr.  Wolff  started. 
i;       He  went  supported  by  letters  from  the  Sultan  and 
others,    and    on    arriving    was    well    received    by    the 
!  Emir,    and    Abdul    Samut    told    him    how    and    why 
'  Stoddart   and   Conolly   had  been  put   to  death.     The 
missionary    then    desired    to    return    at    once,    recom- 
mending that  an  ambassador  should  be  sent  with  him 
to  ask  pardon  of  the   English  Government,   and  also 
expressing  a  wish  to  redeem  some   Russian  slaves,  of 
whom  he  heard  in  Bokhara.     Every  pretext,  however, 
■  was  put  forward  to  delay  the  stranger's  departure,  and, 
lodged  in  the  house  of  Abdul  Samut,  this  rascal  tried 
every  means  possible  to  extort  money  from  Dr.  Wolff, 
besides  doing  his  best  to  compass  his  death  as  he  had 
done  that   of   the   two  officers.     At  length,   however, 
the  brave  traveller  had  permission  to  depart,  and  after 
escaping    several    attempts    at    assassination,    robbery, 
and  poison,  he  reached  London  in  1845. 


78  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  have  a  dim  recollection,  as  a  child,  of  hearing  Dr. 
Wolff  lecture  on  his  travels — I  suppose  soon  after  his 
return — and  a  better  remembrance  as  a  boy  of  hearing 
him  preach.      How  little  I  then  dreamed  that  I  should 
be  the  next  of  the  Queen's  subjects  to  enter  the  city 
of  Bokhara!     Yet,   on  October    nth,    1882,    I    found 
myself  approaching  the  very  gate  by  which  I  presume 
Burnes    had    entered    50    years    before.      The    sight 
of  the    crenelated    walls,    8    miles    round,    with    holes 
through  which  archers  might  shoot,  guarded  by  a  thin 
clay    defence,    and    supported    on    triangular    beams, 
struck  me  as  curious  indeed  for  Anno  Domini   1882. 
Everything,    however,   was   in  keeping  therewith.     It 
was   not  like    a   street    of  Old   London,  erected   in  a 
modern  exhibition,   or  an  assemblage   arrayed   in  an- 
cient costumes   whilst    surrounded   with   19th  century 
furniture.       There    came    out    to    meet    us,    from    the 
Kush-beggi   and  his   son,   to  conduct  us  with  honour 
to    our   lodging,    an    array    of    dignitaries,    of   whom, 
mutatis    mutandis,   one   might  have    said.   These   are 
the    princes   which  the   Emir  had  :  ''  Azariah  the  son 
of  Zadok  the  priest,   Elihoreph  and  Ahiah,  the  sons  of 
Shisha,  scribes  ;  Jehoshaphat  the   son   of  Ahilud,  the 
recorder.     And  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  over  the 
host :  and  Zadok  and  Abiathar  the  priests  :  and  Azariah 
the  son  of  Nathan  over  the  officers  :  and  Zabud  the  son 
of  Nathan  principal  officer,  and  the  king's  friend  :  and 
Ahishar  over  the  household  :  and  Adoniram  the  son  of 
Abda  over  the  tribute"  ( I  Kings  iv.  2 — 6  ;  i  Chron.  xviii. 
15).     One  of  my  difficulties^was  to  distinguish  "  Who  " 
from  "  Which  "  among  these  notabilities,  for  they  were 
all  so  grand,  and  their  Oriental  titles  of  office  were  to 
me,  of  course,  considerably  ''  worse  than  Greek."* 

*  Dr.  Schuyler  mentions  his  being  preceded  at  Shahr  by  men  running 
on  foot,  as  Absalom  and  his  brother  Adonijah  each  prepared  50  men  t( 


THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  79 

What  with  our  own  djiguitts,  however,  one  or  two 
who  had  accompanied  us  all  the  way  from  Kitab, 
and  the  cavaliers  who  came  out  to  welcome  us,  we 
mustered  a  pretty  strong  party.  We  had  driven 
nearly  to  the  city  gate  when  it  was  suggested, 
Christians  though  we  were,  that  we  should  leave  the 
tarantass,  and  formally  enter  Bokhara  on  horseback — 
a  change  truly  from  the  treatment  accorded  to  Burnes, 
who,  because  a  Christian,  had  to  trudge  about  the 
city  on  foot,  whilst  his  Muhammadan  servants  were 
mounted.  Not  the  least  objection  was  made  later  on 
to  our  riding  in  the  Rhigistan,  of  the  old  law  con- 
cerning which  we  were  ignorant,  and  the  Russians 
have  sometimes  administered  a  bitter  pill  to  the 
Bokhariots,  in  that  when  embassies  happened  to  be 
attended  by  a  Jewish  interpreter,  the  Russians  do  not^ 
of  course,  suffer  him  to  dismount. 

Our  cavalcade  was  marched  through  the  streets,  the 
carriage  bringing  up  the  rear,  and  djiguitts  going  before 
to  clear  the  way.  I  supposed  the  one  immediately 
before  us  to  be  in  authority,  for  a  woman,  who  was  not,. 
I  think,  fully  veiled,  happening  to  meet  us,  he  appeared 
to  rebuke  her  sharply,  and  she,  poor  creature,  went  and 
turned  her  face  to  the  wall  like  a  scolded  child.  Many 
rose  to  give  our  party  the  Muhammadan  salutation, 
Salaam  aleikttm,  in  which,  I  presume,  we,  as  Christians, 
were  not  intended  to  participate,  for  the  Moslems  do  not 
thus  salute  Christians  ;  but  the  Jews  frequently  bowed  to 
us,  and  paid  their  respects  with  an  uttered  Aman  !  * 

run  before  him  (2  Sam.  xv.  i  ;  i  Kings  i.  5) ;  but  I  do  not  remember  meeting- 
with  an  exemplification  of  this  custom  in  Bokhara,  nor  of  the  Egyptian 
calling  before  a  ruler,  "  Bow  the  knee"  (Gen.  xli.  43).  I  missed,  too, 
among  the  many  officers  of  the  Emir,  a  cup-bearer,  like  Nehemiah  (i.  ii.) — 
the  Bokhariot  sovereign,  like  all  Moslems,  being  a  "  total  abstainer." 

*  Reminding  one  of  Matt.  v.  47,  "If  ye  salute  your  brethren  only,, 
what  do  ye  more  than  others  ?  ' ' 


8o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

At  length  we  reached  the  largest  of  the  eight  houses 
set  apart  for  guests,  and  which  proved  to  be,  on  the 
whole,  the  finest  house  we  entered  in  the  khanate. 
I  was  disposed  to  christen  it  ''the  house  of  Haman,"* 
for  it  had  been  the  residence  of  a  fallen  favourite,  one 
Barat  Bek,  who,  four  years  previously,  was  at  the 
head  of  5,000  troops,  and  had  enriched  himself  by 
withholding  their  pay.  Besides  this  he  drank,  and 
having  had  the  batchas  one  night,  he  went  out  inflamed 
with  strong  drink,  and  insulted  not  only  the  people, 
but  the  Emir  also.  His  master  caused  him  to  be 
bound  and  thrown  into  the  Kana-Khaneh,  the  prison, 
I  believe,  where  the  English  officers  were  confined, 
out  of  which  the  corpse  of  the  man  was  taken  1 5  days 
afterwards,  when  it  was  found  he  had  bitten  himself  to 
death. 

On  leaving  the  street  to  enter  this  good  specimen 
of  a  Bokhariot  noble's  residence,  we  rode  into  a  horse 
yard  in  the  shape  of  the  letter  L,  bounded  on  one  side 
with  stables,  and  on  another  with  men-servants'  apart- 
ments, and  two  rooms  that  served,  apparently,  for 
men-servants'  wives.  From  this  yard  we  rode  into  a 
second  small  court,  out  of  which  a  screened  door  led 
into  the  women's  quarters,  and  a  narrow  passage  con- 
ducted us  into  the  principal  court,  or  square,  with  a 
fountain  in  the  midst.  The  side  opposite  the  entrance 
was  occupied  by  a  raised  platform,  and  four  rooms  en 
suite,  and  a  fifth.  The  centre  one  was  an  entrance 
hall,  in  which,  at  the  entrance,  was  a  place  for  ceremonial 
bathing,  with  a  chamber  overhead  ;  on  the  right  was 
the  room  of  the  Bek,  and  on  the  left  that  intended 
for  his  guests,  whilst  further  to  the  left  was  a  small 
sleeping-room.     The  other  sides  of  the  principal  court 

*  Esther  viii.  i. 


2 HE  CITY  OF  BOKHARA. 


were  occupied  by  offices,  and  rooms  for  the  Bek's 
officers  and  attendants.  Also  on  one  side  of  the 
women's  court  were  two  rooms  with  upper  stories  and 


n 

m  n 

9 


GARDEN 


STABLES. 


YARD       FOR       HORSES, 


FOUNTAIN. 

WITH  TREES 
AROUND. 


WOMEN'S 


COURT. 


ENTRANCE 


^ 


GARDEN. 


SERVANT'S 
ROOM. 


OFFICERS  -^ 


PRINCIPAL 


COURT. 
PLAT  FORM 


MASTER'S 
ROOhA. 


BATH 
ROOM. 


GUEST 
ROOM. 


W.  C. 


OFflCERS 


iLEEPINC 
ROOM 


ENTRANCE 
FROM   STREET. 


&  UPPER 
STOREY. 


GROUND   PLAN   OF   THE   PRINCIPAL   GUEST-HOUSE   AT    BOKHARA, 

an  entrance  hall,  opening  at  either  end  into  the  court, 
or  into  a  splendid  garden,  where  near  at  hand  was  a 
pool  with  adjacent  trees.     Somewhat  further  off  was  a 
VOL.  n.  6 


32  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

summer-house,  surrounded  by  bowers  of  vines,  groves 
of  apricots,  and  clusters  of  apple,  pear,  pomegranate, 
plum,  and  fig  trees,  the  whole  watered  by  running 
streams  from  the  Zarafshan.  The  Bek's  own  chambers, 
in  which  we  dwelt,  were  very  spacious,  roofed  with 
timber  beams,  and  painted  between  in  red,  whilst 
over  the  numerous  doors  were  trellised,  but  unglazed, 
windows,  there  being  no  glass  windows  in  the  city 
except  in  the  palace.* 

Though  this  ''house,  of  Haman"  is  sometimes 
without  guests  for  two  or  three  months  at  a  time,  it 
was  in  a  good  state  of  repair,  our  rooms  were  nicely 
carpeted,  and  our  comfort  closely  studied.  An  old 
secretary,  one  Mirza  Muhammad  Yusuf,  appeared  to 
be  told  off  to  watch  over  us — in  more  sehses  I 
suspect  than  one — and  besides  him  there  were 
sundry  messengers  to  keep  up  communications  with 
the  citadel.  As  we  had  arrived  in  the  morning  I 
expressed  a  desire  to  see  the  Kush-beggi  the  same 
day,  but  he  begged  to  be  excused  until  the  morrow, 
and  then  we  might  go  out  to  see  the  city.  Thus 
the  Kush-beggi  was  giving  us  a  mild  repetition  of  the 
treatment  we  had  received  from  his  master  at  Kitab 

*  This  building  calls  to  mind  the  passage  in  Jer.  xxii.  13 — 15,  "  Woe 
unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness,  and  his  chambers 
by  wrong ;  that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages,  and  giveth 
him  not  for  his  work  ;  that  saith,  I  will  build  me  a  wide  house  and 
large  chambers,  and  cutteth  him  out  windows  ;  and  it  is  cieled  with 
cedar,  and  painted  with  vermilion.  Shalt  thou  reign,  because  thou 
closest  thyself  in  cedar  ?  "  The  manner,  too,  in  which  the  Bek's  apart- 
ments were  cut  off  from  those  of  his  wives  recalled  the  expression,' 
■"The  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers"  (Cant.  i.  4).  I  was 
given  to  understand  that  the  Bokhariots  do  not  spend  their  time  con- 
tinuously, nor  even  sleep,  with  their  wives  always,  but  about  twice  a 
week,  so  that  a  particular  wife,  when  desired,  is  sent  for  to  come  to  her 
husband's  chamber.  This  is  not  the  case,  Yakoob  told  me,  among  his 
people,  the  Tatars  of  Kazan,  who  live  together,  except  when  the  hus- 
band has  visitors. 


THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  83 

— for  though  we  were  guests,  yet,  disguise  it  how  we 
might,  we  were  also  prisoners.  I  therefore  made  a 
virtue  of  necessity,  set  myself  to  explore  every  hole 
and  corner  of  the  premises,  and  then  proceeded  to 
a  careful  examination  of  this  excellent  specimen  of 
an  Oriental  garden. 

The  first  thing  that  struck  me  was  the  enormous 
size  of  the  apricot-trees,  standing  like  avenues  of  old 
English  pear-trees,  from  30  to  40  feet  high,  whilst 
in  circumference  the  first  I  measured  was  3  ft.  10  in., 
and  the  next  5  ft.  3  in.,  the  latter  being  about  40 
years  old.* 

The  cherry  and  peach  trees  did  not  strike  me  as 
so  remarkable.  Both  are  usually  grown  from  the 
stone.  The  fruit  of  the  cherry,  being  acid,  is  very 
little  used.  Peaches  are  of  three  varieties,  distin- 
guished as  red,  white,  and  green,  t 

The  vines  in  the  Bek's  garden  were  in  some  cases 
allowed  to  trail,  and  in  others  were  trained  to  form 
colonnades,  under  which  one  might  walk.  In  Bokhara 
are  cultivated  1 3  different  kinds,  and  of  these  we  tasted 
several.  A  small,  round,  greenish  variety,  called 
Kishmish,    was    thought    much    of,    but    there    were 

*  The  wood  is  good  for  fuel  only,  but  the  Bek  of  Shahr  had  told  me 
they  often  grow  so  many  apricots  that  they  do  not  trouble  to  gather 
them.  They  have  three  sorts  in  Bokhara,  the  earliest  being  ripe 
towards  the  middle  of  June.  A  second  kind,  white,  is  obtained  by 
grafting,  one  peculiarity  in  the  process  being  that  the  scion  is  first 
dipped  into  a  bowl  of  fresh  cows'  milk.  Of  a  third  and  reddish  kind, 
the  stones  are  largely  prepared  as  food.  The  dried  apricots,  called 
"  Uriuk,"  of  which  I  had  read  so  much,  were  to  me  disappointing, 
and,  till  cooked,  uneatable. 

t  When  sown,  the  stone  is  put  in  the  earth  two  fingers  deep,  before 
the  frosts  set  in  ;  water  is  then  let  in  and  allowed  to  freeze  ;  after  that, 
earth  is  put  over  it  and  left  till  the  following  spring,  when  the  young 
shoots  are  transplanted  at  intervals  of  four  paces.  The  best  peaches 
are  said  to  come  from  Samarkand. 


84  •  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

larger  kinds,  the  berries  of  which  measured  from  an 
inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length.  The  mode  of 
cultivation,  however,  was  to  me  more  curious  than 
their  flavour.^  Towards  the  close  of  summer  the 
bunches  are  enclosed  in  bags,  and  cut  off  later  on 
to  be  suspended  from  the  ceilings,  and  so  preserved 
through  the  winter  as  food,  but  not  pressed  for  wine. 
Oi  the  manufacture  of  this  I  neither  heard  nor  saw 
anything  In  Bokhara,  unless  it  were  to  some  insig- 
nificant extent  among  the  Jews.t 

We  saw  likewise  in  our  garden  many  dwarf  pome- 
granate and  fig  trees,  planted  in  what  appeared  like 
sunken  beds,  the  muddy-looking  soil  at  the  bottom 
showing  that  it  was  so  done  for  purposes  of  irrigation.  + 
The  fig-tree  requires  no  peculiar  soil,,  and  only  two 
fingers'  depth  of  manure  ;  but  as  the  fruit  advances 
towards  maturity,  the  roots  have  to  be  covered  with 
water  three  days  in  the  week.  The  crop  is  usually 
from  70  to  140  lbs.  from  one  tree. 

*  In  grafting,  the  stem  being  cut,  they  raise  the  bark  all  round 
for  half  an  inch,  though  without  removing  it  from  its  point ;  they  then 
peel  the  graft  for  an  equal  distance,  and  fix  it  on  the  stem,  binding  it  all 
round  with  the  bark.  The  two  soon  unite,  and  next  year  the  vine 
yields  fruit.  In  autumn  a  trench  is  made,  and  the  tops  of  the  vine 
buried  under  the  soil  for  the  winter.  The  soil  chosen  for  the  vine 
is  half  clay  and  half  sand,  enriched  with  from  one  to  two  tons  of 
manure  to  the  acre.  The  ground  is  usually  watered  twice  before 
budding  time,  and  once  towards  the  end  of  May,  when  the  earth  is 
completely  inundated  for  24  or  36  hours.  A  good  crop  averages  from 
40  to  50  tons  to  the  acre. 

t  The  Bokhariots  use  the  grape  for  making  syrup  and  vinegar,  and 
for  drying  into  raisins.  The  last  is  done  by  exposing  the  picked  fruit 
to  the  sun  on  the  housetop  for  three  or  four  days,  whilst  the  syrup  is 
made  by  treading  grapes  in  a  cylinder  lined  with  alabaster,  refining 
the  juice  with  pounded  clay,  and  then  boiling  it  to  the  solidity  required. 

%  The  pomegranate  requires  a  more  sandy  soil  than  the  vine,  and 
that  it  be  under  water  the  whole  of  every  tenth  day.  A  tree  springing 
from  seed  can  yield  fruit  in  the  fourth  year.  Bokhara  pomegranates 
are  excelled  by  those  of  Shahr-i-sabz,  where  also  is  a  peculiar  kind  with. 


THE   CITY  OF  BOKHARA.  85 

They  have  two  kinds  of  plums,  yellow  and  black. 
Of  course,  by  October  i  ith,  we  were  late  for  fresh  fruit, 
but  I  observed  some  of  the  siah,  or  black  plums,  on  a 
branch  suspended  in  a  shop,  which,  having  told  Yakoob 
to  purchase,  I  found  particularly  well  flavoured.  From 
150  to  200  lbs.  usually  grow  on  one  tree.  There  were 
in  our  garden  apple-trees,  of  which  there  are  in  the 
khanate  eight  sorts  ;  but  none  of  them  autumn  fruit. 
These  last  are  brought  from  Khiva,  especially  the 
town  of  Hazarasp ;  but  I  cannot  say  much  for  the 
flavour  of  any  I  tasted  in  Central  Asia,  as  compared 
with  good  sorts  in  England.  Of  quince-trees  we  had 
noticed  abundance  at  Khokand  and  elsewhere.* 

The  various  sunken  beds,  to  which  I  have  referred, 
in  the  Bek's  garden  were  connected  by  runnels  with 
the  quadrangular  pond  near  the  women's  apartments, 
and  near  this  pond  were  shady  trees  and  two  or  three 
flower-beds  ;  but  of  flowers  there  were  only  three  or 
four  varieties,  and  those  of  the  commonest  in  England. 
The  Bokhariots  cultivate  flowers  only  to  a  very  limited 
extent — the  rose,  however,  among  them, — and  then 
not  for  ornament  in  the  house,  but  simply  to  be  carried. 

Thus  we  looked  thoroughly  at  our  well-stocked 
garden,  and  found  that  its  far  end  almost  touched  the 
city  wall.  I  was  minded  to  climb  up  and  look  over, 
but  was  stopped  by  barriers  and  the  swampy  nature 
of  the  ground.  We  had,  therefore,  to  make  ourselves 
happy  in  confinement,  and  wish  for  the  morrow. 

small  seeds,    called  bidone,   or   seedless.     The   Bokhariot   gardeners 
think  the  crop  improved  by  the  tree  being  dwarfed, 

*  They  grow  on  almost  any  soil,  and  need  little  water.  The  fruit  is 
not  eaten  raw  in  Bokhara,  but  minced  meat  is  mixed  with  them  ;  the 
seeds  are  administered  in  medicine,  the  pulp  is  used  in  soups,  and,  once 
more,  boiled  quinces  are  prescribed  as  good  against. humours. 


CHAPTER   L. 

BOKHARA  THE  NOBLE. 

Bokhara  as  a  place  of  learning — Desire  to  mount  a  minaret. — Paucity 
of  Russian  inhabitants  and  their  treatment. — Visits  to  medresses 
Kokol-tash  and  Miri-arab. — Characteristics  of  Kirghese  and  Sart 
music. — Dancing-boys  dressed  as  girls. — Misinterpretation  of  an 
English  song. — Slumbers  disturbed  by  watchmen,  dogs,  and 
military  parade. — Service  in  the  Jtitnma  mosque  reminiscent  of 
temple  worship  in  Jerusalem. — A  Hindu  temple. — Gallop  round 
the  walls. 

I  NOTICED,  in  my  Uzbeg  Interpreter,  that,  when 
he  was  speaking  to  the  Emir  or  other  native 
notables,  he  was  careful  to  add  to  the  word  Bokhara, 
'*  Al-sherif,"  or  ''the  noble";  ''Bokhara  the  noble," 
spoken  in  a  religious  sense,  being  the  official  name 
among  the  Muhammadans  for  this  seat  of  so-called 
learning  and  piety.  Accordingly  we  were  all  agog  to 
see  the  University  of  Colleges  and  Schools,  whither 
Moslem  students  are  said  to  come  from  distant  coun- 
tries, even  Siberia,  as  to  a  mediaeval  Oxford.  Early 
on  Thursday  morning,  the  day  after  our  afrival,  the 
Kush-beggi  sent  messengers  to  inquire  for  my  health, 
and  to  say  that  a  considerable  amount  of  business  had 
arrived  from  the  Emir,  and,  in  consequence,  that  he 
would  not  be  able  to  receive  us  till  Saturday  morning, 
but  that  we  might  go  to  see  the  town.     We  therefore 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  87 

sallied   forth    on    horseback,   conducted    by    the    court 
attendants  and  our  own  djiguitts. 

I  wanted  much  to  mount  some  lofty  building  to  get 
a  view  of  Bokhara  as  a  whole,  and  so,  perhaps,  by 
comparison,  form  an  idea  of  its  population  ;  for  as  we 
were  conducted  through  the  narrow  irregular  streets, 
each  successive  one  very  like  the  last,  it  was  hard  to 
trace  any  plan  in  the  laying  out  of  the  city,  or  to  form 
any  estimate  of  the  number  of  its  inhabitants.  On 
approaching  the  Manari  Kalian,  or  great  minaret,  I 
said  that  I  wished  to  ascend  it.  This  at  once  flurried 
my  conductors,  and  at  first  they  tried  to  put  me  off  by 
saying  "To-morrow."  When  I  objected,  they  next 
said  that  the  Emir  had  taken  the  key  with  him  to 
Kitab.  Upon  this  not  satisfying  me,  they  urged  as  an 
objection  that  if  I  went  up  I  should  see  the  women. 
Not  thinking  this  very  dreadful,  I  still  urged  my  wish 
to  ascend,  telling  them  that  if  they  knew  how  many 
of  the  fair  sex  there  were  in  England  who  did  not 
object  to  be  looked  at,  they  would  not  think  I  should 
come  for  such  a  purpose  all  the  way  to  Bokhara.  But 
they  said  it  was  contrary  to  their  law.  They  would, 
however,  send  to  the  Kush-beggi.  This  having  been 
done,  the  messenger  came  back  to  say  that  the  Viceroy 
would  send  to  the  Emir  for  permission,  and  that  if  his 
answer  should  be  favourable  they  would  have  to  tell 
all  the  women  to  hide  themselves  before  I  went  up,  as 
they  had  done  on  the  last  occasion  when  a  criminal 
was  taken  up  to  be  thrown  down  headlong.* 

*  This  sounded  to  me  at  the  time  very  much  like  a  pack  of  excuses. 
Yakoob  afterwards  said,  however,  that  for  me  to  ascend  would  be  against 
Muhammadan  law,  and  I  observe  Burnes  writes  that  no  one  but  the 
high  priest  might  ascend  this  tower  (and  that  only  on  Friday  to  call 
the  people  to  prayers),  lest  he  should  overlook  the  women's  apartments 
in  the  city. 


88  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Accordingly  we  passed  on  to  the  Russian  Sarai,  or 
warehouse,  and  other  parts  of  the  town,  to  present  our 
few  private  letters  of  introduction.  Since  crossing  the 
Bokhariot  frontier  we  had  not  seen  or  heard  of  a  single 
Russian  of  any  grade  or  calling,  nor,  so  far  as  I  learnt, 
were  there  more  than  the  two  or  three  agents  of 
Kamensky  and  of  the  Commercial  Russian  Company, 
with  the  wife  of  one  of  them,  in  Bokhara.  It  seemed 
almost  like  calling  upon  a  fellow-countryman  in  pre- 
senting our  first  letter,  to  see  Kamensky's  agent  in 
European  clothes,  and  his  wife,  the  one  Russian  female 
in  all  Bokhara,  unveiled,  and  moving  rationally  about 
the  house,  and  not  like  her  oppressed  and  degraded 
sisters  around.  Very  pleasant,  too,  it  was,  by  way  of 
relief  from  native-made  dishes,  to  stay  to  lunch,  and 
partake  of  a  meal  served  In  European  fashion.  We 
called  afterwards  at  the  office  of  the  Russian  Company, 
where  I  met,  oddly  enough,  an  Asiatic,  upon  whom  I 
had  called  in  Moscow.  He  had  returned  by  Orenburg, 
and  reached  Bokhara  some  weeks  before  me.  These 
Russian  agents  had  not,  seemingly,  a  very  enviable 
post,  for  they  are  surrounded  with  Muhammadans,  who 
at  first  were  exceedingly  abusive  and  Insulting,  not  to 
say  dangerous,  in  the  streets,  though  matters  afterwards 
improved.  This  improvement  was  no  doubt  traceable, 
in  a  measure,  to  European  courage.  If  a  Bokhariot 
chooses  to  insult,  or  even  strike,  a  Hindu  or  a  Jew, 
they  must  patiently  bear  It,  as  the  natives^  knew,  and 
accordingly  tried  the  same  with  these  Russians,  though 
not  with  a  like  result ;  for  the  agents,  without  waiting 
for  the  interference  of  the  authorities,  took  the  law  In 
their  own  hands,  and  administered  a  thrashing.  This 
made  the  Muhammadans  more  careful ;  but,  to  show 
what  arrant  cowards  the  Bokhariots  were,  one  of  the 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  89 

agents  said  that  on  a  certain  occasion,  when  riding,  his 
horse  became  restive,  whereupon  a  knot  of  ten  natives 
frightened  the  animal  and  made  it  run  away.  Upon  this 
the  Russian  returned  to  thrash  them,  and  they  set  upon 
him,  as  he  said,  to  kill  him.  My  informant  happened 
not  to  have  his  revolver,  which  he  usually  carried,  but, 
taking  from  his  pocket  a  telescopic  aluminium  pencil, 
he  solemnly  drew  and  pointed  it  at  them,  whereupon 
they  supposed  it  to  be  some  new  infernal  machine,  and 
the  company  fled ! 

We  next  went  to  see  some  of  the  medresses,  or 
colleges :  first  to  that  called  Kokol-tash,  for  146 
students,  and  built,  they  told  me,  about  300  years  ago, 
though  Vambery  gives  the  date  1426.  I  asked  what 
it  would  cost  to  erect  such  a  building  in  Bokhara  now, 
and  they  thought  ^^  1,2 50.^  The  second  medresse  in 
importance  is  the  Miri-arab,  concerning  which  my 
notes  say  ''  114  rooms  and  230  mullahs. "t 

On  returning  to  our  lodging  we  were  entertained  in 
the  course  of  the  evening  with  some  native  songs  and 
music,  as  well  as  dancing-boys.  One  of  the  instruments 
resembled  a  guitar,   46  inches  long,  with  a  sounding- 

*  The  medresse  is  largely  supported  by  legacies,  and  in  Khanikoff^s 
time  the  three  classes  of  students  respectively  received  from  £2  to 
^3  lOJ".  a  year,  whilst  the  emoluments  of  the  professors  amounted  to 
£2af)'.  This  medresse  was  the  same  in  form  as  those  we  had  seen  in 
Samarkand,  but  far  less  handsome,  and  consisted  of  a  quadrangular 
building,  with  two  stories  of  rooms  opening  on  a  court  with  a  few  trees 
and  a  pool  of  water,  or  fountain.  The  upper  rooms  were  for  students, 
and  are  sold  or  let  to  them,  whilst  the  lower  are  for  instruction. 

t  It  was  built,  Vambery  says,  in  1529,  and  its  rooms  cost  from  £^^  to 
£^0,  whilst  those  of  the  preceding  college  cost  from  £b^  to  ;^8o.  The 
natives  are  fond  of  fixing  the  number  of  their  medresses  at  365.  Burnes 
gives  them  at  366  ;  Vambery  not  more  than  80  ;  but  Khanikoff,  "  from 
the  Emir's  registers  on  which  the  grants  to  them  are  entered,"  at  103- 
This  last  authority  also  gives  the  number  of  students  in  1840,  when  the 
Emir  granted  them  part  of  the  taxes,  and  it  was  found  their  aggregate 
amounted  to  10,000. 


90  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

board  9  inches  by  4,  and  might  be  played  with  a  bow 
or  with  the  thumb.  Another  instrument  resembled 
the  flageolet,  and  had  something  of  the  hautboy  sound, 
or  one  between  that  and  a  bagpipe.  Singing  and 
music  appear  to  hold,  according  to  M.  Gotobitzky,  a 
different  place  among  the  Sarts  and  the  Kirghese,  the 
latter  of  whose  songs  I  have  ^partially  described.  As 
with  the  Arabs,  so  among  the  Kirghese,  a  certain  class 
of  singers  called  Oiliantchi  are  looked  upon  as  were  the 
minstrels  of  the  middle  ages.  The  Sarts,  on  the  other 
hand,  regard  their  Gafiz,  or  singers,  merely  as  pro- 
fessionals, who  often  take  a  secondary  position  at  a 
feast  (as  with  ourselves  on  the  evening  in  question)  to 
accompany  dancing-boys.^ 

Yakoob  had  endeavoured  to  raise  my  anticipations 
by  telling  me  that  some  of  the  batchas  would  be 
dressed  as  dancing-girls.  Two  of  them  did  assume 
female  costume,  wearing  a  handkerchief  round  the 
head  and  falling  down  the  back.  They  wore  wristlets 
with  tinkling  ornaments,  and  carried  small  cymbals, 
wherewith  to  accompany  the  tambourines,  took  short, 
mincing  steps,  and  shook  their  hands  and  heads  with 
rapid  motions,   now  holding   up    and    extending  their 

*  The  Kirghese  oiliantchis  travel  from    one   collection   of  tents  to 
another,  perpetuating-  their  ancient  traditions  and  singing  love  songs, 
some  of  which  latter  they  compose  on  the  spot.     The  singer  draws  ar 
eager  and  attentive  audience,  which,  whenever  carried  away  by  th 
object  of  the  song,  or  a  sudden  change  of  melody,  evinces  approval  b 
such  exclamations  of  delight  as  Ichaou  /  Barakalla  !    Their  song. 
are  full  of  feeling  and  tenderness,  and  such  widespread  celebrity  do 
some  of  the  oiliantchis  attain  that  whole  auls  are  eager  to  do  them 
honour.     The  theme  of  Sart  songs  is  invariably  the  feats  of  valour  ol 
their  Palva?ts,  or  heroes,  or  else  love  adventures  ;  but  neither  do  the  con 
tents  nor  the  music  of  their  songs  display  that  uniform  originality  th 
characterizes  an  unmixed  people  like  the  Kirghese.     The  songs  of  t 
Sarts,  in  fact,  like  their  race,  are  mixed,  and  exhibit  several  peculiaritie 
Some  are  full  of  tenderness,  the  object  of  affection  being  a  spotle 


in- 

i 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  91 

filter  garment,  and  so  somewhat  immodestly  dancing, 
ind  then  kneeling  and  making  motions  towards  us 
.vith  their  hands.  Our  choristers  favoured  us  with 
^ome  prayers  or  sacred  songs  in  Tajik,  one  old  man 
screaming  up  dreadfully  high,  after  which,  by  way  of 
^.jiale,  I  asked  them  whether,  as  they  had  done  their 
3est  to  entertain  us,  they  would  like  to  hear  a  song 
Tom  me.  Upon  their  replying  in  the  affirmative,  I 
vvondered  how  best  to  hit  their  musical  taste  :  whether 
with  something  sacred  or  secular,  grave  or  gay ;  for  the 
words  would  in  any  case  be  lost  upon  them.  I  decided 
in  favour  of  a  rapid  movement  rather  than  a  slow  one, 
and,  without  remembering  exactly  all  the  words,  I  sang 
them  ''  Twickenham  Ferry,"  at  the  end  of  each  verse 
of  which  comes  the  refrain  : 

*'  O  hoi-ye-ho,  ho-ye-ho,  ho-ye-ho,  ho  !  " 
I  also  sang  them  another  song,  and  had  each  time 
a  most  attentive  audience,  but  was  not  a  little  amused 
afterwards  to  hear  that  they  had  detected  the  repetition 
of  "  O  hoi-ye-ho,  ho-ye-ho,  ho  !  "  and  thought  that  must 
be  a  prayer  !  I  wound  up  the  proceedings  by  lighting 
a  piece  of  magnesian  wire,  which  caused  them  no  little 
astonishment,  as  it  had  done  at  Kitab,  and  after  this 
we  retired  to  bed. 

My  slumbers,  however,  were  not  to  be  undisturbed, 

creature,  "pure  as  a  star"  ;  whilst  others,  on  the  contrary,  breathe  a 
coarse  passion  and  sensuality.  The  first,  probably,  are  pirated  from 
Persian  poets,  amongst  whom  one  Gafiz  was  a  Persian  luminary,  a 
singer  of  love,  who  has  given  his  name  to  all  singers.  Again,  the  Sart 
music  is  made  to  suit  the  varying  theme,  being  now  tender,  soft,  and 
pleasant,  and  then  harsh,  abrupt,  and  shrill.  The  songs  of  the  Kirghese 
have  not  this  variety,  but  have  a  character  of  their  own,  and  likewise  a 
peculiarity  of  execution  ;  for  whilst  the  Kirghese  sing  in  a  natural  tone, 
and  do  not  raise  their  voices,  the  Sarts  do  so  to  the  utmost,  and  often 
in  a  falsetto.  Lastly,  comparing  the  two  peoples,  the  Sarts  sing  some- 
times by  twos  in  unison,  whereas  the  oiliantchi  prefer  singing  by  turns, 
which  enables  them  to  improvise. 


92  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

for  first  we  were  aroused  by  "  the  watchmen  that  go 
about  the  city,"  who  had  some  dull  imitation  of  a  gong 
or  bell  wherewith  to  make  us  aware  of  their  presence, 
and  then  there  came  into  our  principal  court  a  howling 
cur,  ''  returned  at  evening  to  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and 
go  round  about  the  city.'"^  I  sallied  forth  with  a  lighted 
candle,  and  drove  out  the  dog,  but  was  afraid  of  going 
too  far  in  my  queer  ddshabille,  lest,  being  unable,  if 
discovered,  to  give  an  account  of  myself  in  the  ver- 
nacular, I  might  cause  the  natives  to  wonder  what  in 
the  world  I  was  about.  The  rules  concerning  keeping 
at  home  after  sunset  are  very  strict,  and  the  night 
myrmidons  in  the  pay  of  the  Mir-sheb,  or  chief  police- 
master  (called  KurbasJii  in  Samarkand),  think  little  of 
dealing  summarily  with  anyone  found  in  the  streets,! 
so  much  so  that  one  of  the  Russians  who  had  paid  us  an 
evening  visit,  and  who  left  quite  early,  did  not  like  to 
go  home  without  one  of  the  Emir's  attendants  to  accom- 
pany him.  Then,  again,  early  next  morning  we  were 
disturbed  by  bugle  calls  for  the  practising  of  the 
soldiers.  Accordingly,  when  the  messengers  came 
after  breakfast  from  the  Kush-beggi  to  inquire  for 
our  health,  and  to  ask  if  I  had  slept  well,  I  replied 
that  we  had  been  somewhat  disturbed  by  dogs  and 
watchmen,  but  that  on  the  morrow  we  should  like  to 
see  the  soldiers  practise.  Things  were  better  after- 
wards as  regards  watchmen  and    animals,    though  as 

*  Psalm  lix,  6.  I  never  had  so  lively  an  illustration  of  this  last 
figure  as  in  Constantinople,  where  every  street  was  monopolized  by 
ownerless  dogs.  They  did  not  obtrude  themselves  much  by  day,  but 
at  night  they  are  unmercifully  severe  upon  any  strange  dog  that  tres- 
passes into  their  particular  streets,  and  are  not  too  nice  in  barking  at 
if  not  even  attacking,  foot  passengers 

t  Thereby  illustrating  "  The  watchmen  that  went  about  the  city  founci 
me,  they  smote  me,  they  wounded  me ;  the  keepers  of  the  walls  took 
away  my  vail  from  me  "  (Cant.  v.  7  ;  iii.  3). 


94  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

for  my  seeing  the  soldiers  practise,  they  put  us  off  by 
saying  that  the  permission  of  the  Emir  must  be  asked, 
and  pretended  that  they  would  exercise  no  more  during 
our  stay.  Upon  this  I  twitted  the  courtiers  by  telling 
them  that  they  were  ashamed  to  let  us  see  their  soldiers, 
and  that  I  had  heard  how  badly  they  were  armed. 
They  replied  that  it  used  to  be  so,  and  that  formerly 
they  were  a  sorry  lot,  ''but  now,"  they  adroitly  added, 
*'  we  have  seen  and  learned  from  the  Russians,  as  the 
Russians  did  from  the  French  and  English." 

I  was  curious  to  be  present,  if  possible,  at  the 
preaching  of  a  Muhammadan  sermon  at  a  chief  function 
on  Friday,  which  is  the  Moslem  Sabbath.  Upon 
inquiry,  I  was  given  to  understand  that  the  Jumma, 
or  Friday  service,  would  be  held  at  noon  in  the  great 
mosque,  which,  in  theory,  ought  to  be  large  enough 
to  hold  all  the  Mussulmans  in  a  city.  On  the  morning, 
therefore,  of  the  day  in  question,  I  asked  to  be  taken, 
and  we  sallied  forth.  I  also  wished  to  visit,  I  said, 
the  synagogue  and  the  Jews'  quarter. 

By  this  time  I  was  fully  alive  to  the  fact  that  I  was 
not  to  be  allowed  to  see  too  much,  and  I  learned  that, 
from  my  continual  taking  of  notes,  I  was  suspected  of 
being  a  spy.*  Accordingly  our  conductors  seemed  not 
to  be  too  well  pleased  at  the  idea  of  my  seeing  the 
Jumma  service,  and  were  leading  us  off  first  to  the 
Jews'  quarter,  which  would  have  brought  us  to  the 
mosque  when  the  service  was  over.  I  detected  this, 
and  insisted  on  going  at  once  to  the  other  building, 
and,  in  due  time,  we  rode  up  to  the  great  mosque 
Baliand,  Buland,  or  Kelan.  The  front  of  it  was  orna- 
mented with  glazed  bricks,  some  of  which  were  fallen 

♦  A  very  old   suspicion   attaching  to  strangers  in  the  East ;   said 
Joseph  to  his  visitors,  "Ye  are  spies  "  (Gen.  xlii.  9). 


I 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  95 

away,  so  that  the  colouring  looked  worn  off.  Near 
at  hand  was  the  tall  minaret,  said  to  be  200  feet  high, 
ornamented  with  coloured  bricks  inlaid  in  elegant 
designs.  It  was  the  same  that  I  had  expressed  a 
wish  to  ascend.  I  now  looked  round  the  base  pretty 
thoroughly  to  see,  if  possible,  where  the  entrance  was 
made,  but  I  failed  ;  and  my  conductors  were  unwilling 
to  further  my  wishes,  and,  moreover,  began  to  scheme 
for  keeping  me  from  the  service,  by  proposing  that  I 
should  go  to  an  upper  story  of  the  Miri-arab  medresse, 
which  faced  the  great  mosque,  and  from  thence  look 
down  upon  the  Jumma.  I  counter-manoeuvred  this 
proposal  by  saying  that  I  would  ascend  to  the  upper 
parts  of  the  medresse  and  see  if  that  would  do  ;  for  I 
thought,  if  they  would  not  let  me  ascend  the  minaret, 
I  might  perhaps  get  an  extended  view  of  the  town 
from  the  college,  and  so  checkmate  them.  I  went  up 
accordingly,  but  found  that  the  view  was  nothing  for 
my  purpose,  since  it  overlooked  merely  the  roof  of  the 
palace  and  fortress,  and  I  therefore  came  down  at  once, 
saying  that  would  not  do,  and,  without  further  parley, 
entered  the  big  mosque  just  before  the  service  com- 
menced. My  conductors  seemed  anxious  to  put  me 
out  of  sight,  I  suppose  because  I  was  an  "  infidel," 
and  they  would  evidently  have  liked  that,  after  peeping 
in,  I  should  withdraw.  But  I  was  not  minded  so  to 
do.  Yakoob  appeared  to  take  sides  against  us,  and 
urged  that  the  people  would  look  at  us,  and  thus  lose 
the  benefit  of  their  prayers.  I  simply  replied,  ''  Then 
tell  them  not  to  look!"  This  mild  altercation  was 
going  on  near  a  corner  at  the  back  of  the  worshippers, 
when  suddenly  the  mullah's  voice  sounded.  This  put 
an  end  to  all  discussion,  and  the  Emir's  men,  with 
Yakoob  among  them,  went  off  to  take  their  places. 


96  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Sevier  and  I  were  now  left  with  Kolutch,  who 
remained  faithful  to  us,  calling  Yakoob  somewhat  of 
a  hypocrite,  for  that  he  had  put  on  in  Bokhara  a  white 
turban,  and  was  manifesting  Muhammadan  zeal  only 
to  curry  favour  with  the  local  authorities,  whilst  at 
other  times  and  places  he  did  not  even  observe  the 
stated  hours  of  prayer.  As  for  Kolutch,  I  suspect 
that  holding  the  office  of  a  djiguitt  in  the  service  of 
the  Russians  had  not  strengthened  his  Muhamma- 
danism,  and,  without  our  asking,  he  quietly  wrapped 
up  a  garment  for  me  to  sit  on,  and  we  all  three  took 
our  places  against  the  wall,  and  quietly  watched  the 
proceedings. 

I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  in  this  mosque  that 
Jinghiz  Khan  turned  loose  his  dogs  of  war  on  the  town. 
They  told  us  it  was  about  350  years  old,  but  Burnes 
says  that  "  its  cupola,  once  shaken  by  an  earthquake 
was  repaired  hy  iho.  renowned  Timur,"  whilst  Vambery 
attributes  the  building  of  it  to  Timur,  and  its  restora 
tion  to  Abdullah  Khan.  It  is  one  of  the  most  soli 
constructions  in  Bokhara,  and  as  I  sat  within  I  felt 
exceedingly  glad  that  I  had  declined  to  be  shut  out ; 
for  the  service  was  wholly  unlike  any  form  of  Western 
congregational  worship  I  had  seen,  and  it  suggested 
to  my  mind  what,  in  some  degree,  may  have  been 
the  ancient  temple  service  in  Jerusalem.  The  interior 
of  the  great  mosque  at  Bokhara  consists  of  a  large 
unroofed,  entirely  open  court,  300  feet  square,  and 
capable  of  accommodating,  they  say,  10,000  wor- 
shippers. It  is  surrounded  by  what  Dr.  Schuyle 
calls  '*  a  wide,  vaulted  cloister  of  brick,  two  an 
sometimes  three  aisles  in  width,"  but  which  I  had  pu 
down  as  a  succession  of  colonnades.  They  brough 
to    my    mind    the    Hebrew    Bethesda    at    Jerusalem 


iS 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  97 

*'  having  five  porches "  or  stoas.*  In  front  of  us, 
and  at  the  end  opposite  the  entrance,  was  th^  pishtak, 
or  tall  fafade,  faced  with  coloured  bricks,  and  sur- 
mounted by  a  dome  over  the  two  arches,  forming 
the  sanctuary  we  had  seen  in  other  mosques,  where 
the  mullah  prays  ;  whilst  in  front  of  these  arches,  and 
standing  a  little  outside,  was  a  low  structure  that  I 
supposed  to  be  intended  for  a  pulpit  or  reading  place 

The  service  began  on  a  long  sustained  note,  uttered 
by  a  mullah  from  the  sanctuary,  upon  which  the  men 
arranged  themselves  in  ranks  with  strictest  precision  ; 
all  knelt,  then  rose  and  stood  praying  and  bowing  in 
silence.  Some  of  the  worshippers  knelt  in  clusters  of 
two  and  three,  but  always  in  a  line.  Looking  under 
one  of  the  covered  stoas  I  saw  a  man  whom  I  was 
uncharitable  enough  to  fix  upon,  in  imagination,  as  the 
Pharisee,  "who  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray."  He 
\  was  clad  in  a  crimson  velvet  robe,  with  the  purest  of 
white  turbans,  and  had  taken  ''  a  chief  room  in  the 
synagogue,"  whilst  a  poor  fellow  with  bare  feet,  whom 
I  thought  to  be  the  publican,  came  in  later,  took  a 
hindmost  place,  where,  having  no  costly  prayer-cloth 
on  which  to  perform  his  devotions,  he  took  off  his 
upper  coat,  laid  it  on  the  ground,  and  so  prayed 
"  standing  afar  off."  As  for  the  behaviour  of  the  con- 
gregation, I  can  only  speak  of  it  as  most  reverential. 
One  or  two  did  now  and  then  look  round  at  the  infidel 
strangers  in  the  corner,  showing  that  Yakoob's  fear 
was    not    altogether   groundless;  but    their  eyes  were 

*  It  was  not  "  a  high  day"  when  we  were  there,  and  I  estimated 
the  number  of  worshippers  as  not  exceeding  500,  but  one  had  only  to 
imagine  the  people  pouring  into  the  city  by  thousands  on  a  festival  to 
be  reminded  of  the  place  "whither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the 
Lord,  unto  the  testimony  of  Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the 
Lord"  (Psalm  cxxii.  4). 

+  John  V.  2. 
VOL.  XL  7 


98  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

quickly  withdrawn,  and  the  service,  as  a .  whole, 
was,  outwardly,  far  more  decorous  than  that  of  an 
average  Christian  assembly,  whether  Anglican,  Roman, 
or  Greek. 

Although  at  the  extreme  end  and  out  of  doors, 
as  I  have  intimated,  we  could  hear  quite  plainly  the 
mullah's  words  from  the  sanctuary,  and  further  on  in 
the  service  some  sentences  were  uttered  by  another 
mullah  from  under  one  of  the  stoas  on  the  right,  about 
halfway  down.  Again  all  the  worshippers  stood,  then 
bowed  down,  and  next  prostrated  themselves  to  the 
ground,  after  which  I  was  told  the  "Jumma"  was  finished. 
Something  else  was  to  follow,  which  I  did  not  make 
out  to  be  of  the  nature  of  preaching,  but  rather  of 
staying  behind  for  private  prayer.  The  great  mass  of 
the  congregation  began  now  to  move,  and  with  their 
faces  towards  the  exit,  of  course  they  had  a  full  view 
of  the  ''  infidels."  The  Emir's  men  were  ready,  not  to 
say  in  haste,  to  take  me  off,  but  I  had  noticed  one 
thing  that  I  was  anxious  to  inspect.  It  very  much 
resembled  a  font,  and,  remembering  that  Nestorian 
Christianity  had  once  been  known  in  the  land,  I 
wondered  whether  this  object  could  have  come  down 
from  those  mediaeval  times.  Accordingly,  I  went  up 
to,  and  looked  around,  over,  and  under  it,  if  perchance 
there  might  be  on  it  some  Christian  emblem  or  device; 
but  whilst  so  doing  I  was  quickly  surrounded,  the 
crowd  looking,  I  fancied,  not  too  well  pleased,  so  that 
if  ever  I  felt  nervous  in  Bokhara,  it  was  at  that  moment, 
for  I  thought  they  might  misinterpret  what  I  was  doing^ 
and  set  upon  me,  as,  without  provocation,  a  man  assaulted 
and  attempted  to  kill  Dr.  Schuyler  while  examining  the 
shrine  of  a  saint.  I  did  not  linger,  therefore,  over 
inspection  ;  but,  seeing  nothing  that  led  me  to  suppo: 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 


99 


MEDRESSE   OF   ABDUL  AZIZ   KHAN. 


100  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  basin  to  be  of  Christian  origin,  I  joined  my  con- 
ductors, who  took  me  out  of  a  side  door,  sent  to 
Fazul  to  bring  our  horses  there,  and  hurried  us  off, 
seemingly  glad  to  get  us  away. 

There  were  some  few  other  Muhammadan  religious 
buildings  we  entered  in  Bokhara.  One  I  have  noted 
down  as  the  Jumma  mosque  of  Abdul  Aziz  Khan,  said 
to  have  been  built  about  200  years,  and  to  hold  2,000 
people.  There  is  also  a  medresse,  named  after  that  same 
Khan.  At  the  Mosque  of  Hazret  Imlah,  132  years 
old,  we  saw  the  tomb  of  the  great  saint  Imlah,  where- 
on were  two  spear-heads,  and  above,  a  pole  with  a 
horse-tail  suspended.  Lastly,  at  the  Hazret  Haifa 
Khu-daidat  was  a  covered  cistern,  where  sick  people 
drink  the  water  for  recovery.  Pious  turbaned  Yakoob 
went  down  to  taste,  but,  having  so  done,  made  a 
grimace,  and  said  the  water  stank.  We  saw  com- 
paratively few  monumental  inscriptions,  but  at  this 
well,  over  the  door,  it  was  written  in  Persian  that  the 
building  stood  71  years,  was  then  destroyed,  andj 
rebuilt  28  years  ago. 

We  went  afterwards  to  the  Hindu  Sarai,  somewhat 
similar  to  the  one  we  had  seen  in  Khokand.*  At 
Bokhara  the  Hindus  lie  under  the  same  disabilities  as 
the  Jews.     They  paint  a  red  circle  about  two  inches  in 

*  At  Khokand  we  found  in  the  priest's  house  a  reading-room,  and  a 
temple.  In  the  former  was  a  central  seat,  or  dais,  something  like  a 
bedstead,  also  a  sacred  book,  written  in  Hindustani,  laid  open,  but 
having  a  cover  with  pendants,  and  a  brush  of  peacocks'  feathers  to 
keep  off  flies.  There  was  a  priest  and  his  attendant,  who  opened 
for  us  in  the  temple  the  doors  of  a  shrine,  in  a  cupboard,  with  pictures 
■of  Vishnu  and  offerings  of  flowers,  incense,  candy,  and  apples.  When 
Bishop  Alexander,  from  Vierny,  visited  them,  they  said  he  explained 
the  pictures.  There  were  also  stones  placed  in  the  altar,  said  to  have 
been  found  by  saints,  but  the  priest  would  not  suffer  me  to  touch  them.j 
He  seemed  pleased  with  our  visit,  and  offered  us  candy  and  appk 
There  are  about  30  Hindus  at  Khokand,  all  usurers. 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  loi 

diameter  on  their  forehead — whether  by  compulsion  or 
for  glory  and  beauty  I  know  not — and  they  wear  the 
black  calico  cap  and  girdle  of  string.  Their  temple 
in  Bokhara  was  carpeted,  and  we  found  therein  a 
looking-glass,  with  a  musical-box,  a  lectern,  and  a 
cupboard  with  books ;  but  I  doubted  whether  they 
had  the  freedom  of  religious  worship  that  their  co- 
religionists enjoyed  in   Khokand, 

Since  my  guides  had  baffled  me  in  mounting  the 
minaret,  whence  I  might  form  an  idea  of  the  area  of 
the  city,  I  determined  to  go  round  its  walls,  and,  there- 
fore, asked  to  be  taken  to  one  of  the  gates,  keeping  my 
counsel  till  I  got  outside  the  portal  of  the  Saleh-Kaneh. 
Then  I  told  my  conductors  what  I  wished  to  do,  where- 
upon they  began  to  raise  objections  ;  but  by  this  time 
I  was  disposed  to  have  my  own  way.  So  I  gave  my 
horse  his  head.  Diotrephes  had  not  had  a  gallop  all 
day,  and,  after  creeping  through  the  crowded  streets, 
was  quite  prepared  for  a  run.  Sevier,  Kolutch,  and 
Fazul  followed,  and  we  soon  put  space  between  us 
and  the  malcontents,  among  whom  Yakoob  stayed 
behind  to  curry  favour,  as  we  supposed,  with  the 
Emir's  grandees.  This  galloping  off  was  very  undig- 
nified, according  to  Bokhariot  ideas,  but  we  enjoyed 
immensely  the  race  and  the  pleasure  of  being  pursued. 
We  passed  the  Kuale  or  Karshi  gate  by  which  we  had 
arrived,  then  the  Mazar  gate  that  leads  to  the  famous 
shrine  of  Boghu-eddin,  on  to  the  Samarkand  and  Imam 
gates,  the  Urlan,  or  Uglan,  and  Talipaj.  By  this  time 
the  run  had  given  a  wet  jacket  to  horses  and  men. 
The  temperature  had  been  rather  fresh  in  the  morning, 
and  Kolutch  had  put  on  his  best  fur-lined  khalat. 
This  he  now  opened,  and  held  up  to  show  me  how  wet 
he  was,   and  how  his  horse's  sweat  had  damaged  his 


102  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

garment.  It  became  a  question,  therefore,  how  long 
we  were  to  continue,  for  in  about  half-an-hour  we  had 
compassed  7  out  of  the  1 1  gates  of  the  city,  a  distance 
of  about  5  miles,  and  to  continue  our  flight  beyond  the 
Talipaj  gate  appeared  to  require  our  making  a  ddtour. 
I  decided,  therefore,  to  re-enter  the  city,  and  to  finish 
the  circuit,  if  possible,  on  the  morrow.  We  had  met 
scarce  anyone  in  galloping  round  the  w^alls,  save  one 
or  two  persons  winding  silk,  and  these  looked  not  a 
little  astonished  at  our  headlong  career.  Kolutch, 
before  the  invasion  of  the  Russians,  had  lived  in 
Bokhara,  and  so  was  able  to  pilot  us  back  to  the 
embassy,  where  we  had  a  wash,  and  calmly  awaited 
the  arrival  of  our  custodians.  Fortunately,  the  old 
fellow,  into  whose  special  keeping  we  appeared  to  be 
committed,  took  the  thing  pleasantly,  and  made  the 
best  of  it.  He  even  complimented  us  upon  our  horse- 
manship, but  I  said  that  we  thought  small  things  of 
anything  we  could  do,  being  accustomed  only  to  caper 
about  in  a  riding-school,  and  one  of  us  not  that,  but 
that  we  had  heard  the  Bokhariots  were  splendid  riders, 
to  which  he  replied  that  anyhow  we  held  in  our  horses 
remarkably  well  ;  and  so  the  matter  for  the  present 
ended,  the  old  man  telling  us  that  he  had  followed  us,' 
inquiring  at  one  gate  after  another  whether  we  had 
entered.  This  was  not  the  last  unwilling  gallop  we 
gave  the  old  gentleman,  but  we  had  immensely  enjoyed 
our  first,  though  not  without  some  little  fear  of  rebuke 
for  our  insubordination. 


I 


CHAPTER   LI. 

THE  JEWS   OF  BOKHARA. 

My  plans  concerning  the  Jews. — Inquiry  about  the  alleged  persecutions 
in  Moscow  and  South  Russia. — Russia :  how  regarded  by  Western 
and  Eastern  Jews. — Oppressed  condition  of  Jews  in  Bokhara. — 
Visits  to  their  synagogue,  and  their  sick. — Inquiry  for  Hebrew 
manuscripts. — Hints  concerning  their  technicalities. — Wonderful 
manuscript  of  the  Old  Testament. — Fear  of  the  Jews  to  receive  us. 
— My  letter  to  the  Emir  on  their  behalf. 

I    HAD  looked  forward  with  great  interest  to  what 
I  might  see  and  learn  in    Bokhara  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  Jews,  and,  in  crossing  Europe,  had  called 
on    some  of  the  rabbis,  telling  them  of  my  intended 
journey,  and  my  willingness  to  be  of  use,  if  possible, 
to    their    countrymen,    though     I    was    not    sanguine 
that  I  could  do  much.      ''Ah!  that's  right,"  said  one 
old  Israelite,   "  they  are  much  oppressed  in  Bokhara, 
and  stand  in  need  of  help."     I  took  occasion  also,  on 
some  of  these  visits,  to  ask  concerning  the  then  recent 
persecutions  of  the  Jews  in  Russia.    I  had  been  present 
at  the    Mansion   House  meeting  in  the  early  part  of 
1882,  convoked  on  behalf  of  the  persecuted,  and  had 
been  favoured,  as  I  have  said,  with  a  letter  from  the 
Lord  Mayor  as  Chairman  of  the  Jewish  Relief  Fund. 
This  letter  I  showed,  so  that  they  might  see  I  was  in 
every  way  friendly   to  them   and  their  cause  ;  yet    I 


104  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

must  confess  that  the  accounts  from  the  rabbis'  mouths 
relative  to  the  sufferings  of  their  people  seemed  much 
less  than  the  newspapers  had  led  us  to  believe. 

To  begin  with  Moscow.  I  was  told  how  the  troubles 
there  began  with  the  revival  by  the  Minister  Ignatieff 
of  old  regulations  against  the  Jews,  which  the  authori- 
ties had  for  a  long  time  allowed  them  to  break,  though 
the  laws  had  not  been  repealed  ;  and  further,  that  the 
Jews  had  not  suffered  personal  violence  by  order, 
though  the  police,  in  some  cases,  had  hastened  to 
drive  away  from  the  town  some  women  among  others 
who  were  sick,  and  unfit  to  travel,  until  a  petition  was 
presented  to  Prince  Dolgorouki,  the  Governor,  who 
thereon  manifested  his  sympathy  with  the  sufferers, 
and  showed  a  desire  to  mitigate,  as  far  as  possible, 
the  carrying  out  of  the  minister's  edict.  After  this, 
things  were  less  severe.  At  the  same  time  it  could 
not  be  denied  that  the  Jews,  in  certain  parts  of  Russia, 
suffered  under  many  disabilities.  I  asked  one  Jew  to 
tell  me  succinctly  what  these  disabilities,  or  some  of 
them,  were.  To  this  he  replied,  "A  Jew  may  not 
trade  in  the  interior  unless  a  merchant  of  the  first 
guild,  or  after  being  a  merchant  five  years  in  the 
provinces.  Jewish  artisans  may  dwell  in  the  interior 
with  strangers'  passports  only,  and  not  as  citizens ; 
the  police,  moreover,  allowing  them  to  practise  only 
their  own  trades.  Again,  suppose  that  a  man  has 
made  a  fortune,  he  may  not  buy  a  house  and  live  in 
the  interior.  His  wife  might  live  there,  and  be  a 
dressmaker,  but  if  he  remains  unoccupied,  he  must 
go  away."  By  "■  the  interior "  is  meant  Petersburg, 
Moscow,  and  certain  other  localities  where,  the  laws 
not  having  been  rigorously  carried  out,  many  from 
the  provinces  had  settled  unrebuked,  and  the  turning 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  105 

out  of  some  two  or  three  thousand  of  these  people 
at  the  previous  Easter  had  cost  the  Jewish  com- 
munity from  ^500  to  ^600  to  send  them  to  their 
former  homes  in  the  provinces.  This,  however,  did 
not  exhaust  the  Hst  oi  gravamina.  "  If  a  Jew,"  my 
informant  continued,  "  has  passed  the  university,  he 
may,  in  theory,  enter  the  service  of  the  State,  but  not 
practically.  For  instance,  only  just  before,  an  order 
had  been  issued  by  the  Minister  of  War  that  among 
the  military  physicians  the  Jewish  element  should  not 
form  more  than  5  per  cent.  Also,  on  the  Exchange, 
a  Jew  could  not  be  a  broker,  and  the  right  to  trade  in 
spirits,  or  make  them,  is  forbidden  in  the  interior,  even 
to  Jewish  merchants  of  the  first  guild.  Again,  in  the 
interior,  Ignatieff  had  lately  ordered  that  a  Jew  might 
not  be  an  apothecary,  or  manager  for  an  apothecary. 
The  same  authority  had  forbidden  to  the  Jews  in  the 
west,  for  the  time  being  at  all  events,  to  buy  or  even 
to  hire  land.  Even  in  Moscow  it  appeared  that  the 
Israelites  had  not  a  piece  of  land  of  their  own  whereon 
to  build  a  synagogue  or  a  school,  though  this  is  allowed 
to  Lutherans,  and  also  to  Muhammadans.  Once  more, 
by  Russian  law,  if  in  a  high  school  there  are  a  certain 
number  of  Jewish  children,  a  rabbi  should  be  allowed 
to  teach  them  ;  but  this  was  forbidden  in  one  large 
town  at  least  that  I  heard  of,  and  the  rabbi  not 
allowed  to  have  them  even  at  his  own  house.  Lastly, 
the  Jews  have  no  rights  as  a  community."* 

*  It  is  singular  to  compare  the  remains  of  Christian  persecution  of 
the  Jews  in  Russia  and  the  Muhammadan  persecution  of  the  IsraeHtes 
in  Central  Asia,  with  a  letter  written  towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century  by  Isaac  Zarphati,  a  refugee,  who  then  found  in  Turkey  the 
shelter  denied  him  by  Christians  in  Germany.  He  says  : — "  They  (the 
Christians)  imagine  that  their  religion  is  in  danger,  because  the  Jews  in 
Jerusalem  may,  peradventure,  purchase  the  Church  of  the  Sepulchre. 
For  this  reason  they  have  issued  a  decree  that  every  Jew  who  is  found 


io6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  have  set  down  these  things  as  they  came  to  me 
from  Jewish  lips,  without  having  had  the  opportunity 
of  hearing  of  what  explanation  they  may  be  capable, 
or  what  may  be  said  to  the  contrary.  As  we  were 
travelling,  one  gentleman  was  heard  to  say,  "  These 
English  are  greatly  shocked  about  the  treatment  of 
the  Jews  in  Russia  ;  but  it  would  not  be  so  if  they 
understood  how  the  Jew  money-lenders  fleece  the 
peasants  when  they  get  them  into  their  hands."  This 
was  only  an  echo  of  what  a  Polish  nobleman  said, 
when  I  asked  him,  in  Warsaw,  why  they  disliked  the 
Jews,  and  he  replied,  "  Because  by  money-lending 
they  get  all  power  in  their  hands,  and  distress  their 
debtors."  To  which  I  simply  replied,  "  Then  why 
go  to  them  ?  The  remedy  is  in  your  own  hands.  Don't 
borrow !  "  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  Jewish  element  in  Russia  is  comparatively 
large  ;  and  with  reference  to  one  prohibition,  that  of 
liquor,  though  the  Hebrew  is  sober  himself,  he 
does  not  object  to  deal  out  for  gain  this  curse  of 
humanity,  and  there  are  parts  where  the  Jews  have 
got  into  their  hands  the  grog-shops  of  the  district  to 
the  great  demoralization  and  ruin  of  the  people. 
Whether,  in  their  absence,  someone  else  might  not 
do  the  same,  I  am  unprepared  to  say.      I  simply  notice 

in  a  Christian  ship,  sailing  for  the  East,  is  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea  .... 
I  proclaim  to  you  that  Turkey  is  a  land  in  which  nothing-  is  wanted 
....  Is  it  not  better  to  live  among  Mahomedans  than  Christians  - 
Here  we  are  allowed  to  dress  in  the  finest  materials  ....  while  in 
Christian  countries  you  are  not  even  permitted  to  dress  your  children  in 
red  or  blue,  without  exposing  them  to  be  beaten  red  or  blue.  Hence 
you  are  obliged  to  walk  about  like  beggars,  and  in  rags  !  They  invent 
lying  accusations  against  you  ....  They  always  inflict  upon  you  double 
punishment  ....  They  prohibit  the  instruction  in  our  schools.  And 
now,  O  Israel,  arise  and  quit  this  cursed  land  ! " — See  Massoreth-ha- 
Massoreth  of  E lias  Levtta,  by  Christian  D.  Ginsburg,  1867,  p.  6. 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  107 

what  I  believe  to  be  the  fact.  I  met  one  Intelligent 
Russian  lady,  who  began  to  put  things  before  me  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  Russian  Government ;  but, 
unfortunately,  our  Interview  was  cut  short  ;  and  hence, 
personally,  I  do  not  consider  that  I  have  heard 
properly  both  sides  of  the  question. 

When,  on  my  return  journey  In  December,  I  reached 
South  Russia,  I  inquired  again  of  the  highest  authori- 
ties and  persons  most  likely  to  know  the  truth,  and 
they  said  things  In  Odessa  had  quieted  down,  and  that 
there  was  no  more  persecution  there  ;  further,  that  at 
the  outset  the  people  were  not  against  the  Jews,  but 
that  the  authorities  had  made  them  hostile,  and  that 
whilst  in  Balta,  Okna,  Smeela,  and  New  Prague,  there 
had  been  much  dishonouring  of  women,  it  was  not  so 
In  Odessa,  where  only  one  murder  had  been  known. 
I  heard,  however,  of  one  authority,  the  vigorous  Prince 
Dondukoff  Korsakoff,  going  Into  the  streets  himself  in 
a  riot,  and  punishing  one  persecutor  with  his  own  fists. 
English  opinion  In  Odessa  went  to  say  that  at  the  very 
first  the  newspaper  accounts  made  things  out  worse 
than  they  were,  but  that  the  rectification  of  the  error 
sent  the  pendulum  too  far  in  the  opposite  direction, 
and  then  the  English  people  would  not  believe  enough. 
I  thought  perhaps  I  might  see  a  little  into  the  state 
of  affairs  by  going  to  the  Russian  frontier,  where  the 
refugees  were  gathered,  and  the  committee  of  relief 
were  sitting.  At  Odessa  they  said  I  should  find  at 
Brody  a  few  hundred,  or,  perhaps,  a  thousand  families. 
I,  therefore,  went  out  of  my  way,  though  sorely  pressed, 
and  spent  a  day  In  going  there,  but  not  to  much 
purpose.  I  found  indeed  a  committee  sitting,  at  the 
end  of  their  labours,  and  a  few  men,  women,  and 
children  being  brought  into  the  room  to  be  portioned 


io8  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

off;  most  of  them  fairly  well  dressed,  many  of  them 
young  men  with  young  wives,  and  most  suitable 
persons  to  emigrate ;  but  if  I  am  to  be  candid,  I 
confess  to  the  suspicion,  that,  whether  persecution 
had  anything  to  do  with  it  or  not,  such  young  husbands 
might  be  very  glad  to  get  away  from  Russia  to  avoid 
military  conscription.  I  presented  my  Lord  Mayor's 
letter,  and  was  asked  to  sit  down  ;  but  the  meeting 
being  over  in  about  an  hour,  I  was  left  to  go  my  way. 
Thus  much  for  the  Western  Jews,  who  looked  upon 
the  Russians  as  their  oppressors  ;  whereas,  when  I  got 
to  Samarkand,  the  Eastern  Jews  regarded  the  Russians 
as  their  deliverers,  and  the  Israelites  of  Bokhara 
longed  for  the  Tsar  to  gain  possession  of  them  as 
subjects.  I  took  an  early  opportunity  of  securing  a 
private  interview  in  Bokhara  with  Jews  to  whom  I 
had  letters,  but  they  appeared  to  be  in  great  fear  of 
being  heard  or  seen  talking  to  me.  Formerly,  they 
said,  it  was  death  to  speak  to  a  Russian,  but  that  now 
they  might  do  so  on  matters  of  business  ;  but  for  all 
that,  despised  as  they  were,  they  did  not  dare  presume 
to  accept  my  invitation  to  visit  us  at  the  embassy.* 
Vambery  speaks  of  the  Jews  coming  to  Bokhara  from 
Kazim  and  Merv  150  years  since,  but  those  on  the 
spot  told  me  600  or  700  years  ago,  and  that  most 
came  from   Persia,   but  some  from  Tunis,  and  among 

*  More  than  one  prophecy  respecting  the  Jews  seems  fulfilled  in  their 
condition  in  Bokhara,  for  they  are  truly  "a  proverb  and  a  by-word" 
among  the  people  (Deut.  xxviii.  T^y  ;  i  Kings  ix.  7).  They  still  "dwell 
alone"  (as  once  in  the  ghettos  of  Europe),  "not  reckoned  among  the 
nations"  (Num.  xxiii.  9),  and  these  verses  are  still  startlingly  true: 
"  Among  these  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  ease,  neither  shall  the  sole  of 
thy  foot  have  rest ;  but  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  there  a  trembling  heart, 
and  failing  of  eyes  and  sorrow  of  mind :  and  thy  life  shall  hang  in 
doubt  before  thee  :  and  thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt  have 
none  assurance  of  thy  life"  (Deut.  xxviii.  65,  66). 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  109 

the  latter,  one  named  Malman.  This  man,  or  a  relative, 
was  here  in  the  time  of  Dr.  Wolff's  visit.  I  heard  of 
him  as  far  off  as  Petersburg,  where  he  was  known  to 
the  English  Consul  through  having  become  a  British 
subject,  and  a  mercantile  gentleman  has  told  me 
that  when  Maiman  came  to  London  he  astonished 
the  English  merchants  by  his  skilful  knowledge  of 
cochineal.  Maiman's  son,  or  grandson,  was  said  to 
speak  French,  if  not  English,  and  I  was  told  at  Moscow 
to  inquire  for  him,  but  I  found  that  he  had  been 
killed  in  the  Russian  service.  Some  of  the  Bokhara 
Jews  had  travelled  to  Europe,  and  one  spoke  a  few 
words  of  French,  but  not  enough  to  converse.  I 
showed  my  letters,  and  asked  the  Jews  if  there  was 
anything  that  I  could  do  for  them, — an  offer  they  were 
disposed  at  first  to  embrace.  They  thought  I  might 
ask  the  Emir  to  release  any  Jewish  prisoners  he  now 
has,  and  this  request  seemed  to  be  made  with  reference 
to  a  former  chief  rabbi,  who  1 5  years  before  had  been 
arrested,  his  goods  confiscated,  himself  forced  to  turn 
Muhammadan,  and  then  left  to  serve  in  the  palace, 
where  he  is  kept  a  prisoner  still,  and  not  allowed  to 
go  out  of  the  fortress.  But  upon  further  thoughts, 
they  considered  that  to  ask  for  his  release  might  lead 
to  his  being  put  to  death,  and  that  my  request  was 
more  likely  to  bring  evil  than  good  upon  them  for 
their  mentioning  the  matter  to  me,  so  that  they  depre- 
cated my  attempting  anything  on  their  behalf. 

On  the  Friday,  as  I  have  said,  I  expressed  a  wish 
to  see  the  synagogue,  reputed  to  be  500  years  old.  We 
passed  through  a  narrow  entrance,  and  came  into  a 
room,  perhaps  50  feet  square,  which  had  no  pretence 
to  architectural  beauty.  There  was  a  reading  desk 
of  marble,  and  on  this  they  began  to  show  me  their 


no  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

manuscripts  and  books.  I  had  read  in  Dr.  Wolff's 
memoir  that  the  Jews  of  Bokhara  had  a  manuscript 
of  the  prophet  Daniel,  wherein,  in  Chapter  viii.  14,  the 
words  ''  Unto  two  thousand  and  three  hundred  days," 
read  ''2,400"  days  (which  agrees  with  the  Vatican 
copy  of  the  Septuagint,  whilst  the  Armenian  transla- 
tion reads  2,068),  but  I  could  not  find  this  manuscript 
in  the  synagogue.  They  showed  me,  however,  a  large 
number  of  old  torahs,  or  copies  of  the  law,  thrown 
together  pell-mell  on  a  platform  or  loft,  midway 
between  the  floor  and  the  ceiling,  which  I  suppose  in 
this  case  represented  their  genizak*  Nothing  would 
satisfy  me  short  of  being  allowed  to  mount  the  plat- 
form, and  see  and  handle  the  manuscripts,  so  that  I 
might  convince  myself  that,  as  the  rabbi  asserted,  they 
were  not  ancient.  A  ladder  was  brought,  therefore, 
and  up  I  went,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  Jews  who 
spoke  a  few  words  of  French,  which  when  my  custo- 
dians discovered,  they  were  on  tenterhooks,  lest  we 
should  speak  privately,  and  they  requested  that  I 
would  speak  all  I  had  to  say  through  my  interpreter. 
They  also  made  it  apparent  to  the  Jew  that  they  did 
not  like  his  being  on  the  platform  with  me.  He 
remained,  however,  whilst  I  looked  at  one  or  two, 
which  did,  indeed,  appear  to  be  what  I  had  been 
told — namely,  disused  Torahs — though  in  some  cases 
apparently  not  much  soiled.  I  found  it  was  customary 
for  persons  to  leave  at  their  death  a  sufficiency  of 
money  to  purchase  a  new  manuscript  for  the  syna- 
gogue, and  I  inferred  that  this  must  be  a  popular  fori 

*  It  is  in  such  a  place  the  Jews  put  their  copies  of  the  law  that  ai 
soiled  or  ritually  unfit  for  use,  if  only,  for  instance,  a  single  w^ord 
i-ubbed  out  by  wear.     So  literally  do  they  interpret  the  passage,  " 
shall  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I  command  you,  neither  shall 
diminish  ought  from  it"  (Deut.  iv.  2). 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  in 

of  legacy  in  Bokhara,  for  I  should  estimate  there  may 
have  been  20  or  30  on  the  loft,  covered  with  dust,  and 
otherwise  not  inviting  to  a  further  search. 

There  was,  moreover,  another  obstacle  to  my  inves- 
tigation just  then,  inasmuch  as  the  Jews  had  crowded 
in  on  the  very  tiptoe  of  expectation  as  to  what  the 
foreigners  could  mean  by  visiting  their  synagogue  ; 
and  when  I  presented  to  the  rabbi  my  Jewish  letters, 


A  JEW   OF   CENTRAL  ASIA. 


written  in  "  the  holy  language,"  they  swarmed  round, 
leaving  us  scarcely  breathing-room.  Some  of  the 
boys  with  their  coal-black  eyes  were  extremely  hand- 
some, but  of  all  the  crowds  I  have  ever  been  in,  I 
can  remember  none  like  those  of  the  Asiatic  Jews  at 
Khokand,  Samarkand,  and  Bokhara.  They  were  not 
disrespectful  or  rude,  and  they  made  way  when  I 
wished  to  move,  but  the  curiosity  depicted  on  their 
countenances  was  most  striking.     We  were,  I  suppose. 


112    '  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  first  Englishmen  they  had  seen,  and  that  might 
have  gone  for  something  ;  but  I  fancy  it  raised  their 
wonderment  more  that  two  guests  of  the  Emir, 
living  in  the  best  embassy  in  the  town,  should  bring 
them  a  letter  in  their  own  tongue,  come  down  to  their 
synagogue,  and  instead  of  despising  them,  as  did  the 
haughty  Muhammadans,  be  willing  to  enter  their  houses 
and  attend  their  sick — for  we  had  promised  so  to  do. 
Hence  the  people  had  come  not  in  ones  and  twos,  but 
in  crowds,  and  as  we  left  the  synagogue  not  only  did 
they  fill  the  passage,  but  some  had  clambered  up  to 
the  tops  of  the  walls  and  the  roofs  of  the  houses. 

As  for  our  Moslem  custodians,  all  this  excitement 
greatly  perturbed  them,  and  it  seemed  to  ''  grieve  them^ 
exceedingly  that  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the 
welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel."*  Moreover,  when 
they  discovered  that  the  Jews  were  asking  us  to  theii 
houses,  they  made  efforts  to  prevent  us,  by  what  sort 
of  arguments  I  do  not  know,  for  I  cut  matters  short 
by  addressing  our  dominus  in  a  few  words  of  rouncff 
Saxon,  telling  him  to  hold  his  tongue,  and  speaking  iiM 
tones  that  conveyed  to  him  my  intention  of  going, 
whether  he  liked  it  or  not.  Then,  turning  to  the  man 
who  wished  our  help,  I  motioned  to  him  to  lead  the 
way  whilst  I  and  Sevier  followed,  leaving  our  guardians 
to  do  as  they  pleased.  The  crowds  again  pressed  after 
us — with  too  much  freedom  I  suppose  Kolutch  thought 
for  these  despised  Jews, — for,  being  quick  of  temper, 
and  they  not  heeding  his  words  to  keep  back,  my  man 
assumed  the  policeman,  and  began  to  lay  about  him 
with  his  riding-whip  to  keep  them  at  a  respectful  dis- 
tance. The  poor  Jews  submitted  with  a  disappointed 
look,  as  if  such  treatment  were  only  too  common. 

*  Neh.  ii.  lo. 


THE  JEWS   OF  BOKHARA. 


113 


Meanwhile  we  had  arrived  with  the  man  whose 
daughter  was  sick,  the  multitude  crowding,  but  there 
entered  only  Yakoob  and  a  few  more,  and  the  father 
and  mother  of  the  girl.  The  women  were  not  veiled, 
and,  Englishman  like,  I  offered  my  hand  to  the  mother, 
who  took  it,  though  I  have  been  since  told  that  it  is 
contrary  to  rabbinical  teaching  for  a  woman  to  shake 
hands  with  a  man.  Then,  looking  at  the  girl,  we  found 
her  suffering  from  ophthalmia.  Sevier  prescribed,  or 
promised  medicine,  and  then  we  were  entreated  to  go 


^^E 

R^H 

^nvTft) Y  ^i^    ^^1 1 

Wmwim 

WlK    'V  vlmt 

Ib 

A   JEWESS   OF    BOKHAKA. 


to  another  patient,  at  some  little  distance.  We  went, 
to  find  an  old  rabbi  with  a  paralyzed  limb  ;  and  when 
Sevier  stooped  to  examine  it,  the  patriarch  was 
affected  to  tears,  and,  placing  his  hands  on  Sevier's 
head,  he  gave  him  his  blessing.  Sevier  would  have 
recommended  galvanism  for  his  legs  and  back,  but  as 
that  was  not  to  be  had  in  Bokhara,  he  wrote  a  pre- 
scription to  be  made  up  at  Samarkand.  I  do  not 
know  whether  by  this  time  the  Emir's  men  thought 
they  had  gone  too  far,  but  they  must  have  seen  that  I 

VOL.  II.  8 


114  JIUSSIA.V  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

was  annoyed,  and  they  accordingly  proceeded  apolo- 
getically to  explain  that  with  the  crowds  pressing  round 
they  were  apprehensive  for  my  safety,  and  hence  their 
desire  that  I  should  not  venture  into  the  houses.  Fruit 
was  now  offered  us  in  the  rabbi's  house,  which  we  sat 
down  and  ate,  and  talked,  hearing  nothing,  however, 
of  ancient  books  or  writings. 

I  had  thought  it  possible,  before  leaving  England, 
that  I  might  find  a  Hebrew  manuscript  or  two  worth 
bringing  home,  and  not  trusting  to  my  slender  acquaint- 
ance with  Hebrew  I  went  to  the  British  Museum  and 
consulted  on  the  subject  Dr.  Ginsburg,  who  has  spent 
a  quarter  of  a  century  in  the  praiseworthy  but  thankless 
occupation  of  editing  the  ''  Massorah,"  a  work  that  will 
hand  down  his  name  among  the  learned  to  posterity, 
although  pecuniarily  it  promises  to  be  an  unrequited 
labour.*  Dr.  Ginsburg  was  kind  enough  to  tell  me 
what  kind  of  manuscripts  would  be  worth  buying,  and 
the  contrary,  also  by  what  signs  I  might  judge  approxi- 
mately as  to  their  antiquity  or  otherwise.  I  had  also 
spoken  upon  the  same  subject,  and  received  one  or  twc 
hints  from  Dr.  Albert  Harkavy,  of  the  Imperial  Librarx 
at   Petersburg. t     Accordingly,  I   left  Petersburg  duh 

*  The  price  at  which  the  first  volume  was  published  did  not  cover  th' 
cost  of  paper  and  print,  so  that  Dr.  Ginsburg  might  say,  only  in  ; 
wider  sense,  as  did  Jacob  ibn  Adonijah  before  him,  "  This  was  a  labou 
of  love,  for  the  benefit  of  our  brethren,  the  children  of  Israel,  and  fo 
the  glory  of  our  holy  and  perfect  law";  and  the  Tz'mes  might  we' 
admiringly  add,  "  That  such  a  work  as  this  edition  of  the  '  Massorah 
should  be  completed  by  the  unaided  labours  of  one  man  is,  indeed, 
singular  illustration,  unhappily  rare  in  this  age,  of  scholarly  enthusiasr 
and  perseverance." 

t  The  outcome  of  these  hints  was  somewhat  as  follows  :  Buy  r 
Korans  or  Persian  manuscripts ;  nothing,  in  fact,  but  Hebrev 
Chaldee,  and  Syriac.  Rolls  of  the  Pentateuch  and  Esther  do  not  touch 
rolls  of  other  books,  yes.  Manuscripts  in  book  form  generally  may  I 
examined,  even  of  the  Pentateuch  :  the  larger  the  characters,  and  tl 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  115 

primed,  and,  strange  to  say,  met  my  first  manuscript 
at  Moscow,  recently  arrived  from  Bokhara  by  the 
hands  of  a  Jew,  who  was  said  to  have  acquired  it  at 
a  cost  of  ^500.  This,  they  informed  me,  was  about 
;^300  more  than  a  Hebrew  manuscript,  with  points, 
of  the  whole  Bible  would  cost.  I  began  to  apply  my 
tests,  and  fancied  that  I  had  made  my  little  learning 
go  a  long  way,  for  pointing  out  to  the  learned  rabbi 
who  showed  it  me,  that  n  and  n  were  differently 
formed,  likewise  1  and  "»,  and  that  consequently  the 
manuscript  could  not  be  very  ancient,  the  old  bookworm 
said  to  his  fellow-rabbi  in  German,  which  he  thought  I 
should  not  understand,  ''  That's  a  knowing  fellow  ! " 
The  manuscript  struck  me  as  of  singular  beauty, 
by  reason  of  its  marvellous  illumination  and  the  fine- 
ness of  the  Massoretic  writing.  When  I  reached 
Bokhara  I  told  the  Jews  I  had  seen  the  manuscript, 
which  to  them  was  news.  They  knew  the  book.  It 
had  been  sold  by  a  woman — they  thought  for  ^100 — 
but  they  did  not  know  whether  it  had  been  taken  to 
Constantinople  or  to  Russia.  When  I  arrived  in 
England  I  chanced  to  meet  Dr.  Ginsburg,  at  the 
British  Museum,  and  was  informing  him  of  the 
treasure  I  had  met,  when  I  was  told  that  if  I  would 
come  downstairs  I  could  perhaps  see  it  again.  I  did 
so,  and  there  it  was  !     The  owner  had  brought  it  all 

fewer  divisions  between  the  words,  the  better ;  also  two  columns  on  a 
page  are  better  than  three  ;  and  illuminations  add  to  their  value.  I 
might  expect  sometimes  to  find  the  text  on  leather,  because  they  did  not 
know  in  remote  places  how  to  make  parchment,  and  I  should  do  well 
to  note  whether  the  manuscripts  were  of  Bokhariot  origin  or  foreign. 
With  regard  to  the  forms  of  the  letters,  the  following  were  signs  of 
great  age,  namely,  both  n  and  n,  written  like  the  latter,  and  the  same 
with  ''  and  1  ;  p  written  without  a  space  between  the  horizontal  line  and 
shaft ;  7  written  with  an  extra  long  upper  stroke  ;  and  lastly,  final  } 
written  no  longer  than  T. 


ii6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  way  from  Bokhara  to  London,  and  now  it  enriches 
our  national  collection — a  manuscript  that  has  turned 
out  to  be  of  great  importance  to  textual  criticism  as 
well  as  to  the  art  of  Jewish  illumination. 

The  peculiarity  of  the  illuminations  consists  in 
their  exhibiting  a  mixture  not  only  of  French  and 
Flemish  art,  but  of  German  and  Italian,  interspersed 
with  decorations  of  an  Oriental  character,  more 
especially  Persian*  At  the  end,  within  richly  illu- 
minated double  borders,  and  in  letters  of  gold,  the 
writer  of  the  codex  describes  himself  and  the  dis- 
tinguished patron  for  whom  it  was  written  as  follows  : 
"I,  Samuel  the  Scribe,  son  of  Rabbi  Samuel  Ibn 
Musa — peace  be  upon  him  ! — have  written  these  four- 
and-twenty  books  by  the  help  of  Him  who  is  en- 
throned between  the  cherubim,  at  the  order  of  the 
distinguished,  etc..  Rabbi  Joseph,  son  of  the  honoured 

*  The  manuscript  consists  of  three  volumes  large  quarto,  the  first 
containing  the  Pentateuch,  wherein  not  only  is  the  first  word  of  each  otm, 
the  five  books  written  in  letters  of  gold,  in  a  beautifully  illuminateda 
border,  occupying  the  space  of  six  lines,  but  every  one  of  the  53 
pericopes,  into  which  the  Pentateuch  is  divided,  is  indicated  by  a  rich 
illumination  in  the  margin  containing  the  word  t^lS  (pericope)  in  letters 
of  gold.  The  second  volume  contains  "  the  Prophets  "  in  the  following 
order :  Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, 
Hosea,  Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah,  Jonah,  Micah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk, 
Zephaniah,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi.  The  first  page  of  each 
of  these  prophets  has  a  highly  illuminated  border,  and  the  first  word  of 
each  book  is  not  only  written  in  letters  of  gold,  but  is  in  a  square  on  a 
beautiful  groundwork  of  delicate  penmanship.  Two  leaves  separate  the 
earlier  from  the  later  prophets,  and  on  these  are  written  in  the  border,  in 
letters  of  gold,  the  celebrated  Massorah  registering  the  number  of  verses 
in  the  Hebrew  Bible  ;  and  in  ordinary  ink  the  alphabetical  list  of  hapax 
legoinena,  or  words  occurring  only  once  with  and  once  without  the 
letter  1  at  the  beginning.  In  volume  iii.,  of  186  folios,  the  books  are  in 
the  following  unusual  order  :  Chronicles,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Job,  Uaniel, 
Ruth.  Canticles,  Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes,  Esther,  Ezra,  and  Neh( 
miah.  After  the  sacred  text  are  9  folios,  7  of  which  are  filled  wit 
Massoretic  and  rabbinical  lore. 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  117 

Rabbi  Jehudah,  called  Alchakim I  finished  the 

manuscript  in  the  month  Kislev,  on  the  sixth  day  of 
the  week,  on  the  preparation  for  the  Sabbath,  in  the 
year  of  the  creation  5243  {i.e.,  a.d.  1483),  in  Lisbon." 

Hence,  when  I  saw  the  manuscript  at  Moscow,  I 
was  right  in  my  supposition  that  it  was  of  late  date, 
but  Dr.  Ginsburg  says  that  even  a  cursory  examination 
shows  that  it  is  a  careful  copy  of  an  ancient  and  model 
codex,  and  that  it  in  turn  was  designed  for  a  model.^ 

Thus  I  lighted  upon  what  Dr.  Ginsburg  says,  so  far 
as  he  knows,  is  "the  most  richly  illuminated  Hebrew 
manuscript  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  world  "  ;  and 
though  I  did  not  know  its  full  value  until  I  reached 
England,  I  was  careful  to  ask  in  Bokhara  whether 
there  were  any  more  like  it.  They  replied  "  No."  I 
confess,  however,  to  leaving  the  city  with  a  regret  that 
I  did  not  make  another  effort,  and  search  to  the  bottom 

*  This  is  evident  not  only  from  the  careful  and  splendid  manner  in 
which  it  is  written  and  illuminated,  but  from  the  various  readings  given 
in  the  margins  as  taken  from  renowned  recensions.  The  most  in- 
teresting and  important  fact,  however,  is  that  the  manuscript  gives,  in 
the  Pentateuch,  two  variations  between  the  Westerns  and  Easterns, 
which  have  hitherto  been  unknown.  On  Lev.  xxvii.  24  it  tells  us 
that  the  Westerns  read  WXP  [maiito),  whilst  the  Easterns  have  T^'^?D 
{maothd) ;  and  again,  in  Deut.  xvi.  3,  we  are  told  that  the  words 
*'  For  thou  camest  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  etc.,  which  in 
our  Bibles  are  in  the  middle  of  the  verse,  are  the  Western  division, 
whilst  according  to  the  Eastern  these  words  begin  a  new  verse.  In 
Joshua  xxi.  the  Bokhariot  manuscript  has  the  two  verses,  36  and  -i^^  in 
the  text,  both  with  vowel  points  and  accents,  and  remarks  against  them 
in  the  margin,  "These  two  verses  are  not  in  the  text  in  the  Hillali 
Codex."  This  manuscript  has  also  some  various  readings  that  are  in- 
teresting, as  for  instance  in  Psalm  Ixxii.  5,  where  our  version  has  "  They 
shall  fear  Thee  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure,"  we  are  told  the 
Hillali  codex  reads,  "  The  people  of  the  sun  [that  is,  of  the  East]  shall 
fear  Thee." 

The  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum  is  numbered  "  Oriental 
2626—8  "  ;  but  for  further  information  see  Dr.  Ginsburg' s  letter  to  the 
Athenceum,  page  409,  March  31st,  1883. 


ii8  RUSSIAN'  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  Torahs  on  the  synagogue  loft.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  we  saw  none  of  the  principal  Jews  after  our  visit 
on  Friday.  The  Emir's  men  evidently  did  not  wish 
us  to  go  into  the  houses  of  the  people,  and  the  Jews 
were  afraid  as  to  what  might  be  done  if  they  received 
us.  Two  Jews  came  to  the  embassy  on  the  following 
day,  one  with  bad  eyes,  and  the  other  inviting  us  to 
his  house,  but  also  telling  Yakoob  characteristically 
that  he  had  European  "clothes  to  sell."  We  had 
neither  time  nor  opportunity  to  avail  ourselves  of  this 
offer,  but  on  the  Sunday  a  knot  of  half-a-dozen  Jews 
and  two  Jewesses  came  to  the  embassy  for  treat- 
ment. Of  the  latter,  one  had  slight  goitre,  the  other 
ophthalmia ;  and,  of  the  men,  one  had  a  weak  hand, 
and  another  dry  and  chapped  fingers. 

After  this  we  met  no  more  Jews  in  Central  Asia. 
I  am  anticipating  a  little,  but  by  way  of  finishing  with 
this  subject,  I  may  add  it  occurred  to  me  after  leaving 
Bokhara,  when  writing  my  last  letter  of  thanks  to  the 
Emir,  that  it  might  possibly  do  good,  to  express 
guardedly  to  my  royal  Mussulman  host  my  good  wishes 
for  Israel,  and  I  did  so  in  the  following  words  : — 

"  Petro-Alexandrovsk, 

''October  17-29/y^,  1882. 

*'  To  His  Majesty  the  Emir  of  Bokhara. 
"Sir, 

"  According  to  my  promise,  I  hasten  to  inform  your 
Majesty  of  my  safe  arrival  here,  and  once  more  to 
express  my  thanks  for  all  the  kindness  I  have  received 
in  passing  through  Bokhara.  I  will  not  weary  your 
Majesty  by  mentioning  the  many  things  that  have 
pleased  and  interested  me,  but  if  I  may  be  allowed  to 
mention  one  thing  that  has  pained  me  in  my  travels  in 
Central  Asia,  it  is  the  condition  of  the  Jews. 


THE  JEWS  OF  BOKHARA.  T19 

"  I  was  told  in  Samarkand  that  the  Jews  in  Bokhara 
are  placed  under  restrictions,  and  on  visiting  them  was 
sorry  to  find  them  so  cramped  for  room,  and  possessing 
only  one  synagogue.  May  I  not  venture  to  hope  that 
your  Majesty  will  be  pleased  to  allow  them  to  build 
other  synagogues  if  they  wish  ? 

"  Your  Majesty  will  doubtless  remember  that  the 
Jews  are  God's  ancient  people,  to  whom  He  gave  His 
first  written  revelation,  and  Jesus  Christ,  our  great 
Christian  Prophet,  was  also  a  Jew.  It  would  therefore 
be  a  thing,  I  am  sure,  pleasing  to  the  God  your 
Majesty  worships,  that  His  people  in  your  midst 
should  have  similar  privileges  to  your  other  subjects. 

'"  We,  in  England,  and  other  nations  in  Europe, 
used  once  to  place  many  and  severe  restrictions  upon 
the  Jews,  but  we  are  now  ashamed  of  this,  and  in 
England  we  give  them  full  rights  with  ourselves.  I 
sincerely  hope  your  Majesty  will  be  pleased,  on  con- 
sideration, to  do  the  same,  for  I  ask  this  out  of  love 
for  the  people,  amongst  whom  I  have  friends  in 
England. 

"  Let  me  once  more  thank  your  Majesty  for  the 
splendid  hospitality  I  have  received  in  Bokhara — such 
as  I  have  received  in  no  other  country  in  the  world — 
and  allow  me  to  remain, 

''Your  Majesty's  obedient  Servant, 

''  Henry  Lansdell." 

What  fruit  this  letter  bore  I  have  not  heard,  but 
thus  finished  my  intercourse  with  a  scattered  remnant 
of  that  wonderful  race,  amongst  whom  I  had  seen 
much  of  interest,  by  whom  I  had  been  kindly  received, 
and  on  whose  behalf  I  would  willingly  have  done 
more. 


CHAPTER   LII. 

BOKHARA     THE    NOBLE    {Continued). 

Visit  to  a  primary  school. — Method  of  study, — A  ride  outside  the  walls. — 
Mosque  of  Namazi-gah. — Visit  to  the  Kush-beggi. — The  Emir's 
palace  and  curiosities. — Conversation  with  the  Kush-beggi  and  his 
son. — Some  of  my  requests  refused. — Value  of  presents  received. — 
Visit  to  the  bazaar. — Commerce  and  trade  of  Bokhara. — The  Righi- 
stan. — Bokhara  after  dark. — Standing  up  for  my  rights. — Ride 
towards  Katte-Kurgan. — The  lepers'  quarter. — Fear  of  punishment. 
— Return  to  our  lodgings. 

AS  we  were  taking  a  morning  ride  during  the 
Saturday  of  our  stay  at  Bokhara,  I  inquired 
the  meaning  of  a  sing-song  noise  that  proceeded  from 
a  house  we  were  passing,  and  learned  that  it  was  a 
school.  We  dismounted  immediately,  and,  entering, 
found  therein  from  25  to  30  scholars,  of  ages  from 
6  to  13.  It  was  a  good  example  of  one  of  the 
maktab  or  lower  schools,  just  as  in  the  medresses  we 
had  seen  specimens  of  the  upper  schools,  of  Central 
Asia.  Both  are  usually  attached  to  the  mosques,  and 
maintained  on  the  wakuf  or  foundation  ;  but  if  the 
schools  are  not  so  maintained,  they  are  kept  up  partly 
at  the  expense  of  the  people  generally,  and  of  the 
parents  of  the  scholars.  The  teachers  of  the  lower 
schools  are  usually  chosen  from  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  district  in  which  the  school  is  situated,  and  who 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE,  121 

are'taxed  at  the  rate  of  from  6^.  to  i^.  per  house  for 
the  teachers'  support.  The  building  we  entered  was 
small  and  simple  enough — a  single  room  roofed  with 
a  dome,  having  several  doors  instead  of  windows,  and 
niches  around  for  shoes,  clothes,  etc.  On  the  floor, 
and  parallel  to  the  walls,  were  raised  benches,  about 
14  inches  apart,  consisting  of  beams  of  wood  10  inches 
high.  The  pupils  sometimes  sit  on  these,  or,  as  we 
saw  them,  on  the  ground,  their  books  resting  on  the 
beams.  Tables  or  desks  there  are  none.*  The  pupils 
sit  with  their  faces  towards  the  centre  of  the  room,  in 
the  direction  of  the  teacher,  who  is  in  the  middle  of 
them,  and  thus,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  they  are  "  brought 
up  at  his  feet."  t  The  floor  is  usually  covered  with 
plaited  reed  mats  or  simple  straw.  I  asked  how  much 
the  scholars  paid,  and  found  that  their  fees  were  partly 
tendered  in  kind,  and  by  way  of  presents  ;  but  M.  Kuhn, 
who  has  written  upon  the  subject  somewhat  fully,  + 
mentions  as  an  ordinary  school  fee  on  beginning  from 
3^.  to  i^.  per  month,  with  a  present  of  cakes  and 
raisins. 

*  I  do  not  remember  ever  seeing  a  single  native  in  Central  Asia 
writing  at  a  table.  They  hold  the  paper  in  the  left  hand.  Even  the 
Turks  at  Constantinople  seemed  to  me  only  in  a  transitional  stage  in 
this  respect,  for  I  observed  in  the  Government  offices  that,  though  they 
had  tables  before  them,  on  which  the  ink  was  placed,  the  clerks  curled 
their  legs  under  them  on  the  chair,  and  held  in  the  hand  the  paper  they 
wrote  on. 
t  Acts  xxii.  3. 

X  In  the  Turkistan   Gazette^  Nos.    ■}^'],  47,  48,  for  1876.     The  first 
thing  a  novice  does  is  to  repeat  after  his  teacher  : — 

"  Merciful  God,  enlighten  the  heart  of  Thy  slave. 
Thy  slave  is  a  Mussulman, 
Who  is  thirsting  to  read  the  Koran. 
He  seeks  Thy  protection, 
For  he  has  sinned  much." 
After  this  dedication,  so  to  speak,  the  teacher  writes  the  alphabet, 
gives  the  pronunciation  of  the  letters,  and  frequently  hands  the  boy 
over  to  one  of  his  kalfa,  or  assistants,  who  are  generally  senior  scholars. 


122  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

In  these  lower  schools  the  most  unsophisticated 
simplicity  reigns.  There  is  no  division  into  classes, 
but  by  the  side  of  one  scholar  sing-songing  the  alphabet 
is  another  learning  the  verses  of  Khoja  Hafiz,  or  not 
less  loudly  reading  the  Koran.  In  the  school  we 
entered  they  all  read  together,  swinging  their  bodies 
backwards  and  forwards,  though  one  boy  was  permitted 
to  read  alone  for  us  to  hear.  I  asked  about  school 
hours  and  holidays,  and  found  that  the  boys  are  present 
from  six  in  the  morning  till  five  at  night,  with  an 
interval  of  two  hours  at  noon.  They  go  on,  moreover, 
all  the  year  round,  except  Fridays  and  a  week  at  each 
of  the  three  Muhammadan  festivals.  On  Thursday  each 
pupil  usually  brings  his  teacher  a  specially  prepared 
cake,  and  on  that  day  also  the  studies  close  at  noon, 
the  teacher,  before  dismissing  his  pupils,  examining 
their  nails,  and  banging  their  heads  with  a  book  if 
they  are  not  found  clean.  But  Thursday  is  also  the 
day  for  paying  off  disciplinary  scores.  Thus,  if  a  boy 
has    played  truant,    some  of  his   fellows    are    sent    in 

After  the  alphabet,  the  pupil  passes  to  the  abjad,  which  is  an  exercise 
of  committing  to  memory  hard  words  without  sense.  This  done,  he 
has  a  day's  holiday,  when  he  is  expected  to  go  home,  and  return  with 
a  present  from  the  parents,  and  then  he  proceeds  to  the  study  of  the 
Koran.  After  a  certain  number  of  chapters  has  been  studied,  a  thanks- 
giving procession  is  formed,  and  the  pupil  goes  round,  not  *'with  the 
hat,"  but  a  tray,  to  his  friends  and  relations,  who  contribute  money  for 
the  teacher,  the  procession  singing  a  hymn  composed  for  the  occasion. 
The  pupil  then  passes  on  to  the  remaining  parts  of  the  Koran,  the 
various  steps  being  attended  with  feasting  and  giving  of  presents.  All 
the  instruction  thus  far  has  been  in  Arabic,  which  the  pupil  has  to 
acquire  by  rote,  but  without  understanding  it.  The  boy  now  goes  on 
to  certain  books  in  Persian,  and  finishes  with  the  verses  of  Amir 
Nevai,  in  Turki,  or  very  zealous  pupils  are  further  instructed  in  Fazul's 
poetry,  written  in  Uzbeg.  After  this  the  boy  can  remain  to  perfect  his 
caligraphy,  which  is  generally  done  by  those  who  are  intended  for 
mirzas  or  scribes,  whereas  those  intended  for  a  college  training  are 
taught  writing  in  the  medresse. 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  123 

search,  and,  on  bringing  him  back,  the  culprit  is  laid 
on  the  floor,  his  feet  lifted  in  a  noose,  and  he  is 
bastinadoed,  the  right  of  giving  the  first  blow  belong- 
ing to  his  captors,  as  a  reward  for  finding  him.  On 
Thursday,  too,  the  teacher  usually  shows  them  the 
attitudes  of  devotion,  and  concludes  by  reciting  a 
prayer.  Education  among  the  Mussulman  women  is 
at  a  very  low  ebb.  There  are,  nevertheless,  in  most 
towns  one  or  two  bibi-kalfas,  whose  duty  it  is  to  teach 
girls,  for  the  most  part  those  of  the  rich.  In  the 
school  we  entered  at  Bokhara  I  had  a  little  conversa- 
tion with  the  teacher,  and  thought  to  surprise  him  by 
saying  that  in  some  of  our  English  schools  we  have  as 
many  as  a  thousand  children  ;  to  which  he  replied  with 
the  greatest  calmness,  as  if  to  give  me  a  Roland  for 
my  Oliver,  that  they  had  many  schools,  but  only  about 
25  scholars  in  each.  His  was  only  one  of  many 
instances  wherein  the  self-complacency  and  ignorance 
of  the  Asiatics  struck  me  forcibly,  for  they  seemed  not 
to  have  the  least  idea  that  they  were  behind  other 
people,  or  needed  any  improvement. 

Remounting  our  horses  we  went  outside  the  town, 
by  the  Saleh-Kaneh  gate  as  before,  but  turning  now 
to  the  right,  my  intention  being  to  ride  round  the 
remainder  of  the  walls  ;  but  we  stopped  awhile  oppo- 
site the  Namazgah  gate,  at  the  mosque  Namazi-gah, 
said  to  be  350  years  old,  and  where  prayers  are  read 
at  the  two  feasts,  Ramazan  and  Kurban.  As  this 
building  was  tolerably  high,  though  some  distance 
from  the  walls,  I  wished  to  ascend,  and  did  so,  our 
aged  "dominus"  clambering  up  to  the  top  after  me. 
We  could  see  several  of  the  prominent  buildings  stand- 
ing above  the  walls,  such  as  the  chief  minaret,  and 
the  blue  dome  of  the  Jumma  mosque  close  by,  as  well 


124  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

as  the  citadel,  and  the  domes  surmounting  many 
medresses  ;  but  we  were  too  far  off  to  get  anything 
Hke  a  view  of  the  whole  of  the  town.  We  could  see  a 
good  long  stretch  of  the  wall,  looking  truly  ancient, 
and  perhaps  rather  imposing,  with  no  houses  or  build- 
ings outside,  with  battlements  and  buttresses,  which 
from  a  distance  appear  like  towers,  though  not  higher 
than  the  wall  itself.  The  buttresses  are  called  burj, 
and  are  131  in  number.  The  wall  is  7  miles  980 
yards  round,  24  feet  high,  and  10  feet  thick  at  the 
base."^  I  asked  the  date  of  building  the  wall,  and  they 
said  ''a  thousand  years  ago,"  and  that  the  population  of 
the  city  is  about  2,000,000  !t  Wolff  gives  the  popula- 
tion at  180,000,  but  Khanikoff  estimated  it  between 
60,000  and  70,000.  I  should  judge  this  to  be  much 
nearer  the  mark,  since  Khanikoff  estimates  the  area 
covered  by  the  city  to  be  1,860  acres,  or  about  3 
square  miles. 

There  were  no  houses  near  the  mosque,  on  whose 
summit  we  were  standing,  so  I  took  occasion  to  twit 

*  The  condition  of  the  walls  in  Central  Asia  more  than  once  brought 
up  Scripture  analogies.  At  Aulie-Ata  they  presented  a  scene  such  as 
Nehemiah  (ii.  13)  saw  when  he  "  went  out  by  night,  and  viewed  the 
walls  of  Jerusalem,  which  were  broken  down."  The  rent  and  cracked 
walls  of  Etchmiadzin,  in  Armenia,  reminded  me  of  the  derisive  expres- 
sion of  Tobiah,  "  That  which  they  build,  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even 
break  down  their  stone  wall  "  (Neh.  iv.  3) ;  but  I  do  not  remember  being 
struck  with  a  similar  multiplicity  of  cracks  in  Central  Asia,  where  I 
think  the  walls  were  thicker.  Once  more,  in  the  so-called  Jasper 
wainscoting  of  Tamarlane's  tomb,  we  saw  an  exemplification  of 
Oriental  magnificence  pictured  in  the  expression,  "the  foundations  of 
the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished  with  all  manner  of  costly  stones  " 
(Rev.  xxi.  19),  or  better,  perhaps,  "  I  will  lay  thy  foundations  with 
sapphires,  and  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates,  and  thy  gates  of 
carbuncles,  and  all  thy  borders  of  pleasant  stones  "(Isa.  liv.  11-12). 

t  The  latter,  at  all  events,  is  a  specimen  of  their  ignorance  as  to 
high  numbers,  with  which  they  seem  quite  unable  mentally  to  deal. 
Also  they  love  set  numbers,  saying  there  are  in  the  city  360  mosques 
and  360  streets  and  lanes. 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE,  125 

Mirza  Yusuf  about  his  fear  that  we  should  overlook 
the  apartments  of  the  women.  Then,  remounting  our 
horses,  I  galloped  off  to  finish  the  remaining  gates, 
namely,  Sheikh-Jelal,  Kara-Kul,  Shir-ghiran,  and  so 
entered,  as  before,  the  gate  Talipaj.  This  we  did  in 
about  half  an  hour,  including  the  stoppage  at  Namazgah, 
but  the  run  was  not  so  long  as  we  had  had  on  the 
preceding  occasion.  It  was  an  autumnal  morning, 
decidedly  cool,  not  to  say  cold  ;  so  by  the  time  we 
reached  the  embassy  I  told  our  old  gentleman  that,  as 
the  morning  was  fresh,  I  thought  he  might  like  a 
warming,  whereupon  Fazul,  seeing  the  joke,  looked  at 
me,  and  expressively  hid  his  face  in  his  khalat  to  laugh. 
Our  custodian  took  it  good-naturedly,  however,  saying 
that  an  occasional  gallop  was  good,  since  it  stirred  the 
blood. 

The  Kush-beggi  had  appointed  noon  as  the  hour 
for  receiving  us,  but  it  was  not  till  some  time  later  he 
sent,  with  apologies  for  delay,  to  say  that  he  was  ready. 
We  therefore  paraded  through  the  streets  with  our 
retinue  and  certain  of  the  local  dignitaries,  and  came 
to  the  Righistan,  or  public  place.  On  one  side  of  this 
is  the  citadel,  or  palace  of  the  Emir,  built  on  a  square 
mound,  35  or  40  feet  high,  and  about  a  mile  in  circuit, 
with  an  area  of  24  acres.  On  this  area,  surrounded  by 
a  high  crenelated  wall,  are  built  the  palace,  the  houses 
of  the  Kush-beggi,  and  certain  of  the  court  grandees 
and  their  retinue.  At  the  entrance  are  two  lofty 
towers,  and,  looking  up,  I  noticed  the  clock  made  by 
Giovanni  Orlandi,  who  fell  into  the  hands  of  Nasr- 
UUah,  and  when  condemned  to  death  because  he  would 
not  turn  Mussulman,  was  pardoned  on  promising  to 
make  the  despot  a  machine  for  measuring  time.  There 
were  also  a  few  cannons  lying  about,  and,  as  we  drew 


126  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

near,  we  were  saluted  by  the  soldiery  and  sentinels 
presenting  arms.  Things  had  altered,  I  thought,  since 
the  last  of  my  countrymen  rode  his  horse  in  the 
Righistan,  and  since  the  first  was  allowed  to  be  there 
only  on  foot.  For  my  own  part  I  did  not  give  the 
matter  a  thought,  and  dismounted  only  at  the  foot  of 
the  inclined  way  that  leads  to  the  palace. 

The  Kush-beggi  (or  lord  o{  the  Beks)  is  the  chief 
adviser  and  confidential  officer  of  the  sovereign,  the  first 
person  in  Bokhara  after  the  Emir.  He  manages  all  the 
commerce  of  the  city,  and  its  dealings  with  neighbouring 
countries.  He  sits  at  certain  times  on  a  raised  platform 
under  the  archway  at  the  entrance  of  the  citadel  to 
transact  business  with  those  who  enter.^  Besides  this 
he  is  his  Majesty's  viceroy.  The  Kush-beggi  is  the 
chief  representative  of  authority  when  the  Emir  is 
absent.  During  this  time,  in  keeping  with  the  Bokhariot 
idea  that  the  greatest  man  in  a  city  must  always  remain 
at  home,  the  Kush-beggi  is  said  never  to  leave  the 
town.  He  was  not  sitting  in  the  gate  at  the  time  we 
entered,  but  above,  as  he  usually  does,  I  believe,  when 

♦  Just  as  "  Daniel  sat  in  the  gate  of  the  king"  (ii,  49),  so  it  was 
"beside  the  way  of  the  gate  "  that  Absalom  said  to  those  who  cam< 
for  judgment,  "  There  is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to  hear  thee  ' 
(2  Sam.  XV.  2,  3).  Again,  with  David  in  a  critical  time,  "The  kin.i; 
stood  by  the  gate  side,"  and  confidence  was  restored  when  "  the  king 
arose  and  sat  in  the  gate"  (2  Sam.  xviii.  4,  and  xix.  8).  Moreover, 
since  trials  are  conducted  there,  **to  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate" 
meant  "to  give  unjust  judgment"  (Amos  v.  12).  "The  gate"  also 
served  in  the  East  as  a  place  for  public  buying  and  selling.  Abraham 
thus  purchased  Macpelah  (Gen.  xxiii.  10).  Similarly  Boaz  went  to  tho 
gate  for  witnesses  to  his  paying  the  kaltm,  on  taking  Ruth  to  wife. 
And  in  Samaria,  after  a  siege,  corn  was  sold  there  (2  Kings  vii.  i). 
The  gate  was  a  place  of  debate  for  the  public  good.  "  Hamor  and 
Shechem  communed  there  with  the  men  of  their  city,"  etc.  (Gen. 
xxxiv.  20).  A  "  fool  openeth  not  his  mouth  in  the  gate  "  (Prov.  xxiv.  7)  ; 
but  the  gate  was  a  place  for  prominent  persons,  and  for  Mordecai  to 
refuse  there  to  reverence  Haman  was  particularly  insulting  to  the  court 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  127 

the  Emir  Is  away,  and  then  another  officer  takes  the 
place  of  judgment  below. 

We  noticed  this  portal  arrangement  in  many  towns, 
but  at  the  fortress  my  attention  was  attracted  therefrom 
by  some  curiosities  hanging  on  the  walls.  Among  them 
was  a  huge  whip,  7  feet  long,  with  a  handle  of  about  4 
feet,  the  thin  end  of  the  lash  being  three  inches,  the 
thick  end  5  inches,  and  the  middle  about  8  inches  in 
circumference.  I  wondered  what  it  could  be  for,  and 
was  told  that  it  belonged  to  a  former  monarch,  who, 
perhaps,  used  ii  as  a  fighting  weapon.  When  some 
of  the  courtiers  were  telling  me  next  day  how  pri- 
soners were  flogged,  I  asked  if  this  great  whip  were 
used  for  the  purpose,  whereon  they  said  indignantly 
that  it  was  made  by  a  lunatic,  and  presented  to 
Abdullah  Khan.  This  is  a  less  poetic  origin  than 
that  given  by  Maieff,  who  calls  it  the  whip  of  the  hero 
Rustum,  and  adds  that  formerly  there  were  seven  of 
such  whips,  but  the  "most  religious"  Emir  Nasr- 
Ullah  distributed  six  as  relics  of  the  past  among  the 
dervishes  and  other  holy  men  of  Bokhara.  The 
courtiers  added  that  a  snake-like  staff,  hanging  near 
the  whip,  belonged  to  a  saint,  and,  when  dipped  in 
water,  possessed  curative  properties.  Another  thing  I 
noticed  in  the  passage  at  the  entrance  to  the  palace 
was  a  narrow  shelf  on  either  side,  which  served  as  a 
sleeping  place  for  the  guard  and  attendants.^  At 
length,  after  passing  through  some  passages,  we  came 
to  the  house  of  the  Vizier. 

favourite  (Esther  iii.  2,  v.  9).  Job  lamented  the  bright  days  when  "he 
went  out  to  the  gate  through  the  city"  (Job  xxix.  7).  Lot  was  sitting 
in  the  gate  of  Sodom,  when  two  angels  came  at  even  (Gen.  xix.  i). 
Lastly,  for  Abraham's  seed  to  overcome  the  nobles  and  councils  of  a 
nation  was  to  possess  the  gate  of  his  enemies  (Gen.  xxii.  17). 

*  Illustrating  so  naturally  2  Sam.  xi.  8,  9.    "  Uriah  departed  out  of  the 


128  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

The  Kushi-beggi,  a  man  of  60  or  65,  and  his  son 
came  out  to  greet  us,  and  we  were  conducted  into  the 
grand  man's  chamber,  that,  for  a  wonder,  had  two 
glass  windows,  and  contained  a  French  clock.  I 
knew,  as  I  have  said,  that  I  was  under  surveillance, 
and  that  my  deeds,  if  not  my  words,  were  reported 
to  the  Emir  ;  for  while  some  of  the  attendants  were 
on  one  occasion  waiting  for  me  outside  a  house,  two 
of  them  were  reading  over  their  notes,  not  noticing 
there  was  a  man  near  who  understood  them,  and  who 
heard  them  read  the  record  of  my  ill-deeds  in  galloping 
away  from  them  round  the  walls,  notwithstanding  that 
I  was  told  to  go  slowly.  Remembering,  therefore, 
that  my  note-taking  had  brought  me  under  suspicion, 
I  began  by  telling  the  Kush-beggi  of  my  travels  ;  that 
I  was  an  author,  and,  therefore,  I  took  notes  of  what 
I  saw.  "  He  might  perhaps  have  heard  of  this,"  I 
said.  Also,  I  wrote  books.  I  had  written  about 
Siberia,  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  accepted  a 
copy,  as  also  Count  Tolstoy,  and  had  been  much 
pleased.  Then  I  showed  him  an  official  letter  to  this 
effect  from  the  Russian  Embassy  in  London,  together 
with  my  letters  from  General  Chernaieff  and  the 
Lord  Mayor.  I  added,  moreover,  that  I  should 
perhaps  write  a  book  concerning  Bokhara  ;  and  that 
I  might  see  their  customs,  I  requested  to  be  allowed  to 
be  present  at  a  circumcision,  a  marriage,  and  a  funeral. 

To  this  he  replied  that  inquiry  should  be  made  if 
there  were  such  things  going  on,  and  he  would  let 
us  know. 

king's  house,  and  there  went  out  after  him  a  mess  of  meat  from  the 
king.  But  Uriah  slept  at  the  door  of  the  king's  house  with  all  the 
servants  of  his  lord,  and  went  not  down  to  his  house."  At  Ura-Tiube 
I  observed  that  a  Russian  soldier,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  open  air, 
had  placed  his  bedstead  close  to  the  front  door  of  the  commandant. 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  129 

I  then  asked  to  be  allowed  to  see  the  Emir's  library, 
but  the  old  fox  replied  that  his  Majesty  had  taken 
the  key.  But  I  said  that  the  Emir  had  given  me 
permission,  and  it  was  strange  there  should  be  any 
difficulty  about  the  key.  He  then  proposed  to  send 
a  messenger  for  it  to  the  Emir,  but  I  disappointedly 
replied  that  was  of  no  use,  to  which  he  said  "Very 
well!"  I  inquired  about  the  antiquities*  promised 
by  his  master,  but  he  said  the  Emir  had  not  Written 
to  ask  them  to  find  any,  although,  if  I  desired  it,  he 
would  send  to  the  bazaar  and  have  them  brought  to 
me.  I  thought  it  was  of  no  use  to  accept  this  offer, 
and  asked  that  a  mullah  should  be  sent  to  me  who 
could  decipher  inscriptions  on  coins.  The  Kush-beggi 
said  the  man  should  be  sent,  but  he  never  came.  I 
next  requested  to  see  the  two  prisons,  called  the 
Kana-Khaneh  and  the  Zindan.  I  could  not,  he  said, 
without  the  Emir's  permission,  nor  could  I  be  allowed 
to  ascend  the  great  minaret. 

Upon  this  I  changed  my  tactics,  and  said  I  must 
tell  General  Chernaieff  that  when  his  visitors  came 
to  Bokhara  they  were  not  allowed  to  see  the  things 
they  wished,  to  which  the  old  man  said  that  they 
could  not  do  things  contrary  to  their  law.  "  But 
surely,"  I  said,  ''it  is  not  against  your  law  for  me 
to  see  a  prison  !  "  He  replied  that  in  this  case  the 
Emir  must  be  asked  ;  whereupon,  finding  myself  no 
more  successful  than  before,  I  told  him  that  if  he 
came  to  London  he  would  be  allowed  to  see  the 
prisons,  and  ascend  our  highest  building  as  often  as 
he  pleased.  For  this  he  thanked  me,  and  appeared 
relieved  by  the  remark. 

I  then  invited  him  to  ask  me  any  questions  he 
pleased.      He   at   first   declined,  until  I   drew  him  out 

VOL.  IT.  Q 


130  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

by  telling  him  that  our  Queen  was  the  greatest  monarch 
in  the  world.  "  Is  she  rich  ?"  he  asked.  I  replied  that 
for  her  private  purse  she  has  6,000,000  tengas  a  year, 
and  that  some  of  our  nobles  also  have  as  much.  On 
the  previous  day  I  had  told  the  Kush-beggi's  mes- 
sengers that  so  great  was  our  Empire  that  the  sun  never 
set  thereon  ;  upon  which  they  pleaded  that  "  surely  it 
must  set  for  a  few  hours  ? "  Then,  discovering  that 
they  did  not  understand  the  earth's  rotundity,  although 
one  of  them  had  travelled  to  Petersburg,  I  took  a 
melon,  and  roughly  explained  it ;  but  I  fancied  they 
thought  I  was  "cramming"  them.  It  occurred  to 
me  now  to  repeat  my  astronomical  and  geographical 
lectures  to  the  Kush-beggi,  and  I  again  spoke  of  our 
Queen  as  ruling  over  an  Empire  on  which  the  sun 
never  sets.  Was  his  Excellency  aware,  I  asked,  that 
the  sun  did  not  move  round  the  earth,  but  the 
earth  round  the  sun  ?  That,  he  replied,  was  their 
opinion  ;  and  I  then  went  on  to  explain  my  paradox 
by  stating  that  the  sun  was  always  shining  upon  some 
part  of  our  dominions.  Further,  since  they  had  told 
me,  as  a  sign  I  took  it  of  their  greatness  and  import- 
ance, that  they  had  eight  guest-houses,  and  received 
many  guests  in  the  course  of  the  year  at  Bokhara, 
I  told  him  that  we  had  10,000  visitors  a  year  come 
to  London.  Did  he  think,  I  asked,  that  his  son  would 
come  ?  and,  in  case  of  such  an  event  happening,  I  gave 
him  my  card,  hoping  to  see  him. 

During  the  conversation  the  festal  board  had  been 
spread  for  us  with  fruit  and  viands.  I  had  observed 
that  up  to  the  present  we  had  nowhere  seen  in  the 
khanate  any  diaper  or  damask  linen,  but  our  napkins 
had  been  made  by  cutting  from  corner  to  corner  a  square- 
of  common    brown    calico,  thus    making   a  triangular 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  131 

serviette  of  original  design,  the  table-cloth  being  usually 
of  white  calico.  When,  therefore,  at  the  Kush-beggi's, 
I  saw  on  the  table  a  damask  napkin,  I  said  to  Sevier, 
"  Ah  !  here  is  linen  at  last !  "  when,  upon  examining  it, 
I  found  it  was  my  own  napkin,  which,  with  our  knives 
and  forks,  they  had  brought  up  from  the  embassy,  the 
Kush-beggi,  I  presume,  having  no  such  furniture  to 
his  table.  I  do  not  remember  that  the  Kush-beggi  or 
his  son  partook  of  the  food  with  us,  but  they  sat  at 
the  table.  I  inquired  whether  arrangements  had  been 
made  to  get  us  to  Charjui  in  two  days,  and  w^as 
answered  in  the  affirmative.  I  then  rose  to  go,  but 
was  pressed  to  stay  longer,  whereupon  we  renewed 
our  conversation,  and  by  way  of  starting  a  topic  I 
asked  if  he  remembered  two  Englishmen  named 
Stoddart  and  Conolly  being  put  to  death  at  Bokhara, 
about  40  years  ago?  He  replied  that  he  was  then 
Bek  of  Samarkand,  and  he  did  not  remember  Dr.  Wolff 
coming  to  inquire  into  the  matter.  He  appeared  not  to 
like  the  subject,  whereupon  I  proceeded  to  administer 
another  potion,  that  I  thought  would  not  be  sweet,  by 
asking  if  he  remembered  the  visit  of  Dr.  Schuyler. 
He  said  "Yes,"  and  I  reminded  him  that  Schuyler  pur- 
chased a  slave,  whereupon  both  father  and  son  nodded 
their  heads  as  certainly  remembering  that,  and  I  added 
that  I  was  very  glad  that  they  had  no  slavery  now. 
M.  Stremoukhoff's  assertion  that  slaves  are  still 
bought  in  the  khanate  has  led  me  to  wish  that  I  had 
made  some  inquiries  upon  the  subject,  but  I  heard  of 
nothing  of  the  kind  anywhere  in  the  khanate.  I  had 
asked,  on  the  day  after  our  arrival,  to  see  the  interior 
of  the  palace,  which  was  then  refused  ;  and  now,  on 
leaving  the  room,  I  expressed  a  wish  to  see  more  of 
the  building  ;    but   again  the  old   fellow  said  that  his 


132  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Majesty's  apartments  were  locked  up,  and  the  remaining 
portion  of  the  palace  was  occupied  by  the  women.  At 
parting  he  shook  my  hand  warmly  twice,  and  thanked 
me  for  my  visit,  but  I  had  summed  him  up  as  an  old  fox, 
who  had  utterly  disgusted  me  by  his  want  of  straight- 
forwardness, whilst  his  son,  who  holds  the  office  of 
Toksaba  at  the  court,  or  chief  of  the  officers  of  the 
second  grade,  struck  me  as  the  greatest  nincompoop 
I  had  seen  in  the  khanate.  The  Kush-beggi,  however, 
at  Bokhara  has  great  influence  with  an  Emir,  especially 
in  the  case  of  the  present  one,  who  is  said  to  be 
very  easily  led  by  the  opinions  of  others.  I  had  sent 
presents  for  both  the  Kush-beggi  and  his  son,  among 
other  things  of  a  Persian  Bible,  Arabic  New  Testament, 
a  watch  and  chain,  india-rubber  cushions,  a  compass, 
articles  for  toilet  use,  etc.,  in  return  for  which  he  sent 
me  a  piece  of  silk  and  four  black  curly  Kara-Kul  lamb- 
skins. 

My  presents  received  had  by  this  time  so  increased 
that  I  was  obliged  to  think  what  to  do  with  them. 
I  had  crossed  the  frontier  with  two  horses,  and  now 
I  was  the  possessor  of  six  !  I  was  given  to  understand 
that  I  need  not  be  at  all  nice  about  selling  my  presents 
even  under  the  noses  of  those  who  gave  them  ;  nay. 
that  in  all  probability  the  Emir  himself  would  buy  the 
horses  again,  to  present  to  his  next  guest.  Yakoob 
and  Kolutch  valued  my  four  royal  steeds  to  be  worth, 
in  all,  ;^io,  but  when  a  horse-dealer  was  sent  for,  he 
offered  only  ^8  for  the  lot !  This  was  rather  amusing 
to  one  accustomed  to  English  prices,  and  since  I  did 
not  know  what  cattle  I  might  need  in  crossing  the 
desert,  I  determined  to  take  two  of  my  presents  down 
the  Oxus,  and  the  remaining  two  I  sold  for  the  sum  of 
68i-. 


I 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  133 

After  returning  from  the  Kush-beggi  we  went  to 
the  bazaar,  where  also  we  had  been  several  times  pre- 
viously. Were  I  to  speak  of  the  commerce  of  Bokhara 
without  book,  and  as  it  appeared  to  my  limited  obser- 
vation, I  should  almost  be  tempted  to  say  that  more 
merchandise  crosses  London  Bridge  in  an  hour  than 
enters  Bokhara  in  a  twelvemonth  !  *  M.  Petrovsky 
speaks  of  the  bazaar  of  Bokhara  as  five  times  as  large 
as  that  of  Tashkend,  and  he  estimates  the  transactions 
of  the  Bokhara  market  at  ^4,000,000. 

Business  is  carried  on  in  24  caravansaries  and  6 
timis,  besides  the  ordinary  shops.  As  in  other  Asiatic 
towns,  the  various  kinds  of  merchandise  are  sold 
apart,  t 

So,  again,  the  various  trades  are  localized  in  streets, 
as,  e.g.,  for  selling  machines  for  silk-w4nding,  copper- 
smiths, bakers, J  etc.  In  the  shoemakers'  street  were 
skins  for  sale  at  half-a-crown  each.      In  the  armourers' 

*  The  only  statistics  I  can  offer  upon  the  matter  are  those  of  M. 
Petrovsky,  who  gives  the  value  of  34  items  of  merchandise  passing  from 
Russia  through  Kazalinsk  to  Bokhara  in  1868-9  as  ^179,283  ;  and  con- 
versely, the  value  of  30  items  passing  from  Bokhara  to  Russia  as^4i9, 341. 
Further,  concerning  goods  passing  from  certain  Russian  towns  through 
Tashkend  to  Bokhara,  and  vice  versa,  14  kinds  of  merchandise  exported 
from  Bokhara  to  the  value  of  ^864,  and  8  kinds  brought  into  Bokhara 
to  the  value  of  ;^i,402.  But  these  figures  concern  only  two  commercial 
routes,  from  the  north  and  north-east,  and  say  nothing  of  merchandise 
brought  from  the  south  and  west,  from  India,  Afghanistan,  Persia,  and 
Khiva. 

t  Khanikoff  mentions  the  following  permanent  bazaars  for  various 
merchandise,  thus: — i,  kid-boots;  2,  bread;  3,  fish;  4,  candles  ;  5,  fuel; 
6,  flour,  barley,  and  jugara ;  7,  salt;  8,  charcoal;  9,  bez  ;  10,  copper 
and  metal  wares;  11,  leather;  12,  boots;  13,  bran;  14,  dried  fruit; 
15,  drugs;  16,  melons;  17,  pomegranates  and  pears;  18,  eggs;  19, 
milk;  20,  horse  coverings;  21,  knives;  22,  butter;  23,  ropes;  24, 
sla\es,  which  last  is  now  abolished,  and  it  should  be  added  that  for 
some  articles  of  merchandise  there  are  more  bazaars  than  one. 

+  So  in  Jerusalem,  Jeremiah  was  to  be  given  daily  a  piece  of  bread 
out  of  the  bakers'  street  (Jer.  xxxvii.  21). 


134  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Street  I  secured  a  capital  helmet  of  mail,  a  powder- 
flask,  and  a  battle-axe  ;  and,  in  another  street,  some 
rude  china  inkstands  and  cups  of  local  manufacture, 
which  have,  fortunately,  come  safely  to  England,  where 
I  presume  they  are  unique  in  origin,  if  not  transcendent 
in  beauty.  Another  curiosity  I  obtained  is  a  woman's 
veil  (called  chasmari),  made  in  part  of  horse-hair,  and 
closely  resembling  the  hair-cloth  used  in  England  for 
upholstery,  as  also  a  woman's  cotton  khalat  (called 
pharange),  similar  in  form  to  that  of  a  man.  In 
wearing  it,  however,  the  garment,  instead  of  hanging 
from  the  shoulders,  does  so  from  the  head,  the  collar 
being  made  to  encircle  the  veiled  face  ;  and  instead 
of  the  woman  putting  her  arms  into  the  sleeves,  they 
are  pinned  together,  and  allowed  to  fall  down  the  back. 
As  winter  was  approaching,  we  were  advised  to  provide 
ourselves  with  fur  shubas,  or  robes,  for  crossing  the 
desert.  We  found  a  serai  set  apart  for  this  trade. 
In  form  the  serai  was  a  quadrangular  building,  very 
much  like  a  medresse,  with  the  interior  resembling 
a  college  quadrangle  of  two  stories.  The  centre  was 
given  up  to  horses  and  camels,  and  bales  of  merchan- 
dise, the  rooms  in  the  lower  story  were  for  warehouses, 
and  in  the  upper  story  were  rooms  approached  along 
a  wide  gallery,  and  in  each  of  them  fur  shubas  were 
hanging  for  sale.  The  shubas  were  lined  with  various 
furs,  specially  that  of  the  jackal,  and  common  ones 
differed  in  price  from  30^.  to  635-.,  there  being  few 
of  the  best  kinds.  It  was  probably  a  little  too  early 
in  the  season  to  see  a  large  collection.  We  had  a  few 
coins  brought  to  us,  but  all  the  fine  promises  of  the 
Emir  and  Kush-beggi  about  searching  for  antiquities 
came  to  little  or  nothing.  I  tried  to  get  some  native 
books,  and  succeeded  to  a  small  extent,  but  only,  as 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE.  135 

it  were,  by  stealth,  for  I  saw  nothing  like  a  bookseller's 
shop,  and  had  to  purchase  through  a  middle  man. 

The  streets  and  lanes  of  Bokhara  (which  are  not 
named  separately,  but  only  as  belonging  to  a  certain 
quarter  of  the  town)  are  exceedingly  tortuous  and 
narrow,  varying  in  width,  as  Khanikoff  says,  from 
40  inches  to  20  feet.  It  did  not  need  many  people, 
therefore,  to  give  the  bazaars  a  very  busy  appearance, 
and  everywhere  crowds  attended  us,  staring  at  the 
strangers,  especially  when  we  stopped  to  make  pur- 
chases, so  that  our  horses  could  make  way  only  very 
slowly.  One  of  the  liveliest  places  was  the  Righistan, 
which  we  first  saw  on  the  day  following  our  arrival. 
On  two  sides  are  five  mosques  and  medresses,  and 
on  a  third  side  is  a  pool,  around  which  loungers 
congregate.  Here  we  dismounted,  the  better  to  go 
in  and  out  among  the  stalls  for  the  sale  of  small  wares, 
and  afterwards  visited  several  mosques  and  medresses. 
Near  the  Medresse  Divan-beggi  is  a  square  pool, 
called  Liabehaus  Divan-beggi,  the  sides  being  of 
square  stones,  with  8  steps  to  the  water,  and 
shaded  around  with  mulberry-trees  of  a  century's 
growth.  Here  are  numbers  of  tea  and  refreshment 
stalls,  from  which  one  may  see  the  people  drinking, 
bathing,  or  performing  their  ceremonial  ablutions  in 
the  pool. 

After  finishing  our  business  on  Saturday  afternoon, 
we  called  again  at  the  Russian  serai,  which  kept  us 
till  dusk,  so  that  we  wended  our  way  homewards  after 
sunset,  and  saw  the  miserable,  deserted  appearance 
of  the  streets  by  night.  There  were  no  street  lamps, 
and  the  few  men  about  were  by  no  means  desirable 
company,  for  I  heard  that  lately  not  a  night  had 
passed  without  a  murder   or  a  robbery,   and  that  the 


136  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Emir  had  issued  permission  to  the  people,  when  they 
saw  a  thief  on  their  premises,  to  shoot  him,  also  that 
several  robbers  had  been  publicly  executed.  The 
streets  of  Bokhara,  therefore,  were  no  place  for  moon- 
light wanderings,  and  having  reached  the  embassy 
we  spent  a  quiet  evening,  having  arranged  to  visit,  on 
the  morrow,  the  shrine  of  the  patron  saint  of  Bokhara, 
and,  if  possible,  the  lepers'  quarter. 

Next  morning  the  Kush-beggi  sent  to  felicitate  me 
as  usual,  and,  to  my  great  disgust,  added  that,  as  we 
were  to  travel  on  the  morrow,  we  might  rest,  and  not 
go  out  that  day,  which  Yakoob  interpreted  as  a  small 
piece  of  revenge  for  our  galloping  round  the  walls. 
I  was  somewhat  nettled,  feeling  that  we  had  not  come 
to  be  prisoners,  but  guests,  and  ordered  our  horses  to 
be  saddled  immediately.  I  then  told  the  messengers 
that  we  had  made  our  arrangements,  and  intended  to 
go  to  Baha-uddin,  to  which  we  hoped  the  Kush-beggi 
would  not  object.  Upon  this  our  custodians  became 
perturbed,  especially  Mirza  Yusuf,  who,  as  he  saw 
me  about  to  mount  my  horse,  got  in  a  great  fever,  and 
said  that  they  had  received  many  Russian  embassies, 
but  that  none  of  the  others  acted  thus,  but  obeyed 
what  they  were  told.  I  replied,  "  Ah  !  yes,  but  you 
have  never  had  an  English  embassy  before !  "  and 
then,  declining  to  wait,  I  bade  him  tell  his  master 
where  we  were  gone,  and  if  the  Kush-beggi  had  any 
message  to  send,  to  bring  it  after  us.  The  old  gentle- 
man mounted  his  horse  somewhat  in  dudgeon,  and 
went  off  hastily,  whilst  I  and  my  party,  and  one  or 
more  of  the  Emir's  men,  sallied  forth  to  the  suburbs 
out  of  the  Samarkand  gate  on  the  high  road  to  Katte- 
Kurgan.* 

*  The  journey  to  Katte-Kurgan  is  a  distance  of  no  miles,  the  whole 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 


137 


As  we  rode  towards  Baha-uddin  we  passed  through 
gardens,  along  a  broad  avenue  intersected  with  ditches, 
and  planted  with  trees.  This  road  is  much  frequented 
by  pilgrims  on  their  way  to  the  tomb  of  the  renowned 
Baha-uddin  Nakishbend,  who  died  in  1303,  and  was 
the  founder  of  an  order  of  dervishes  bearing  his  name, 
to  whom  are  attributed  the  origination  of  those  religious 
extravagancies  that  distinguish  Eastern  from  Western 
Islamism.  He  is  looked  upon  as  a  second  Muhammad, 
and  a  pilgrimage  to  his  tomb  consequently  as  nearly 
equal  in  merit  to  a  journey  to  Mecca.  Near  the  shrine 
of  the  saint  is  the  tomb  of  the  great  Abdullah  Khan,  a 
photograph  of  which  I  fortunately  secured.  There  is 
also  a  sort  of  college  for  beggars. 

I  cannot  say,  however,  that  I  expected  the  shrine 
and  its  surroundings  to  repay  me  for  the  trouble  of  the 
journey.  What  I  really  wanted  was  to  visit  the  poor 
lepers.      I    had    been    taught    at    Karshi    the    folly   of 

being  available  for  carriage  use.   The  stations  or  villages,  with  distances 
between  in  versts,  are  as  follows  :  — 


Bokhara — 

Malik  (hamlet) 

24 

Baha-uddin  (village)     . 

9 

Beginning  of  gardens 

6 

Choloki          .         .         .         . 

2 

Fort  Kermina.         .         . 

12 

Hasan  Khoja 

li 

Tash-Kupriuk  (village)  . 

24 

Khoja  Yaksheba  . 

2 

Zia-ud-din 

4 

Khosya          .         .         . 

i^ 

Kala-i-daus  (small  fort). 

5 

Tuni-Arik      . 

2 

Mir  (hamlet)  . 

15 

Kuyuk-Mazar 

4 

Shirin-Khatin  (village)  . 

7 

Ak-Murud  (hamlet) 

.       8 

Zira-Bulak  (small  hamlet) 

6 

Ata-Zaubat  . 

•       4 

Katte- Kurgan 

.     12 

Uangati 

.       6 

Bustan  (large  village)  . 

.      6 

165 

Kham- Rabat 

•      4 

The  way  from  Bokhara  to  Kham-Rabat  lies  through  a  well- cultivated 
and  populated  district.  Then  comes  the  waterless  steppe  of  Malik, 
beyond  which  the  traveller  again  enters  gardens  before  reaching 
Kermina,  the  residence  of  one  of  the  Emir's  sons,  who  is  Bek,  and 
after  this  point  the  road  runs  through  the  beautiful  gardens  of  the 
Zarafshan  valley  to  the  Russian  frontier  at  Katte- Kurgan. 


138  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

directly  asking  to  see  them,  and  I  suspected  that  I  should 
get  only  a  refusal  if  I  repeated  the  request  in  Bokhara  ; 
but  I  had  heard  that  we  must  pass  the  lepers'  quarter 
in  going  to  Baha-uddin,  and  hence  my  zeal  to  tread 
the  pilgrim's  path.  I  was  disappointed,  however;  for 
when  we  reached  the  Makliau  Kkaiteh,  where  there 
were  said  to  be  about  150  houses,  we  saw  no  single 
building  that  invited  entrance,  nor  any  people  about, 
though  we  were  given  to  understand  that  the  lepers 
were  allowed  to  come  Into  the  town  and  beg. 

Meanwhile,  the  Kush-beggi's  messengers  had  not 
overtaken  us,  and  now  that  I  had  attained,  so  far  as 
I  could,  the  object  of  my  running  away,  I  began  to 
think  what  might  be  the  consequences  of  this  breach  of 
discipline.  I  remembered  how  Dr.  Wolff  was  harassed 
in  Bokhara,  and  how  this  same  Kush-beggi,  with  whom 
I  had  to  do,  had  thwarted  Dr.  Schuyler's  desire  to  go 
to-  Charjui,  even  though  he  had  the  Emir's  permis- 
sion. I  confess  to  having  felt  it  a  little  difficult  to 
know  how  best  to  act.  If  I  allowed  myself  to  be 
dictated  to,  and  treated  as  a  prisoner,  I  thought  it 
would  Imply  fear,  and  I  had  before  me  the  policy  of 
my  American  predecessor,  who  would  not  allow 
himself  to  be  imposed  upon,  and  found  that  the  more 
respect  he  demanded,  the  more  he  received.  The 
situation,  moreover,  gave  me  a  certain  sympathy  with 
Colonel  Stoddart,  who  was  said  to  have  been  unyield- 
ing and  blunt  ;  but  when  a  single  man  is  surrounded  by 
all  the  powers  of  an  Oriental  city  as  he  was,  and  has 
to  hold  his  own  against  them,  it  is  not  easy  always  to 
see  what  is  best  to  be  done.  In  my  own  much  smaller 
and  less  important  case,  I  was  fully  aware  how  com- 
pletely I  was  in  the  hands  of  this  unscrupulous  Kush- 
beggi,  not  indeed  to  harm  me  perhaps,  but  to  delay 


BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE,  139 

me,  and  vex  me  more  than  enough  by  withholding 
help  for  the  way.  He  had  prevented  my  seeing  several 
things  upon  which  I  was  intent,  and  had  told  me 
numerous  falsehoods,  so  that  I  had  not  the  smallest 
respect  for  him,  nor  had  I  reason  to  believe  he  would 
do  for  me  one  whit  more  than  he  was  obliged,  or  than 
suited  his  purpose.  Since,  however,  I  had  bearded  his 
Excellency,  and  sent  a  message  to  his  den,  I  deemed 
it  might  be  bettef*  to  make  a  virtue  of  necessity,  and 
turn  back  to  meet  the  messengers.  We  did  so,  and 
thus  came  to  the  embassy  without  seeing  them  ;  and 
when,  later  in  the  day,  our  old  custodian  appeared,  he 
said  he  had  trotted  round  all  the  city  gates,  and  else- 
where in  pursuit, — a  distance,  he  declared,  of  10  miles, — 
when,  failing  to  hear  of  us,  he  had  given  it  up  as  a  bad 
job,  and  so  returned  to  the  embassy.  The  old  fellow 
was  warm,  but  happily  very  good-tempered  over  it ; 
and  when  I  inquired  by  a  side  wind  what  the  Kush- 
beggi  said  to  our  conduct,  it  transpired  that  he  was  not 
annoyed,  the  reason  of  his  order  being  that  they  had 
not  taken  the  proper  steps  to  provide  us,  on  our  arrival 
at  the  shrine,  w4th  refreshments,  not  to  do  which  to 
their  guests  would  be  a  breach  of  etiquette  the  Emir 
might  not  like  if  he  heard  of  it.  This  dispelled  my 
fears,  and  we  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  at  the  embassy. 


CHAPTER  LIII. 

SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA. 

Both  guest  and  prisoner. — Use  made  of  custodians. — Bokhara  minerals. 
— Building  materials  and  garden  produce. — Animals  and  animal 
products. — The  natives  and  their  diseases. — Treatment  of  the 
insane. — The  rishta,  or  guinea-worm,  and  investigations  concerning 
it. — Native  method  of  treatment. — Classes  of  native  society. — The 
Bokhara  prisons. — Inquiry  as  to  where  Stoddart  and  Conolly  were 
confined. — Manner  of  life  of  the  Emir. — His  harem. 

FROM  the  hour  that  I  crossed  the  Bokhara 
frontier  and  met  the  Emir's  messengers,  I  was 
constantly  accompanied  by  officials — not  that  they  did 
not  leave  us  alone  in  our  rooms,  but  when  going  about 
we  were  always  attended.*  In  travelling,  there  was 
generally  one,  often  more,  of  position  who  went  with 
us  a  long  distance,  if  not  all  the  way,  whilst  others 
were  relieved  at  successive  stations.  Besides  our 
fixed  attendants  in  Bokhara,  some  of  the  higher 
functionaries  came  each  morning  to  exchange  greet- 
ings from  the  Kush-beggi,  and  I  took  advantage  of 
these  visits  to  draw  them  out  by  asking  questions 
pre-arranged,  and  thus,  by  putting  the  courtiers  and 
other  natives  through  the  same  examination,  I  was 
able  to  compare  their  various  answers  with  information 

*  The  custom  of  Eastern  dignitaries  being  usually  thus  attended  may 
perhaps  account  for  Ahimelech's  fear  on  meeting  David  and  saying, 
'*  Why  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with  thee  ?  "  (i  Sam.  xxi.  i.) 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  141 

received  from  men  of  European  education,  both  Moslem 
and  Christian. 

I  asked  about  their  minerals,  but  I  imagine  that 
Lehmann's  book,  which  includes  the  Zarafshan  valley, 
gives  far  more  information  than  the  natives  them- 
selves know.*  One  man  told  me  he  had  read  in  the 
Turkistan  Gazette  that  gold  in  small  quantities  was 
obtainable  on  the  banks  of  the  Amu-daria,  but  that 
the  results  were  so  inconsiderable  that  the  search  for 
it  was  confined  to  Turkomans  and  Uzbegs.  I  obtained 
in  the  shops  at  Bokhara  some  good  specimens  of  pink 
salt,  one  of  which  I  have  given  to  the  British  Museum. f 
The  Bokhariots  have  coal,  though  they  do  not  work 
it.  When  Lehmann  discovered  it  near  Wairabad,  in 
the  Fantagh,  the  native  officials  to  whom  he  pointed 
it  out  would  not  believe  in  its  value,  and  told  him 
derisively  that  he  had  better  take  500  camel-loads  to 

*  Copper  was  found  by  Lehmann  near  Wairabad  as  the  carbo- 
nate, whilst  the  sulphate,  and  probably  copper  pyrites  are  found  in  the 
Karatagh,  Copper  is  found  also  two  days  north  of  Shirabad.  Iron 
exists  in  the  Nuratagh  as  red  and  brown  ironstone,  and  as  iron  glance 
near  Wairabad  in  clefts  of  the  quartzose  sandstone.  Irwin  reports  two 
iron  mines  in  the  Hissar  district.  Lead  (probably  galena  or  sulphide 
of  lead)  is  found  in  many  places,  sometimes  along  with  soorma,  or 
sulphide  of  antimony.  Lead,  the  natives  told  me,  is  to  some  extent 
worked.  In  the  hills  of  Shirabad,  and  the  Wairabad  mountain,  are 
found  sulphur  and  saltpetre,  which  find  a  ready  sale  in  Bokhara  for 
making  gunpowder.  They  have  no  precious  stones,  they  said,  but 
Lehmann  mentions  that  turquoises  are  found  in  the  Nuratagh  and 
in  the  Butantagh. 

t  Some  of  the  best  is  obtained  near  Karshi,  and  rock  salt  is  also 
found  in  the  Nuratagh  hills,  where  each  seeker  is  his  own  miner.  Again, 
from  certain  salt  springs  the  water  is  emptied  into  a  shallow  place, 
and  allowed  to  evaporate,  leaving  the  salt  behind.  In  addition,  there 
are  salt  lakes,  one  for  instance  near  Kara-Kul,  where,  on  the  shores, 
red  salt  is  found  in  crystals.  Lastly,  there  are  spots,  as  at  Shurgul,  a 
valley  near  the  lake  we  saw  in  coming  from  Karshi,  where  the  soil  is 
highly  impregnated  with  salt.  The  sick  resort  to  the  west  end  of  this 
lake  for  the  benefit  of  the  water,  which  is  said  to  contain  iron,  salt, 
and  sulphur. 


142  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

his  Imperial  master,  the  Tsar.  They  burn  saxaul,  or 
charcoal  made  therefrom,  and  coarse  grasses,  called 
jin-tak  2XiA  jin-gul,  which  cost  for  a  donkey-load  from 
9^.  to  \s.  2)d.  Dung  is  little  used  for  fuel  in  towns, 
being  more  valuable  as  manure. 

For  building  materials  I  rarely  saw  stone  used, 
unless  for  wells  or  foundations.  They  have,  however, 
a  limited  supply  of  whitish  and  grey-veined  marbles. 
The  whole  of  the  country  north  of  the  Amu  is  covered 
with  limestone.  Ordinary  houses  are  built  of  timber, 
filled  up  with  intervening  mud  and  stones.  The  burnt 
bricks  used  for  building  medresses  cost  from  5^-.  to 
ys.  6d.  per  thousand.  They  were  said  not  to  have  any 
sun-dried  bricks.  Potters'  clay  is  found  and  used,  but 
pottery  would  seem  to  be  precious,  since  there  is  one 
trade  devoted  to  mending  it ;  and  cleverly,  too,  is  this 
done,  even  when  the  vessel  has  been  broken  into  the 
smallest  pieces. 

Concerning  the  products  of  their  gardens,  one  man 
at  Shahr-i-sabz  told  me  comprehensively  that  they 
had  ''all  kinds  of  fruits  except  lemons,  oranges,  and 
dates."  They  grow  good  peas,  but  do  not  eat  them 
green.  They  use  willow  bark  for  tanning,  and  their 
chief  cures  are  effected  with  medicinal  plants. 

As  for  the  animal  kingdom,  my  informants  told  me 
they  had  in  the  mountainous  portion  of  the  khanate 
tigers,  bears,  wolves,  deer,  and  wild  boars.  To  these 
I  may  add  a  very  remarkable  and  peculiarly  small 
breed  of  goats,  covered  with  a  very  long  and  coarse 
hair,  reaching  almost  to  the  ground.  M.  Oshanin 
saw    them    in    Karategin,   and    also    herds    of  Yaks.* 

*  The  Dong,  or  wild  Yak  [Bos gru7i7izens),  as  Colonel  Yule  observes, 
has  till  late  years  been  only  known  by  rumour.  It  is  a  native  of  Tibet  and 
high  Asia,  between  the  Altai  and  the  Himalayas.     Colonel  Prejevalsky 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  143 

They  are  in  use  all  across  Mongolia,  and  I  have  a 
photograph,  lent  me  by  Mr.  Delmar  Morgan,  of  a 
so-called  "Tibetan  cow"  (which  I  suppose  is  a  cross- 
breed), introduced  by  the  Russians  into  Turkistan. 
The  yaks  pasture  in  the  coldest  parts  of  Tibet  and 
the  eastern  portion  of  Bokhara  upon  short  herbage, 
peculiar  to  mountain  tops  and  bleak  plains.  It  remains, 
therefore,  to  be  seen  whether  the  animal  will  thrive 
in  the   lowlands.       During   our    stay  in    Bokhara   we 


A    TIBETAN    COW    AND    NATIVE    KEEPER. 


drank  excellent  milk,  and  Yakoob,  finding  out  my 
weakness  for  cream,  not  only  kept  us  constantly 
supplied  with  it  for  our  tea,  but  made  the  remainder 
into  butter. 

As  regards  animal  products,  I  learned  that  the  Arab 
sheep  is  kept  for  its  wool,  which  sells  at  from  3^^.  to 

shot  one  south  of  Koko-Nor,  6  feet  high,  and  11  feet  in  length  apart 
from  the  tail,  which  was  3  feet  more.  The  cow  yak  is  considerably 
inferior  in  size  to  the  bull,  and  her  horns  are  small.  The  animal  is 
capable  of  domestication,  and  an  extensive  variety  of  crosses  with 
ordinary  cattle  is  produced. 


144  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

4id.  per  lb.,  whilst  the  Kara-Kul  sheep  is  reared 
chiefly  with  an  eye  to  the  black,  curly  lamb-skins,  like 
Astrakhan  fur,  which  sell  for  Ss.  or  gs.  each.  Other 
pelts  they  use  are  those  of  the  wild  cat,  lynx,  and  fox, 
selling  at  from  ys.  to  los.  each.  A  Russian  told  me 
the  Bokhariots  tan  leather  badly.  They  soften 
sheepskin,  dye  it  black  and  red,  and  export  it  over 
the  border,  where  the  Russian  soldiers  cut  it  up  for 
trousers.  Of  whole  goatskins  they  make  ^ursuks,  in 
which  to  keep  the  honey  they  express  from  grapes. 
Cocoons  of  the  best  silk  cost  about  6d.  a  lb.  Bokhara 
is  one  of  the  chief  places  in  Central  Asia  for  the 
culture  of  silk,  especially  at  Vardan  Zigi,  where  the 
best  is  produced.  In  weaving,  they  use  for  one  kind 
of  warp  a  silk  called  tchillah,  brought  from  Afghani- 
stan.     Khokand  silk  is  called  tajili. 

In  our  wanderings  in  the  khanate  thus  far,  we  had 
met  with  Tajiks,  Persians,  Jews,  Hindus,  Arabs,  and 
Uzbegs.  The  last  were  comparatively  new  to  us,  for 
in  Turkistan  they  comprise  only  6  per  cent,  of  the 
entire  population.  In  Bokhara  they  form  the  ruling 
race.  The  Khan  of  Khiva  and  the  Emir  of  Bokhara 
are  both  descended  from  the  Min  section  of  the  Uzbegs. 
The  Uzbegs  have,  however,  lost  their  political  and 
tribal  importance.  Most  of  them  have  mixed  with  the 
Tajik,  Kirghese,  and  other  races,  and  have  settled 
down  and  become  known  as  Sarts.  Hence,  in  the 
bazaar,  the  crowd  did  not  appear  of  quite  so  motley  a 
character  as  in  some  other  towns  we  had  visited,  and 
in  speaking  of  the  natives  we  usually  heard  the  one 
general  word  Sart  used  as  comprehending  the  whole. 

We  gave  out  that  any  who  were  sick  might  come  to 
be  treated.  The  diseases  from  which  the  Bokhariots 
most  frequently  suffer  are  fevers,  ophthalmia,   leprosy, 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  145 

piles  of  various  kinds,  syphilis,  small-pox,,  and  the 
rishta.  Syphilis  is  treated  only  with  mercury.  They 
practise  vaccination,  but  it  is  not  compulsory,  and  they 
have  a  "pest-house,"  or  rather  a  village,  where  those 
who  wish  may  be  inoculated.  A  boy  came  one  morn- 
ing, his  head  being  covered  with  a  thick  ecze7na,  to 
whom  Sevier  simply  said,  "Go  and  wash!  and  then 
come  again."  I  was  not  a  little  struck  with  the  account 
they  gave  of  their  treatment  of  the  insane.  They  have 
a  special  mullah,  called  Ishan,  who  is  brought  to  a 
man  when  he  begins  to  fail,  and  who  reads  over  the 
patient  prayers  from  the  Koran  for  a  week  or  two.  If 
this  proves  unavailing,  the  patient  is  taken  to  the 
Ishan's  house,  tied  to  a  post,  and  kept  on  low  diet  for 
a  couple  of  months.  Thus  in  the  Ishan's  yard,  not  far 
from  the  Russian  Company's  office,  in  the  quartal  of 
Bokhara  called  Juibar,  may  be  seen  a  number  of  these 
patients  chained,  or  rather  picketed,  to  posts  like 
horses.  As  a  further  step  they  are  beaten  whilst 
prayers  are  going  on.  If  a  poor  creature  does  not 
show  signs  of  pain,  his  case  is  thought  incurable  ;  but  if 
he  is  seen  to  suffer,  his  recovery  is  hoped  for.^  A 
Russian  told  me  that  one  of  his  servants  was  slightly 
deranged,  but,  having  gone  to  the  Ishan,  appeared  to 
be  getting  better.  "  But  suppose  he  does  not  improve," 
I  asked,  "  what  do  you  do  with  him  '^.  " 

''He  remains  there  chained,  and  if  regarded  as  quite 
incurable,  his  parents  are  obliged  to  take  him  away  and 
keep  him  locked  up." 

"  But  suppose  he  has  no  parents  ?" 

*  Is  it  possible  that  Prov.  xxiii.  35  can  have  reference  to  any  such 
custom,  wherein  the  man,  apparently  in  delirium  tremens  or  after 
a  deep  debauch,  says,  "  They  have  stricken  me,  and  I  was  not  sick; 
they  have  beaten  me,  and  I  felt  it  not;  when  shall  I  awake  ?" 

VOL.  11.  10 


146  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

"  Then  he  is  turned  out,  and  allowed  to  run  about 
the  town  till  someone  takes  compassion  on  him." 

After  hearing  this  it  was  a  comfort  to  be  told  by 
one  educated  Muhammadan  that  they  had  not  much 
insanity,  and  that  he  had  never  even  seen  anyone 
raving  mad. 

The  reading  of  the  sufferings  of  Dr.  Wolff,  and 
what  I  had  seen  and  been  warned  of  in  Samarkand, 
made  me  specially  fearful  of  the  rishta,  a  well-known 
disease  in  Bokhara,  Karshi,  Jizakh,  and  Katte-Kurgan. 
It  is  also  met  with  in  India,  Arabia,  and  Africa,  whence 
with  the  negroes  it  was  taken  to  America.  This 
disease  is  caused  by  a  worm,  which  develops  under 
the  skin  in  May  and  August,  in  the  form  of  a 
cylindrical  body,  lengthening  at  the  rate  of  about  an 
inch  in  a  week,  and  lying  extended,  or  curled  in  a  lump 
two  inches  in  diameter.  Later  on,  an  abscess  appears 
where  the  head  (as  is  said)  of  the  parasite  lies,  and 
through  the  opening  thus  made,  especially  when  the 
surrounding  skin  is  pressed,  the  end  of  the  worm 
appears.  Sometimes,  however,  the  skin,  lifted  by  means 
of  a  needle,  is  cut  off  in  layers  until  the  head  of  the 
worm  is  reached  and  grasped. 

The  problem  now  is  to  extract  the  animal  entire,  in 
which  case  the  wound  soon  heals.  Native  specialists, 
usually  barbers,  insert  a  needle  under  the  worm, 
and  one  end  is  drawn  out  by  the  fingers  of  the 
right  hand,  whilst  those  of  the  left  press  the  affected 
part,  the  operation  lasting  from  one  to  five  minutes. 
Russian  medical  men  wind  off  the  animal  on  a  reel, 
so  much  daily  as  comes  out  without  force,  till  the 
whole,  commonly  three,  but  sometimes  (according  to 
one  physician)  seven  feet  in  length,  is  extracted.  If, 
however,  the  worm  should  break,  and  part  of  it  remain 


SUA^DRIES   COXCERAVNG  BOKHARA. 


14: 


In'the  body,  illness  continues  for  several  months.  It 
was  an  unsuccessful  case  of  this  kind  we  saw  in  the 
military  hospital  at  Samarkand,  where  the  portion  of 
the  rishta  extracted  was  given  to  me.  The  other  parts 
had  come  out  of  the  patient  of  themselves,  in  numerous 
places,  through  painful  abscesses. 

In  appearance  the  worm  is  a  long,  cylindrical  body, 


A   PUBLIC    POOL   AT    BOKHARA. 


of  a  milk-white  colour,  resembling  cooked  vermicelli, 
and  can  be  stretched  like  a  piece  of  elastic.  When 
torn,  a  milk-white  fluid  exudes,  containing  an  immense 
number  of  minute  worms,  swimming  rapidly,  whence  it 
appears  this  animal  is  viviparous.  Concerning  its 
origin  in  man,  Dr.  Klopatoff,*  who  resided  three  years 
at  Jizakh,  considered  that  water  was  the  medium  by 
*  journal  of  Health,  p.  123,  No.  2>5y  1876. 


148  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

which  the  parasite  was  conveyed,  entering  most  likely 
through  the  pores  of  the  skin.  Fedchenko,  on  the 
other  hand,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  germs  of 
the  worm  are  swallowed  in  drinking  the  water.* 

Some  persons  are,  however,  I  imagine,  more  prone 
to  the  disease  than  others  ;  for  a  Russian  told  me  that 
his  friend,  who  came  to  Bokhara  in  1876,  had  suffered 
from  rishta  8  or  9  times  a  year,  and  in  the  year  of 
my  visit  12  times,  whereas  he  himself  came  a  year 
earlier,  had  taken  no  care  as  to  what  water  he  drank, 
but  had  not  been  attacked  until  1 882.  It  may  readily  be 
supposed  that  I  had  no  wish  to  be  the  first  to  bring  this 
parasite  from  Bokhara  to  England ;  and,  accordingly, 

*  **  Compendium  of  Russian  Turkistan,"  p.  283,  Moscow,  1872.  His 
investigations  brought  to  light  some  very  int  cresting  facts,  the  first  of 
which  was  that  the  germs  of  the  rishta  {filaria  medinensis)  cannot 
live  in  very  fresh  water.  This  he  discovered  by  accident.  Not  being 
at  home  when  the  first  rishta  was  brought  to  him  in  water,  the  water 
putrefied.  He  detected  therein,  through  the  microscope,  several  living 
germs  ;  but  as  the  fluid  stank,  he  put  therein  some  fresh  water,  with 
the  result  that  all  the  germs  died.  Subsequently  a  fresh  rishta  was 
brought  to  him  in  water,  in  which  water  he  noticed  two  minute  crus- 
taceans of  the  genus  Cyclops,  and,  putting  these  under  the  microscope,  he 
saw  on  each  of  them  several  rishta  germs.  That  he  was  not  mistaken, 
he  convinced  himself  by  pricking  another  rishta  in  separate  water,  and 
out  of  the  aperture  immediately  many  germs  exuded  (there  are  millions 
in  each  rishta),  and  then  he  put  the  water  with  these  germs  into  a 
vessel,  seen  beforehand  to  be  free  from  germs,  but  containing  examples 
of  Cyclops,  with  the  result  that  in  a  few  hours  the  germs  had  entered 
the  crustaceans,  though  how  he  did  not  discover. 

It  then  remained  to  trace  the  germs  onwards.  The  size  of  the  germ_ 
is  about  o'65  mm.  in  length  and  0*02  in  width.  The  animal  has  a  tai| 
about  one-third  of  its  length.  This,  after  being  in  the  Cyclops  for  tw( 
weeks,  it  loses,  and  also  casts  its  skin,  the  tail  being  no  longer  neede< 
as  an  organ  of  motion  in  the  water.  The  animal  now  glides  like 
serpent,  and  no  longer  has  any  rings.  It  begins  also  to  take  in  foo^ 
by  means  of  the  mouth,  and  the  sexual  organs  appear. 

Here   M.  Fedchenko's   observations  ceased;  but  he  asks,  "  Whj 
becomes  of  the  germs  later  on  ?  "  and,  arguing  by  analogy  from  what  \i 
known  of  other  worms,  he  goes  on  to  suggest  that  the  Cyclops  entei 
by  drinking  into  the  human  stomach,  where,  under  new  conditions. 


SUNDRIjES  concerning  BOKHARA.  149 

on  crossing  the  frontier,  I  gave  up  teetotalers'  beverage, 
and  drank  no  longer  water — that  is,  in  its  natural  con- 
dition. But  neither  did  I  take  to  wine,  but  making 
more  tea  than  we  needed,  the  surplus  was  kept  for 
consumption  cold,  and  thirst  allayed  after  a  meal  by- 
melons  or  fruit.* 

The  Bokhariots  have  no  hospitals  ;  but  apothecaries 
and  doctors,  who  profess  to  know  something  of  medicine, 
and  whose  chief  method  is  to  read  over  the  patients 
passages  from  the  Koran.     With  regard  to  the  increase 

further  development  of  the  germs  takes  place,  principally  of  the  sexual 
organs,  copulation  follows,  the  males  die,  and  pass  out  of  the  abdo- 
minal canal,  whilst  the  females  work  their  way  and  settle  themselves  in 
the  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue.  Fedchenko  then  points  out  that  in 
Central  Asia  the  parasite  appears  only  in  those  places  where  the  people 
are  forced  to  use  standing  water,  generally  from  ponds  that  are  filled 
by  means  of  a  small  channel,  whilst  another  similar  channel  serves  for 
the  escape  of  the  superfluous  water.  In  these  square  ponds  or  pools, 
near  every  mosque,  the  natives  wash,  and,  when  drinking,  think  nothing 
of  the  aquatic  animalculae,  even  Daph7iicB,  that  are  visible  to  the  naked 
eye.  It  is  easy  for  them  then  to  swallow  the  small  grey  Cyclops,  which 
can  with  difficulty  be  distinguished  in  the  water.  Fedchenko  adds  the 
curious  fact  that  the  Cyclopes  avoid  moving  water,  and  says  that  if  water 
in  which  they  are  swimming  be  drawn  up  a  syringe,  however  violently, 
they  hasten  out  of  the  current,  and  scarcely  a  single  example  will  be 
found  in  the  syringe,  but  only  Da;phnicB,  in  which  it  appears  the  rishta 
germs  do  not  become  developed ;  so  that  Fedchenko  thinks  the  natives 
might  in  a  measure  avoid  the  evil  by  taking  their  drinking  water,  not 
from  the  ponds  direct,  but  from  the  small  canals  running  out  of  them. 
The  Cyclops  would  thus  be  left  in  the  still  water, 

*  The  old  traveller  Jenkinson,  who  visited  Bokhara  in  1558,  has  the 
following  curious  remarks:  "The  water  of  the  little  river  that  runs 
through  the  city  is  very  bad,  breeding  in  the  legs  of  those  who  drink  it 
worms  an  ell  long,  between  the  flesh  and  the  skin,  which,  working  out 
about  an  inch  every  day,  are  rolled  up  and  thus  extracted  ;  but  if  they 
break  in  the  operation  the  patient  dies.  For  all  this  inconveniency  it 
is  there  forbidden  to  drink  any  other  liquor  but  water  and  mare's  milk, 
such  as  break  that  law  being  whipped  through  the  markets.  There  are 
officers  appointed  to  search  all  houses  for  aqua  uitcB,  wine,  or  braga 
(as  Abul  Ghazi  calls  it) ;  and  in  case  they  find  any,  to  break  the  vessels, 
spoil  the  drink,  and  punish  the  owners  ;  nay,  often,  if  a  man's  breath 
smells  with  strong  liquor,  he  incurs  a  good  drubbing." 


150  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

of  the  population,  men  with  one  wife  sometimes  have 
up  to  8  children,  and  with  4  wives,  each  wife  perhaps 
will  have  from  i  to  3  ;  or  with  2  wives,  8,  9,  and  10 
children  is  common.  In  Bokhara  they  said  the  mother, 
after  childbirth,  gets  up  after  a  week  at  the  longest ;  in 
Khiva,  after  4  or  5  days,  but  sometimes  after  2. 

The  levelling  code  of  the  Muhammadans  prevents 
a  very  definite  classification  of  the  people  into  grades. 
After  the  Emir  and  his  officials,  the  mullahs  take  the 
first  social  place  ;  but  I  was  told  they  were  not  much 
esteemed,  and  merchants  stand  nearly  as  high.  In  the 
city  of  Bokhara  the  most  influential  men  are  Persians, 
who  were  formerly  slaves,  and  who  still  send  their 
money  to  their  fatherland.  I  asked  various  persons, 
in  different  localities,  what  possessions  would  entitle 
a  man  to  be  considered  rich.  In  Bokhara  city,  one 
Mirza  Khoort  was  said  to  be  the  richest  man,  and  to 
possess  a  million  tengas  (round  numbers  again  !) — that 
is,  ^25,000.  Also,  I  was  told  of  a  so-called  rich 
Jewish  family,  now  consisting  of  5  brothers,  2  of 
whom  together  export  annually  200  camel-loads  of 
silk  and  1,100  tons  of  cotton.  Passing  the  suburban 
residences  outside  the  capital,  I  was  told  they  were  the 
houses  of  rich  men.  I  said  to  Yakoob,  ''What  do  you 
call  a  rich  man  ?"  He  replied,  "  One  who  possesses  a 
horse,  some  cattle,  ^50  in  money,  and  an  annual 
harvest  of  25  cwt.  of  corn."  A  similar  question  at 
Petro-Alexandrovsk  elicited  the  answer,  "  A  man  who 
possesses  4  acres  of  cultivated  land  that  will  yield  him 
3  tons  of  wheat,  with  a  horse  and  a  cow"  ;  but  that 
some  possessed  4  or  5  times  as  much  !  Thus  it  would 
appear  that  few  of  the  Sarts  have  what  Europeans  would 
consider  great  riches,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must 
be  added  that  they  have  little  abject  poverty. 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA,  151 

As  they  would  not  allow  me  to  visit  the  prisons 
in  Bokhara,  I  took  care  to  make  what  inquiries  I  could 
about  them  ;  and  happened  to  hit  upon  a  man  who, 
when  crossing  the  Steppe,  made  a  vow  that  if  God 
would  bring  him  safely  to  the  end  of  his  journey,  he 
would  spend  7  tengas  in  bread  for  the  prisoners  in  the 
Zindan,  i,e,,  dungeon,  or  town  prison  of  Bokhara.  He 
was  too  wise  to  give  the  money  to  the  keeper,  but, 
having  brought  the  bread,  asked  leave  to  distribute  it, 
whereupon  he  threw  it  down  to  the  detained.  He  said 
their  prison  was  like  the  baths  we  visited  at  Karshi — 
that  is,  a  chamber  entered  and  lighted  from  above.  I 
asked  him  how  many  prisoners  there  were  ;  and  he 
replied,  ''From  300  to  400";  but  I  found  this  was  a 
mere  guess  on  his  part,  though  he  said  he  had  heard 
the  same  from  the  Bokhariots,  and  that  some  of 
them  had  been  confined  there  for  12  years.  Each  man 
received,  he  said,  only  a  cake  of  bread  in  the  morning, 
and  another  at  night,  whilst  2  prisoners,  he  said,  w^ere 
let  out  daily  to  beg,  and,  of  what  they  received, 
half  went  to  the  jailer  and  half  among  all  the 
prisoners. 

My  informant  added  that,  if  a  man  be  accused  of  theft 
by  two  witnesses,  the  accused  is  beaten  on  one  side  75 
times  with  a  stick  as  thick  as  the  wrist,  then  75  times 
on  the  other  side,  and  lastly  75  times  on  his  stomach, 
unless  he  confesses,  in  which  case  he  is  beheaded  at 
once,  or  perhaps  kept  for  a  year  and  then  let  off  But 
if  he  does  not  confess  he  is  sent  to  prison  to  heal,  and 
then  beaten  again  ;  and  so  on  four  or  five  times.  If 
then  he  is  not  killed,  he  is  allowed  to  go.  Murder  is 
punished  by  hanging  or  beheading.  I  asked  if  prosti- 
tution  were  punished,  as  I  had  heard,  with  death,  and 
received  a   reply   in   the  affirmative  :  that   the    man's 


152  ■  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

throat  is  cut  at  the  bottom  of  the  great  minaret  I 
wished  to  ascend,  whilst  the  woman,  with  her  head 
covered,  and  buried  to  the  waist  in  a  ditch,  is  shot  with 
a  pistol.  This  was  said  frequently  to  happen,  but  that 
bribery  could  often  buy  off  the  would-be  informer.^ 
This  informant  corroborated  the  throwing  of  certain 
criminals  from  the  top  of  the  minaret,  saying,  that  about 
7  years  before,  there  was  a  gang  of  robbers  between 
Bokhara  and  Katte- Kurgan  who  were  caught,  and  most 
of  their  throats  cut,  and  their  bodies  thrown  in  a  heap 
at  the  frontier,  but  that  the  chief  was  hurled  from  the 
tower,  the  women  of  the  town  having  received  notice 
to  hide  themselves,  t 

Thus  primed  with  information,  true  or  false,  I  took 
occasion  one  morning,  when  the  Kush-beggi's  messen- 
gers came,  to  ask  how  many  prisoners  there  were  in 
the  Khana-Khaneh  and  Zindan  prisons,  to  which  they 
replied,  "Very  few"  ;  for  that  they  did  not  keep  them 
long,  not  even  for  5  months,  but  speedily  gave  them 
150  stripes,  or  beheaded,  or  released  them.  I  asked 
if  it  were  true  that  in  the  Khana-Khaneh  ticks  were 
kept  alive  to  annoy  and  prey  upon  the  prisoners. 
They  somewhat  indignantly  denied  it,  saying  that 
they  had  three  sorts  of  prisons,  the  Ab-Khaneh,  Ben- 

*  With  this  may  be  compared  the  very  old  law  in  patriarchal  times 
touching  prostitution,  by  which  Judah  would  have  Tamar  burnt  (Gen. 
xxxviii.  24),  the  Levitical  law  concerning- adulter}^  (Lev.  xx.  10;  Deut. 
xxii.  22),  and  the  continued  existence  of  some  such  punishment  ob- 
taining at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  Christ  (Matt.  i.  19),  though  John  viii.  5 
has  it  ''that  such  should  be  stoned." 

t  Throwing  from  a  height  would  appear  to  have  long  been  a  recog- 
nized mode  of  putting  to  death  in  the  East,  and  to  remain  so  still.  The 
men  of  Capernaum  thus  led  our  Lord  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon 
their  city  was  built,  that  they  might  cast  Him  down  headlong  (Luke  iv. 
29),  and  in  the  very  year  of  my  travels  this  was  one  of  the  modes  ol 
being  put  to  death  offered  by  the  Arabs  to  Professor  Palmer  and 
Captain  Gill. 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  153 

Khaneh,  and  K liana- Khaneh,  representing  better  class, 
intermediate,  and  dark  prisons.  They  also  denied  that 
prisoners  were  sent  out  into  the  town  to  beg;  but  this 
last  denial  was  certainly  a  falsehood,  for  when  we 
turned  back  from  the  lepers'  village  I  asked  one  of 
the  natives  to  take  us  back  to  the  embassy  in  such  a 
way  that  we  might  pass  the  Zindan  prison.  I  saw 
that  I  had  asked  a  hard  thing,  and  at  first  he  said  it 
was  more  than  he  dared  to  do  ;  but  ultimately  he  was 
better  than  his  word,  and,  looking  up  a  passage  as 
we  rode  along,  1  saw  outside  a  lofty  building  two 
prisoners  chained  together  by  the  neck,  and  who,  on 
my  approach,  cried  most  piteously  for  alms,  which 
I  gave  them,  as  also  did  Yakoob,  whose  heart  was 
evidently  touched.  The  building  before  me,  I  make 
no  doubt,  is  the  one  that  Khanikoff  calls  the  "  Zindan," 
saying  that  it  has  two  compartments,  the  upper  and 
lower  dungeons,  the  former  consisting  of  courts  with 
cells,  and  the  latter  of  a  deep  pit,  at  least  20  feet  deep, 
into  which  the  culprits  and  their  food  are  let  down  by 
ropes.  This  latter  I  suppose  to  have  been  the  one 
in  which  Colonel  Stoddart  was  first  placed.  As  for 
the  Khana-Khaneh,  I  stood  near  the  door,  I  was  after- 
wards told,  when  examining  the  great  whip  at  the 
entrance  to  the  citadel,  but  I  did  not  know  it  at  the 
time.  It  was  from  hence,  I  imagine,  that  Stoddart 
and  Conolly  were  taken  to  execution,  or  from  the 
Ab-Khaneh,  said  by  Khanikoff  to  be  also  in  the 
palace,  but  of  which   I   heard  nothing. 

Of  course  we  heard  during  our  stay  in  the  khanate 
something  of  the  Emir's  manner  of  life  and  his  family 
affairs.  Much,  no  doubt,  was  untrue  and  exaggerated, 
but  I  am  not  sure  that  T  shall  be  justified  in  with- 
holding from   the  reader  the  accounts  we  were  told. 


154  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  asked  the  messengers  one  morning  how  his  Majesty 
lived,  and  they  confirmed  what  I  had  previously  read, 
that  he  keeps  a  very  simple  table, — if  indeed  he  can  be 
said  to  keep  a  table  at  all  who,  I  suppose,  sits  on  the 
ground  to  eat.  Also  I  gathered  that  he  spent  but 
little,  his  only  pleasures  being  dancing-boys  and  his 
wives.  I  ascertained  that  his  feasting  is  confined  to  two 
occasions  in  the  year,  when  he  invites  his  officers  ;  and 
I  heard  something,  too,  of  wholesale  feasts,  facsimiles, 
I  should  imagine,  of  those  given  by  David  when  ''he 
dealt  to  every  one  of  Israel,  both  men  and  women,  to 
every  one  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  a  good  piece  of  flesh,  and 
a  fiagon  of  wine  "  (or  grape  cake  ?)  (i  Chron.  xvi.  3),  the 
last,  however,  being  replaced  by  the  Emir  with  sweet- 
meats.* In  the  palace,  certain  men  who  stand  in 
Muzaffar  s  presence,  such  as  the  travelled  Khoja  we 
met  at  Kitab,  eat  with  him,  but  not  at  the  same  table,  f 
''What  does  the  Emir  eat?"  I  asked.  They  replied, 
''  Much  the  same  as  the  fare  provided  for  you,  unless, 
perhaps,  he  might  have  the  very  best  rice,  and  his 
soup  a  little  richer."  He  has  three  meals  a  day, 
namely,  at  sunrise,  milk,  tea,  and  perhaps  meat  and 
meal ;  his  dinner  about  noon,  the  time  of  the  mid- 
day prayer  ;  and  supper  at  eight.  I  thought  to  draw 
out  the  messengers  to  speak  of  his  intellectual  tastes, 
if  he  had  any,  by  saying  that  our  Queen  spent  time  in 
reading.  Does  the  Emir  read  much  ?  They  said  that 
on  rising  he  reads,  then  transacts  business,  and  after- 
wards reads  again,  but  that  he  had  not  much  leisure 
because  of  his  work.     The   Emir  has  several  arbas, 


*  I  heard,  too,  of  the  Zaketchi,  or  principal  tax-gatherer,  inviting 
the  Mussulman  merchants  once  a  year  at  the  time  of  the  fast. 

t  As  did  Jehoiachin,  King  of  Judah,  before  Evil-Merodach,  King  of 
Babylon  (Jer.  lii.  31). 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  155 

they  said,  and,  when  going  away  for  the  summer,  takes 
his  books  with  him.  This  was  in  reply  to  a  question 
of  mine  fishing  for  information  as  to  whether  there 
was  in  the  palace  any  library,  or  anything  that  would 
^w^  me  any  hope  that  it  might  be  that  of  Tamerlane  ; 
but  when  they  spoke  of  taking  his  books  away  in  an 
arba,  I  concluded  they  must  mean  his  accounts  and 
state  documents.  His  Majesty  speaks,  I  was  told, 
only  Turki  and  Persian. 

I  imagine  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  Eastern 
sovereigns  to  suffer  from  scandal  respecting  their 
harems,  and  all  the  more,  perhaps,  because  they  keep 
them  so  secluded.  Even  M.  Ujfalvy  permits  himself 
to  say  that,  at  the  taking  of  Khokand  by  the  Russians, 
the  Khan  had  3,000  women  !  After  this  it  made  little 
claim  on  one's  belief  to  be  told  in  Samarkand  that  the 
Emir  had  300.  The  number  of  300,  however,  would 
not  strike  an  outsider  as  unlikely  in  the  face  of  such 
tales  floating  about  as  the  following.  I  learned  from 
a  Russian  judge  that  there  was  brought  before  him  a 
woman  of  ill-fame,  who  professed  to  have  been  an 
inmate  in  the  Emir's  harem.  She  said  that  when  his 
Majesty  went  through  the  streets,  the  women  he  met 
were  obliged  to  stand  by  the  wall  and  lift  their  veils,  and 
that  anyone  whom  he  saluted  was  taken  to  the  harem, 
and  there  kept  for  a  few  months,  when,  if  not  preg- 
nant, she  was  given  to  wife  to  one  of  the  officials  of  the 
court.  In  the  other  case  the  child  had  to  be  her  only 
one,  and  she  remained  in  the  harem  for  the  rest  of  her 
life.  This  story,  upon  the  face  of  it,  is  not  very  likely 
to  be  true,  for  the  women  go  out  but  little,  and  then  it 
is  chiefly  the  old  ones.  So  contrary  to  etiquette  is 
it  for  young  women  to  go  out,  that,  when  necessity 
compels,  they  take  a  stick  and  creep  along  like  old 


156  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

hags.  Moreover,  on  repeating  this  to  at  least  three 
persons  in  the  khanate,  they  had  never  heard  of  it, 
though  some  of  them  said  that  the  Emir's  wives, 
after  having  a  child,  were  usually  given  to  one  of  his 
favourites. 

I  found  that  the  simple  question,  ''  How  many  wives 
has  the  Emir  ?"  elicited  some  very  varying  replies.  One 
replied,  "Many";  another,  ''Thirty  for  certain";  a 
third  said  he  did  not  know,  but  he  supposed  that  at 
least  two  a  week  were  taken  by  force  from  the  people. 
Of  course  all  the  royal  wives  must  be  orthodox  Sun- 
nites,  so  that,  if  a  very  pretty  Jewess  be  taken,  she  is 
made  a  Muhammadan;  but  no  instance  of  this,  the 
Jews  told  me,  has  occurred  lately.  This  led  to  the 
question,  "■  How  are  suitable  wives  obtained,  since 
females  in  Bokhara  are  kept  so  secluded  ?"  The  first 
informant  said,  '*  Old  wives  are  paid  to  go  into  families, 
and  so  discover  beautiful  girls,  who  are  taken  to  the 
harem,  and  then  either  allowed  to  return  or  made  wives 
of  the  Emir."  This  statement  was  made,  however,  by 
an  ignorant  man,  and  the  report  of  a  second  was 
more  rational,  that  the  Emir  asked  the  father's  per- 
mission, and  paid  a  handsome  kalim — more,  that  is, 
than  the  Muhammadan  law  requires,  which  is  ;^20 
for  a  girl,  and  ^10  for  a  widow.  Another  said  that 
the  presents  or  kalim  that  he  gave  were  small,  and 
that  the  parents  thought  it  a  grievance.  "  But  have 
the  parents,"  I  asked,  "  no  right  to  object?"  *'Yes. 
said  my  informers,  *'  but  no  two  persons  in  the  khanate 
may  marry  unless  the  local  authorities  approve,  though 
the  Emir  may  be  appealed  to ;  and  if  in  his  own 
case  the  Emir's  advances  are  declined  by  the  father, 
he  forbears  to  press  the  matter,  but  forbids  the  girl  to 
marry  anyone  else."     Such  a  case  was  known  to  my 


SUNDRIES  CONCERNING  BOKHARA.  157 

informant  at  Kermina,  where  the  poor  girl,  like 
Jephthah's  daughter,  ''bewailed  her  virginity,"*  and 
cried  over  her  position,  so  singular  in  Bokhara,  where 
it  is  a  thing  comparatively  unknown  for  "  their  maidens 
not  to  be  given  in  marriage."  t 

Of  course  these  were  very  delicate  subjects  upon 
which  to  approach  the  Emir's  messengers,  especially 
as  my  conversation  might  be  reported  to  his  Majesty. 
Nevertheless,  I  thought  it  better  to  hear  their  answer 
to  my  question,  "How  many  wives  has  the  Emir?" 
They  replied  immediately,  "  Four."  I  said  that  I  had 
heard  it  was  300,  upon  which  they  waxed  warm,  and 
said  that  as  a  husband  I  ought  to  know  that  one  man 
would  be  no  match  for  300  wives  !  in  answer  to  which, 
being  unmarried,  I  expressed  my  ignorance  of  such 
matters.  "Then,"  said  they,  "  if  you  are  not  married, 
Mr.  Sevier,  who  is  a  doctor,  ought  to  know  !  "  They 
allowed,  however,  that  his  Majesty  may  have  had  50 
or  60  ;t  "but,"  said  they,  "never  more  than  four  at  a 
time ! "  and  as  to  how  he  obtained  them,  the  Emir 
had  some  sisters,  §  aged  wives,  or  other  near  relations, 
and  that,  when  he  wished  to  marry,  they  told  him  of 
girls  they  knew  here  or  there.  To  this  I  added  that 
I  hoped  they  were  not  offended  at  my  asking,  but  I 
thought   it  better  to  inquire    than   to   go    away    with 

'  Judges  xi.  38. 

t  Psalm  Ixxviii.  63. 

I  Thus  emulating  Rehoboam,  who  took  18  wives  and  60  concubines, 
and  begat  28  sons  and  60  daughters  (2  Chron.  xi.  21). 

§  With  this  may  be  compared,  though  only  in  certain  aspects,  an 
old  wife  seeking  a  younger  for  Abraham  (Gen.  xvi.  3),  and  a  mother 
seeking  a  wife  for  her  son  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxi.  21).  I  met  with  a  case 
of  this  latter  so  recently  as  1879,  when  a  Russian  mother,  whom  I  saw 
on  the  Amur,  was  said  to  be  looking  out  for  a  wife  for  her  son,  just 
finishing  college,  and  who  was  then  to  be  married  as  a  qualification  for 
ordination  to  the  Russian  priesthood. 


158  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

erroneous  ideas.     They  thought  so  too,   and  said  they 
were  not  offended.* 

Thus  I  have  stirred  this  sink  of  impurity,  for  which 
I  feel  an  apology  to  the  reader  to  be  due.  Yet  1 
have  conceived  that,  in  order  to  paint  an  accurate 
picture  of  Bokhariot  life,  the  preceding  paragraphs  will 
convey  more  meaning  than  a  whole  chapter  of  my  own 
opinions  ;  and  if  the  purity  of  the  domestic  hearth  be 
any  gauge,  in  forming  an  estimate  of  the  happiness 
of  a  people,  then  English  men,  I  think,  and  certainly 
English  women,  will  have  no  reason  to  envy  those 
of  Bokhara. 

*  The  royal  harem  was  spoken  of  as  no  abode  of  bliss,  especially 
with  the  young  mothers,  now,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  first 
witness,  set  aside,  and  who  emulate  the  unnatural  practices  of  the 
Central  Asian  men  (Rom.  i.  26).  Of  course  there  can  be  little  of  what 
we  call  family  life,  and  the  case  of  the  Emir's  daughters  is  not  enviable. 
Their  father  marries  them  to  Khojas,  who  live  in  the  palace  as  play- 
things for  their  wives ;  but  should  the  wife  die,  her  property  is  sold, 
they  said,  and  the  husband  turned  adrift,  to  become  perchance  a 
beggar. 


I 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

FROM  BOKHARA   TO  CHARJUI. 

Our  generous  reception  at  Bokhara  and  its  cause. — Extra  presents  to 
the  Emir. — Dr.  Schuyler's  "  Turkistan." — Departure  from  Bokhara. 
— End  of  Zarafshan  oasis. — Bokhariot  agriculture  and  horticulture. 
— Ruins  of  Peikand. — Approaching  Kara-Kul. — Inexperienced 
postiHons. — Lake  of  Kara-Kul. — The  sands  of  Sundukli. — Our 
tarantass  left  behind. — A  night's  lodging  at  Betik. 

AS  the  time  drew  near  for  us  to  leave  "  the  noble  " 
Bokhara,  I  could  not  but  feel  that  we  had  been 
most  hospitably  treated.  Not  that  I  supposed  the 
Emir's  conduct  to  be  the  expression  of  his  personal 
regard  for  me  or  my  country,  but  of  his  desire  to  please 
the  Russians.  I  had  been  warned  at  Samarkand  to 
be  very  careful  not  to  lose  my  credentials,  for  If  I  did 
the  Bokhariots  would  be  only  too  pleased  to  Insult  me, 
and  then  to  excuse  themselves  on  the  ground  that  I 
brought  no  papers.  More  than  once  I  asked  In  Bo- 
khara what  would  have  been  done  to  me  had  I  come  to 
the  town  without  letters.  One  said  we  should  probably 
have  been  sent  back  to  the  Russians;  and  another  that 
we  should  have  been  placed  In  confinement,  and  the 
Russian  authorities  Informed.  No  Europeans,  they 
said,  are  seen  In  Bokhara,  but  Russians,  who  them- 
selves would  have  an  unbearable  time  of  It,  If  the 
Emir  had  power  to  oppress ;  but  since  he  has  not,  the 


i6o  RUSSIAiY  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

natives  are  outwardly  civil,  whilst  they  curse  the 
infidels  at  heart,  and  the  Emir  is  obedient  to  the 
Imperial  will.  The  Russians,  in  fact,  call  him  "  Nask 
ChelovaK  or  ''  oiti^  man."  We  were  told  that  if  only 
an  ordinary  letter  be  sent  from  the  Turkistan  authori- 
ties, the  bearer  is  feasted,  presented  with  3  or  4  khalats, 
and  supplied  with  money  to  return,  whilst  the  number  of 
khalats  sometimes  presented  by  the  Emir  to  the  higher 
officials  at  Samarkand  and  other  principal  places,  it 
was  said,  would  stock  a  clothing  establishment. 

My  reception  was,    therefore,   in   keeping  with   the 
foregoing.     One  Russian  had  told  me  that,  having  a 
letter  from  the  Governor-General,  1  need  trouble  for 
nothing  ;  and  another   had   prophesied  that  the  Emir 
would  give  me  ten  times  the  number  of  presents  that  I 
offered  ;   yet  I  confess   that  I  was  taken  aback  at  the 
way  in  which  1  and  my   retinue    were   supplied  with 
board,    lodging,    and    attendance,    to    say    nothing    of 
presents.     The    splendour    of    my    turquoise    bridle, 
embroidered  saddle-cloth,  and  robes  of  honour,  dazzles 
all  who  see  them,  and  they  are  rendered  doubly  valu- 
able, of  course,  by  the  circumstances  under  which  they 
were   received.      But  besides  these  additional  favours 
bestowed,   it   was  as  if  another  son  of  the  East  had 
said,   "  Howsoever,  let  all  thy  wants  lie  upon    me."*  1 
Nor  did  I  quite  see  in  Bokhara  how  duly  to  acknow-  *' 
ledge    such    thorough-going    hospitality ;    but   I    went 
carefully  through  my  kit  for  such  things  as   I    could 
possibly  spare,  and  which  I  deemed  might  be  accept- 
able to  the  Emir.     There   was   first  my  india-rubber 
bed  and  pillows,  which  I  thought  might  be  a  comfort 
to  his  Majesty's  bones  in  case  of  illness.     Accordingly 
I  showed   one  of  the  attendants  how  to  screw  on  the 
*  Judges  xix.  20. 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUI. 


i6] 


bellows  and  inflate  the  bed.  This  appeared  greatly  to 
tickle  his  fancy,  though  I  doubt  whether  he  had  used 
a  screw  before.  To  this  I  added  an  excellent  filter,  to 
preserve   his    Majesty,  I  said,  from  rishta ;  a  pair  of 


THE    ALTHOR    IN    ROBE   OF    HONOUR,    WITH    TLKQLOISE    BRIDLE,    PRESENTED    BY    THE    EMIR 

OF    BOKHARA. 


mosquito  curtains,  the  like  to  which  I  had  seen  nothing 
in  the  khanate  ;  an  electro  pepper  and  salt  case,  pre- 
sented to  me  by  Messrs.  Langton  and  Son,  whose 
"travelling  requisites"  I  have  found  so  useful,  besides 

VOL.  II.  II 


i62  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

an  enamelled  travelling  bottle  of  their  bringing  out, 
that  is  by  far  the  best  I  have  seen  ;  also  a  fine  damask 
linen  tray  cloth,  and  some  smaller  articles.  These  I 
packed,  and  wrote  a  letter  telling  the  Emir  that  I  was 
to  leave  on  the  morrow  for  Charjui,  thanking  him 
heartily  for  all  the  kindness  and  hospitality  I  had 
received,  and  begging  him  to  accept,  as  a  mark  of  my 
gratitude,  the  few  things  of  European  manufacture 
which  he  would  find  awaiting  his  return  to  the  capital. 
I  promised  further  to  write  again  on  finishing  my  tour 
through  his  kingdom,  and  this  letter  I  sent  to  the 
Kush-beggi  to  forward,  as  also  two  post-cards  to  be 
sent  to  the  nearest  post-office,  no  miles  distant.  The 
Emir  takes  the  liberty  of  reading  his  subjects'  letters, 
when  they  have  any,  and  of  course  he  was  welcome 
to  study  mine. 

The  post-cards  1  sent  were  to  inform  friends  of  my 
safety  up  to  date,  and  that  I  was  now  about  to  plunge 
into  a  land  comparatively  unknown,  which  I  felt  all 
the  more  because  I  had  no  handbook  to  accompany 
me.  Thus  far  from  Omsk  I  had  been  to  no  place 
where  Dr.  Schuyler  had  not  preceded  me,  and  his 
work  had  been  continually  in  my  hand,  as  since  upon 
my  table.  Nor  can  I  take  leave  of  his  pages  without 
expressing  my  increased  admiration  for  his  most  useful 
volumes.  I  have  never  found  his  work  scamped,  but 
more  than  once,  after  reading  up  a  subject,  have,  on 
reference  to  him,  found  the  whole  carefully  condensed 
in  his  notes.  But  now  he  was  to  turn  to  the  right, 
whilst  I  went  to  the  left,  the  latter  being  the  road 
followed,  I  suppose,  by  Burnes,  Stoddart,  and  Wolff. 

\  directed  that  we  should  start  at  sunrise  on  October 
1 6th,  and  sent  my  parcel  to  the  Kush-beggi,  saying  I 
had  received  so  much  kindness  from  the  Emir,  that  I 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUI.  163 

wished  to  offer  some  more  presents.  Yakoob,  remem- 
bering no  doubt  the  khalat  given  him  at  Shahr  when 
bearer  of  a  present,  asked  that  he  might  take  the 
parcel,  saying  that  he  had  business  upon  which  to 
speak  to  the  Kush-beggi ;  but  as  Yakoob  had  served 
us,  I  thought,  half-heartedly  in  Bokhara,  I  gave  the 
job  to  more  faithful  Kolutch.  Whether  he  received  a 
tip  I  know  not,  but  the  cunning  Kush-beggi,  unlike 
the  courtiers  at  Kitab,  intimated,  without  my  offer- 
ing it,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  accept  a  present 
from  England.  I  sent  him  something  more  of  Euro- 
pean manufacture,  and  then  prepared  to  start,  Sevier 
being  employed  up  to  the  last  in  attending  the  sick. 
One  of  them,  a  woman,  was  considerably  taken  aback 
when  he  applied  his  ear  to  her  chest  with  a  view  to 
the  auscultation  of  her  heart,  such  treatment  by  a 
doctor  being  evidently  unknown  in  Bokhara. 

We  were  escorted  out  of  the  town  at  9.20  a.m.  by  a 
niirakhur,  or  captain,  of  the  Kush-beggi  and  three  others 
of  his  men,*  meeting  in  the  suburbs  many  of  the  poor 
riding  in  on  asses.t  When  well  out  of  the  city  I  turned 
for  a  farewell  look  at  its  battlements.  It  was  the  best 
specimen  of  a  walled  town  I  had  ever  seen — the  first, 
strictly  speaking,  in  which  I  had  lodged,  but  wherein 
my  actions  had  been  so  spied  upon,  that  I  confess  to  a 

*  The  Bokhariots  are  still  very  observant  of  the  Eastern  custom  of 
accompanying  or  bringing  on  their  way  friends,  or  those  whom  they 
wish  to  honour,  as  did  Abram  the  angels  going  toward  Sodom  (Gen. 
xviii.  16) ;  and  the  churches  at  Antioch  and  Tyre,  the  Apostles  Barna- 
bas and  Paul  (Acts  xv.  3  ;  xxi.  5). 

t  Some  of  the  asses  were  laden  with  earth  or  sand  in  bags  slung  on 
either  side,  reminding  one  of  the  expression  "two  mules'  burden  of 
earth"  (2  Kings  v.  17);  and  now  and  then  we  met  women,  or  better 
said,  perhaps,  Bokhariot  ladies,  on  white  asses,  which  are  more  ex- 
pensive than  others,  and  so  the  property  of  the  rich.  Hence  the  expression 
in  Judges  v.  10,  "  Speak  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses." 


i64  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

feeling  of  relief  as  I  left  it  behind.  Our  route  lay  at 
first  through  highly-cultivated  gardens  and  fields  on 
both  sides  of  the  road.  Round  the  fields  were  ridges 
of  soil  to  confine  the  water  when  let  in  to  submerge 
the  surface,  and  certain  mounds  of  earth,  rising  from 
the  plain,  were  pointed  out  to  us  as  being  gradually 
carted  away  by  the  natives  for  the  repair  of  their 
fields. 

We  were  now^  approaching  the  termination  of  the 
oasis  that  extends  more  or  less  widely  along  the  Zaraf- 
shan  valley  from  Katte- Kurgan  past  Bokhara  to  Kara- 
Kul,  and  we  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  a  little  of 
Bokhariot  agriculture.  The  extent  of  liyali,  or  rain- 
watered  land  (from  Turki  liyal,  rain),  in  the  north  of 
the  khanate  is  not  great,  about  40  miles  in  length 
only,  I  was  told,  between  Katte- Kurgan  and  Kermineh, 
and  there  the  crops  vary  a  good  deal  according  to  the 
weather.  Owing  to  the  mildness  of  the  Bokhara 
climate  the  irrigated  soil  gives  two  crops  in  the  year. 
The  field  that  has  yielded  a  crop  of  winter  wheat  or 
barley  is  sown  at  the  beginning  of  June,  and  after  the 
harvest  a  second  sowing  takes  place  of  peas,  millet,  or 
carrots,  or  less  frequently  of  sesame,  poppy,  or  lentils. 
After  this  second  crop  is  reaped  the  field  is  prepared 
early  the  next  year  for  the  spring  sowings.  *  The  land 
thus  tilled  is  allowed  to  give  one  winter  and  two  spring 
harvests  before  it  lies  fallow,  or  shid<^ar,  as  it  is  called. 
F'or  the  spring  crops  the  greater  portion  of  the  fields 
are  sown,  not  only  with  rice  and  sorghum,  but  also 
with  cotton  and  lucerne,  and  on  small  portions  of  land 
are  grown  melons,  cucumbers,  pumpkins,  and  onions. 

As  we  passed  along  I  noticed  late  crops  of  jugara, 
bearded  wheat,  and  cotton.  Of  this  last  plant  I 
picked  some  pods,  which    I  brought  home.     Yakoob 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUI.  165 

gave  us  ^i  per  acre  as  the  price  of  untilled  land,  but 
for  cultivated  lands  three  to  four  times  as  much.  This 
is  a  wide  difference,  however,  from  the  price  men- 
tioned by  Khanikoff  forty  years  ago,  for  he  says  from 
^10  to  ^20  per  acre,  A  noticeable  feature,  as  we 
proceeded,  was  the  number  of  farmhouses  surrounded 
by  walls,  usually  a  dead  flat,  but  sometimes  crimped, 
and  crossed  with  lines,  each  presenting  the  appearance 
of  a  miniature  fortress.  They  were  surrounded  by 
gardens,  and  other  efforts  of  Bokhariot  culture.  These 
orchards  form  a  fair  criterion  of  the  wealth  of  their 
owners,  because  everyone  who  can  afford  to  increase  his 
garden  thereby  increases  his  wealth,  the  silver  poplar 
and  willow  being  about  the  only  trees  allowed  to  grow 
there  that  are  not  fruitbearing. 

The  gardens  are  formed  of  enclosed  ground  called 
hazat,  the  surface  being  levelled  to  facilitate  irrigation.* 
Those  skirting  our  way  for  the  first  1 1  miles  appeared  to 
belong  to  men  in  well-to-do  circumstances.  Next  we 
came  to  a  salt  land,  less  fertile  than  the  preceding,  but 
such  as  might  be  cultivated.  At  noon  we  passed  the 
ruins  of  a  large,  mud-built  castle,  once  inhabited  by  a 
wealthy  family,  and  near  this  were  two  small  hovels, 
where  a  bazaar,  so  called,  held  once  a  week,  is  visited 
by  half-a-dozen  people.  I  take  this  to  be  the  ruin 
marked  on  the  Russian  map  Shari-Islam,  16  miles 
from  Bokhara,  and  Dr.  Wolff's  second   stopping-place, 

*  The  vegetables  in  use  at  Bokhara  are  : — beetroot,  carrots,  radishes, 
cabbage,  onions,  cucumbers,  peas,  lentils,  melons,  water-melons,  and 
pumpkins.  In  small  quantities  are  also  raised  red-pepper,  turnips, 
mushrooms,  fennel,  and  cumin.  Melons,  water-melons,  cucumbers  and 
pumpkins  are  sown  on  well-manured  soil  that  has  been  ploughed  over 
at  least  ten  times.  The  sowing  is  done  in  rows.  The  growing  plants 
are  three  times  hoed,  banked  up  with  narrow  ridges  round  each,  and  no 
water  allowed  till  the  plant  is  sufficiently  advanced.  Later,  trenches 
are  made,  and  water  introduced  once  a  week. 


i66  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

though  I  found  nothing  of  Jesman-Doo,  the  first 
village  he  speaks  of  as  one  "  farsang  "  from  the  capital. 
We  rode  on  3  miles  further,  passing  Khoja-Khairon, 
and  arriving  at  12.20  at  Yaka-tut,  or  Jakatut,  our 
worst  mishap  being  that  Sevier's  horse,  which  had 
more  than  once  stumbled,  now  fell,  and  pitched  his 
rider  over  his  head.  Fortunately,  however,  he  was 
not  much  hurt,  though  he  literally  *'  bit  the  dust."  At 
this  our  first  station  we  dined,  and  took  leave  of  our 
old  custodian  Mirza  Muhammad  Yusuf.  He  had 
guarded  us  many  nights  and  days,  and  I  think  had 
done  his  best  to  keep  us  from  seeing  too  much,  but 
he  was  good-tempered,  and  put  on  no  airs  ;  so  I  gave 
him  a  present,  and  we  parted  as  friends. 

We  had  now  before  us  21  miles  to  Kara-Kul,  and  by 
way  of  change  we  accomplished  the  greater  part  of  the 
journey  in  the  tarantass,  though  not  without  pains  and 
penalties  ;  for  our  postilions  were  so  little  accustomed 
to  their  work,  that  they  had  no  notion  of  avoiding 
stones  or  obstructions  in  the  road,  but  took  them  all 
as  they  came,  now  going  over  banks  made  at  the  edges 
of  the  fields  to  keep  in  the  water,  and  now  turning 
the  tarantass  at  right  angles  instead  of  a  curve,  to  the 
imminent  risk  of  an  upset.  The  road,  too,  varied  a 
good  deal,  sometimes  passing  over  strips  of  sand  only 
a  few  yards  wide  ;  next,  over  an  arid  steppe  ;  and  then 
through  cultivated  land  and  well-ploughed  fields  of 
next  season's  wheat,  one  of  which  I  recollect  appeared 
as  clean  as  a  flower  garden. 

On  the  left  we  passed  what  was  given  me  as  Shahan 
Khibar.  They  told  us  the  heaps  of  ruins  were  those 
of  an  old  town  destroyed  by  the  Caliph  Ali,  and  soon 
we  came  to  the  half  station  Peikand,  which  is  mentioned 
by  Wolff.      Burnes  calls  them  "  the   ruins  of  Bykund," 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUL  167 

and  throws  light  upon  them  from  a  history  in  manu- 
script he  purchased  in  Bokhara,  calHng  Bykund  one  of 
the  most  ancient  cities  of  Turkistan,  the  seat  of  Afra- 
siab,  and  of  the  ancient  Turkistan  kings. 

We  stopped  at  Peikand  some  minutes  only,  and  a 
little  further  on  sighted  the  Zarafshan,  no  longer  the 
broad,  impetuous  river  we  had  struggled  through  at 
Samarkand,  but  a  feeble,  attenuated  stream,  robbed  of 
its  life-giving  waters,  and  narrowed,  as  I  judged,  to  a 
width  of  about  20  feet.  The  strip  of  cultivated  land 
on  either  bank  of  the  Zarafshan  gets  narrower,  being 
pressed  in  by  the  desert ;  and  as  we  drove  along  between 
the  aryks,  we  came  here  and  there  to  hillocks  of  sand, 
among  which  we  had  to  wind  in  and  out.  Of  animal 
life  there  was  little  ;  but  we  heard  the  singing  of  a  lark, 
and,  in  addition  to  the  ubiquitous  rook,  saw  a  flight  of 
storks. 

After  driving  thus  to  within  a  mile  of  Kara-Kul,  we 
remounted  our  horses,  and  there  came  out  to  meet  us 
the  amliakdar,  or  tax-gatherer.  He  was  the  principal 
man  of  the  village,  and  with  him  were  several  others, 
wearing  dandy  riding  boots,  of  which  the  height  of  the 
heels  would  vie  with  those  worn  by  English  ladies, 
only  that  the  point  of  the  Bokhariot  heels  barely 
exceeded  the  size  of  a  sixpence.  As  I  rode  along  by 
the  side  of  the  amliakdar,  my  Diotrephes  misbehaved 
himself,  stumbled,  and  came  down  upon  both  knees, 
but,  fortunately,  I  kept  my  seat,  and  he  recovered 
himself.  We  then  crossed  by  a  substantial  bridge 
what  I  supposed  to  be  the  Zarafshan,  or  a  large  canal 
diverted  therefrom,  and  about  sunset  entered  Kara- 
Kul. 

Kara-Kul  Is  a  village  that  gives  its  name  to  the 
black,  curly  lambskins  that  are  exported  thence  over  a 


i68  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

large  portion  of  Central  Asia.  We  stayed  there  for 
the  night,  and  left  early  next  morning,  hoping  to  reach 
the  Oxus  in  the  course  of  the  day.  But  we  did  not 
know  what  was  before  us,  or  we  should  hardly  have 
brought  the  tarantass,  for  it  became  more  and  more 
apparent  that  neither  the  roads,  the  horses,  nor  the 
people  were  accustomed  to  wheeled  vehicles  of  any 
kind,  and  still  less  to  a  European  carriage.  The  horse- 
collars  here  appeared  to  have  been  made  for  the  occa- 
sion, and  instead  of  harnessing  3  horses  to  be  driven 
from  the  box,  the  animals  were  mounted,  as  before,  by 
3  postilions,  who,  in  turning  a  corner,  made  no  allow- 
ance for  the  curve,  but  struck  the  vehicle  against  the 
wall.  Things  were  not  much  better  when  we  reached 
the  open  country,  for  they  not  only  went  over  stones, 
ruts,  and  timbers,  but,  whilst  smoking  in  turn  their 
kalian,  occasionally  left  the  road  to  go  across  country, 
through  wheat  or  melon  fields,  and  consequently  over 
the  irrigation  embankments  surrounding  them.  But 
worst  of  all  were  the  horrible  bridges  over  aryks, 
fortunately  then  empty,  but  8  or  10  feet  deep,  or,  at 
all  events,  sufficiently  deep  to  make  a  fall  therein  a 
most  undesirable  event.  Sometimes  they  avoided  the 
bridges  by  driving  down  into  the  aryk,  which  was  bad 
enough,  but  not  so  dangerous  as  crossing  the  rude 
constructions  that  were  never  intended  for  three  horses 
abreast,  and  had  no  rails  or  guards  on  either  side.  To 
make  matters  a  little  worse,  I  could  not  get  my 
charioteers  to  see  the  desirability  of  fastening  the  two 
wheelers  to  the  centre  horse,  lest  in  crossing  a  narrow 
bridge  one  of  the  two  outer  horses  might  jib,  the  other 
two  go  on,  and  the  whole  concern  go  to  smash.  On 
the  previous  morning  the  tarantass  did  fall  into  an 
aryk,  and  took  20  men  to  get  it  out,  but  happily  we 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHAR  JUL  169 

were  then  on  horseback  ;  and  now,  with  this  careless 
driving,  so  fully  did  I  anticipate  a  second  edition  of 
the  accident,  that  I  unbuttoned  the  apron,  so  as  to  be 
able  to  spring  out  at  a  moment's  notice,  as  we  came  to 
bridges  that  they  seemed  not  to  be  approaching  with 
respectful  care.  I  twice  jumped  clean  out,  with  my 
heart  in  my  mouth,  expecting  to  see  a  crash,  though, 
fortunately,  my  fears  were  not  realized.  It  was  inter- 
esting to  see  messengers,  spade  in  hand,  sent  on  to 
prepare  the  way  before  us,*  to  exalt  the  valleys  and 
make  low  the  hillocks,  t  so  that,  thanks  to  their  preceding 
us,  after  a  drive,  the  most  dangerous  I  had  ever  taken, 
of  16  miles,  we  came  to  the  end  of  the  cultivated 
district,  and  stopped  for  refreshment  at  the  Kishlak- 
Khoja-daulet-bi. 

Thirteen  miles  to  the  south-west  are  marked  on  my 
Russian  map  three  small  lakes,  separated  by  two  necks 
of  land,  but  for  which  the  three  would  make  one  narrow 
lake  25  miles  long.  They  make  together,  I  presume, 
what  is  usually  spoken  of  as  Lake  Kara-Kul,  but,  as 
now  divided,  they  are  called  Sungur-Kul,  Karanga- 
Kul,  and  Tenghiz  or  Denghiz.  They  would  be 
unworthy  of  notice,  only  that,  with  the  exception  of  the 
sheet  of  water  we  saw  in  approaching  the  capital,  these 
are  the  only  lakes  in  the  khanate.  They  are,  more- 
over, the  last  home  of  such  of  the  waters  of  the 
Zarafshan  as  can  attain  thereto.  + 

We  were  now  in  the  neighbourhood,  I  presume,  of 

*  Mark  i.  2. 

t  Isa.  xl.  4. 

X  The  inhabitants  describe  the  water  as  malodorous  and  salt.  And 
thus  ends  the  "  gold-strewing  "  Zarafshan,  after  giving  life  in  Bokhara 
to  the  two  bekships  of  Katireh  and  Kermineh,  to  8  tumens,  or  smaller 
districts  about  the  capital,  and  the  capital  itself,  as  also  the  district  of 
Zia-ud-din,  and  the  ticfnens  of  Kara-Kul;  or,  to  take  the  whole  Zaraf- 
shan oasis,  32,000  nomad  camps,  and  an  area  of  1,800  square  miles. 


170  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

what  Burnes  calls  Meerabad  (though  I  can  find  no 
such  place),  where  he  was  detained  for  some  weeks, 
and  concerning  which  he  makes  the  interesting  remark 
that  Alexander,  after  a  small  detachment  had  been  cut 
up  by  Spitamenes,  followed  him  to  where  the  Poly- 
timetus,  or  Zarafshan,  loses  itself  in  the  sands  of  the 
desert.  He  further  quotes  a  passage  from  Curtius, 
speaking  of  the  extensive  forests  of  Bazaria  (supposed 
to  be  the  modern  Bokhara),  and  the  towers  therein  for 
the  reception  of  the  hunters.  How  things  are  now 
changed  from  a  forest  to  a  desert  the  reader  will  pre- 
sently see. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  geological  features  of 
Central  Asia  is  its  moving  sands,  a  veritable  plague  to 
some  parts  of  Ferghana  and  Bokhara,  advancing  like 
a  flood,  and  swallowing  up  roads,  houses,  and  farms. 
Whole  villages  receive  notice  to  quit,  or  be  buried. 
I  have  already  described  what  is  taking  place  in 
Ferghana,  and  the  same  has  happened  also  between 
the  Oxus  and  Kara-Kul,  where  the  cutting  down  of  the 
saxaul,  to  say  nothing  of  the  forests  spoken  of  by 
ancient  authors,  has  let  loose  the  sand-dunes,  which 
the  wind  drives  forward  to  the  ruin  of  the  fields. 

The  belt  of  sand-hills,  on  the  east  bank  of  the 
Oxus,  from  Kerki,  or  soon  after  the  river  leaves 
Afghan  territory  all  along  to  the  Russian  frontier  on 
the  north,  varies  in  width  from  25  to  40  miles. 
Burnes  speaks  of  the  width  of  the  Sundukli  sands, 
between  the  Oxus  and  Bokhara,  as  varying  from  12 
to  15  miles,  and  the  height  of  the  hills  as  15  or  20 
feet.  Dr.  Capus  says  50  feet — a  computation,  I  think, 
nearer  the  mark.  They  gave  us  the  distance  from 
Daulet-bi  to  the  Oxus  as  16  miles,  and  a  mile  from 
the  station  the  sand  began  in  good  earnest. 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUI.  171 

Sevier  and  I  mounted  our  horses  and  preceded  the 
tarantass,  the  attendants  asking  us  not  to  go  too  far 
ahead,  lest  we  should  be  lost.  When  once  fairly  on  to 
the  desert  we  found  ourselves  amid  surroundings  the 
like  to  which  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  would  not 
willingly  experience  again.  The  only  vegetation  was 
some  dwarf  bushes,  a  few  inches  high,  under  which  ran 
here  and  there,  like  squirrels,  the  long-tailed  marmot, 
and  even  these  were  soon  left  behind,  and  the  bushes 
gave  place  to  sand-dunes  not  unlike  those  found  on 
parts  of  our  own  coasts.  The  shape  of  the  hills  was 
uniform,  each  presenting  the  form  of  a  horse-shoe,  the 
convex  side  being  sloped  towards  the  north,  whilst  the 
concave  side  was  precipitous.  Sometimes  we  saw  a  bar- 
khan  had  been  formed  by  the  increase  of  a  house,  with 
the  result  that  it  had  continued  to  grow  till  the  building 
was  buried.  Nothing  appeared  able  to  stay  the  ad- 
vancing scourge,  and  the  desolation  of  the  scene  was, 
in  our  case,  heightened  tenfold  by  a  blustering  wind, 
that  drove  the  sand  in  our  faces.  As  we  looked  ahead, 
one  bare  hill  rose  above  another  like  waves  of  the 
ocean,  whilst  the  tempest  blew  the  sand  from  their 
crests  like  spray,  and  all  this  on  a  scale  that  strikingly 
brought  to  my  mind  the  waves  I  had  seen  in  crossing 
the  Northern  Pacific. 

For  7  miles  we  dragged  on  to  the  frontier  of  the 
bekship,  where  we  were  met  by  15  horsemen,  come 
to  take  our  tarantass  to  the  Oxus  ;  but  imagine  our 
dismay  when  we  discovered  that  they  had  brought 
with  them  only  one  horse-collar !  They  asked  the 
party  from  Kara-Kul  to  lend  them  theirs,  but  they 
declined,   took  out   their  horses,  and  were  making  off. 

The  Amliakdar  came  to  take  his  congd,  and  I  gave 
him  a  present,  but  it  was  not  till  his  back  was  turned 


172  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

that  we  realized  our  critical  position.  We  were  left 
like  a  boat  in  mid-ocean.  All  around  was  sand — sand 
everywhere — and  our  late  protectors  had  pitilessly 
bolted.  Sevier  suggested  that  they  should  be  forced 
to  return,  which  perhaps  might  have  been  done,  with 
a  revolver  pointed  at  them.  But  it  was  too  late,  and 
we  were  obliged  to  turn  to  our  new  attendants,  who 
stood  discussing  what  was  to  be  done,  for  there  was  not 
another  horse-collar  to  be  had  within  several  miles. 

As  I  stood  there  listening,  the  only  sign  of  animal 
life  apart  from  our  company  that  met  my  eye  was  a 
beetle,  bent  on  taking  home  a  ball  of  dung  ever  so 
much  bigger  than  himself,  but  which  he  was  skilfully 
pushing  along  with  his  hind  legs,  running  backwards, 
kicking  up  his  heels,  and  so  availing  himself  of  the 
wind  to  further  his  efforts.  I  found  that  my  inter- 
ference was  no  use,  so  I  left  the  men  to  their  own 
devices,  whereupon  one  horse  was  put  in  the  shafts, 
and  ropes,  fastened  to  the  tarantass,  were  attached  to 
the  saddles  of  the  rest,  and  in  this  novel  fashion  the 
vehicle  was  dragged  along.  Of  course  this  was  slow 
work. 

I  thought,  therefore,  it  would  be  best  for  Sevier 
and  me,  with  Yakoob  to  interpret,  to  go  forward  and 
send  back  reinforcements.  Moreover,  a  Russian 
officer  in  Samarkand  had  told  me  of  the  terrible 
difficulty  we  should  have  with  the  tarantass,  and  had 
given  me  a  hint  not  to  meddle  in  the  matter.  "  If," 
said  he,  "  the  Emir  gives  the  order  that  your  tarantass 
is  to  be  taken  to  the  Oxus,  it  is  their  affair,  not  yours. 
You  had  better  go  on,  and  leave  them  to  follow."  I 
therefore  took  the  chief  man  for  a  guide,  and  left  the 
tarantass  in  charge  of  Kolutch  and  Fazul.  We  then 
tried  to  gallop  on,  but  that   was  no  easy  matter,   for 


FROM  BOKHARA    TO   CHARJUI.  173 

the  sand  was  so  soft  that  the  horses  sank  at  each  step 
half-way  to  the  knee. 

Our  guide  was  an  old  man,  but  mounted  on  a  good 
Turkoman  horse,  and  him  we  followed  over  little 
mountains  of  sand,  with  clumps  of  sand-grass  visible 
here  and  there,  also  wrecked  houses  and  half-buried 
villages.  This  almost  lifeless  scene  was  but  slightly 
modified  by  one  or  tw^o  kinds  of  birds,  and  carrion 
crows  feeding  on  dead  horses.  As  we  struggled  on, 
we  met  scarcely  any  travellers,  and  wondered  more 
than  enough  how  they  would  get  the  carriage  over  the 
barkhans,  as  high  as  London  houses.  It  was  no  small 
relief  when,  late  in  the  afternoon,  we  came  to  a  pool 
of  water,  said  to  be  3  miles  from  the  kishlak  Betik 
mentioned  by  Burnes.  We  were  now  once  more  in 
sight  of  trees  and  cultivation,  and  soon  reached  the 
house  of  our  guide. 

He  turned  out  to  be  one  in  authority,  Mirza  Anvar 
Gwatchi,  but  it  seemed  that  we  cockney  riders  had 
thoroughly  tired  him  out,  in  addition  to  which  he 
received  a  sound  rating  from  his  belongings  for  going 
off  with  only  one  horse-collar.  He  at  once  sent  a 
relief  party  off,  who,  by-the-bye,  lost  their  way.  Also 
a  boy,  whom  we  had  met  with  a  ewer  of  drinking 
water,  was  clever  enough  to  break  it,  and  so  it  came 
to  pass,  as  we  afterwards  heard,  that,  after  making 
almost  superhuman  efforts,  the  horses  not  unfrequently 
falling  and  rolling  in  the  sand  in  their  efforts  to  get 
the  vehicle  over  the  hills,  they  could  only  approach  to 
within  5  miles  of  the  station,  where,  darkness  coming 
on,  horses  and  riders  alike,  almost  supperless  and 
waterless,  and  thoroughly  tired,  lay  down  on  the 
ground  and  slept.  At  i  o'clock  in  the  morning  some- 
one reached  our  station,  and  more  horses  were  sent, 


174  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

with  clover  and  food,  so  that  later  on  the  party 
consisted  of  25  horses,  25  men,  and  2  camels,  besides 
our  2  mounted  djiguitts.  When  the  tarantass  proved 
too  much  for  the  horses,  they  harnessed  a  camel  to  it, 
but  this  failing  also,  the  goods  were  taken  out,  placed 
on  a  camel's  back,  and  so  the  journey  was  finished. 

Meanwhile,  as  we  heard  on  our  arrival  that  the 
river  was  only  a  few  versts  further  on,  and  Charjui 
just  the  other  side,  we  determined  to  stay  for  the 
night.  This  appeared  to  give  our  hosts  real  pleasure, 
and  we  had  a  hearty  welcome,  though  our  room  was 
exceedingly  poor.  It  had  this  mark  of  distinction, 
however,  that  on  the  wall  were  stuck  two  little  artistic 
productions,  a  few  inches  square,  taken  apparently 
from  a  traveller's  tin  of  preserves.  These  were  the 
only  pictures  I  saw  on  the  walls  throughout  the 
khanate.  One  attendant  brought  in  a  glass  lantern 
worthy  of  the  occasion,  about  a  foot  square  and  two 
feet  high,  and  on  the  level  bottom  of  this  he  was 
vainly  trying,  by  letting  fall  some  drops  of  grease,  to 
make  a  tall  candle  stand.  I  bethought  me  of  a  clerical 
acquaintance,  who,  when  beginning  some  cottage  lec- 
tures among  the  poor  of  Birmingham,  extemporized 
candlesticks  out  of  turnips.  We  had  no  such  roots  at 
hand,  but,  slicing  off  the  top  of  a  melon,  I  made  a  hole 
and  stuck  in  the  candle,  to  the  great  wonderment  of 
the  native,  who  ran  out  with  a  laugh  to  tell  his  fellows 
what  the  stranger  had  done ;  and  even  Yakoob  could 
not  resist  coming  in  to  look  at  the  invention,  which  he 
called  "  American."  I  had  no  more  of  my  outfit  than 
I  had  brought  on  my  saddle,  so  that  I  need  hardly  say 
we  lay  down  in  our  clothes,  and  thus  finished  the  most 
remarkable  day's  travel  I  have  known,  and  I  certainly 
shall  not  soon  forget  the  sands  of  Sundukli. 


CHAPTER  LV. 

CHARJUL 

Departure  for  the  Oxus. — Meeting  of  Charjui  officials. — Our  lodging 
and  reception.— P//^?/5  and  native  bread. — Visit  to  the  Bek. — 
Received  with  music. — The  place  of  execution,  and  the  prison. — 
Charjui  bazaar  and  slave-trade. — A  Bek's  official  staff. — Adminis- 
tration of  the  khanate,  and  taxes. — The  governments  of  the  Tsar 
and  the  Emir,  how  respectively  regarded  by  the  Bokhariots. — 
Return  from  Charjui  to  the  Oxus. — The  tarantass  regained. — 
Departure  of  our  two  attendants. 

AFTER  a  breakfast  of  rice,  milk,  and  tea,  we 
started  from  the  kishlak  Betik  at  7.30  to  ride 
to  the  Amu-daria,  leaving  directions  that  the  tarantass 
should  not  be  brought  on  to  the  town  of  Charjui,  but 
shipped  in  the  boat  waiting  to  descend  the  river.  Five 
miles,  we  had  been  told,  was  the  distance  to  the  water, 
but  it  seemed  much  more,  for  our  guide  did  not  appear 
very  well  to  know  the  way,  and  things  were  not 
rendered  more  pleasant  from  the  fact  that  the  weather 
had  now  become  decidedly  cold.  Fortunately,  I  had 
strapped  behind  my  saddle  a  Maude  shawl,  and  having 
folded  this  around  me  in  what  the  natives  must  have 
thought  a  queer  fashion,  we  wended  our  way  at  first 
across  fields  of  hemp  or  flax,  and  then  passed  over 
ground  frosted  with  salt.  As  we  approached  the 
river,  we  made  our  roundabout  way  through  acres  of 


176  RUSSIAN'  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

pampas  grass  and  reeds  overtopping  our  heads,  waded 
some  narrow  streams,  and  then  came  to  the  famous 
Oxus. 

So  primitive  in  appearance  was  the  boat  to  take  us 
across,  and  so  high  in  stern  and  prow,  that  one  was 
tempted  to  think  it  a  relic  of  the  tribes  that  were 
crushed  by  the  great  commander.  The  oars  were 
about  the  thickness  of  scaffold  poles,  with  blades 
roped  on,  10  inches  wide  by  30  long.  Our  horses 
were  shipped,  and  we  were  rowed  across  to  the 
opposite  bank,  where  one  Mama-sherif,  an  official 
called  the  Toksaba,  came  to  meet  us  from  Charjui. 
We  were  taken  into  a  house  in  the  midst  of  a  garden, 
which  in  summer  doubtless  would  have  been  pleasant 
enough,  but  crossing  the  river  had  not  warmed  us, 
and  I  was  sufficiently  chilled  when  they  brought  us  a 
meal  to  ask  whether  they  could  give  us  also  a  fire. 
They  assured  us  they  would  do  all  they  could  for  the 
comfort  of  their  guests,  and  shortly  brought  us  "  a  fire 
of  coals."  It  was  a  large  brazier  or  octagonal  pan, 
about  4  inches  deep  and  2  feet  in  diameter,  filled  with 
glowing  charcoal.  There  was  no  fireplace  in  the 
room,  and  the  floor  was  nicely  carpeted  all  over,  but 
the  brazier  was  stood  in  a  tray  and  placed  beside  us. 
I  cannot  pretend  there  was  much  heat  to  be  got  from 
it,  but  we  could  not  stay  long,  since  there  remained 
to  be  accomplished  what  they  told  us  was  3  miles, 
though  Burnes  calls  it  six,  to  the  town  of  Charjui,  the 
question  being,  I  suppose,  whether  it  was  half  a  tash 
or  a  whole  one. 

On  setting  out  they  asked  that  we  would  not  hurry, 
for  it  was  customary  for  guests  to  proceed  sedately, 
to  which  I  rather  demurred,  saying  that  I  wished  to 
ride  myself  warm.     We  passed  through  fields  to  within 


CHARJUI. 


177 


about  a  mile  of  the  town,  where  we  gained  the  first 
view  of  its  lofty  fortress,  whose  outline  seen  from  a 
distance  was  more  picturesque  than  that  of  any  building 
I  had  yet  seen  in  the  khanate.  I  asked  the  Toksaba 
the  population  of  the  town,  and  received  another  illus- 
tration of  native  ignorance  when  dealing  with  high 
numbers.  He  stated  it  at  100,000,  and  the  population 
of  the  bekship  at  a  million  !  after  which  he  added  that 
the  place  was  only  a  fortress,  with  a  thousand  soldiers 
to  keep  the  neighbouring  Turkomans  in  order.  Burnes 
gives  the  population  as  not  exceeding  5,000  ;  the 
Russians  give  the  town  6,000  "  yards,"  or  domiciles. 

Thus  we  had  arrived  at  Charjui,  a  distance,  according 
to  my  reckoning,  from  Bokhara  of  80  miles,  but 
Kostenko  calls  it  100,  from  information  given  by  the 
local  staff,  though  his  stations  do  not  appear  to  be  the 
same  as  mine.  In  any  case,  I  suspect  the  distance  is  not 
measured,  but  taken  from  the  statements  of  the  natives, 
whose  reckoning  is  by  the  task,  sa7tg,  or  farsang^  each 
of  which  is  12,000  paces,  ix.,  about  8  versts  Russian, 
or  rather  more  than  5  miles  English.*  We  found 
the  town  pleasantly  situated  ;  the  fort  occupying  a 
knoll,  and  commanding  a  view  of  the  whole  neighbour- 
hood. Our  house  stood  by  itself,  near  a  stream,  and, 
though  not  very  sumptuous,  they  appeared  to  be  doing 

*  The  stations,  with  distances  between  in  versts,  as  given  by  Kostenko 
and  myself,  are  as  follows  : — 


Kostenko.                          i 

Bokhara— 

i 

Shahr-Islam   . 

1 
.     24 

Kara-Kul 

•     32   i 

Ardan 

.         •     36  1 

13enghiz 

.     28 

Passage  of  Amu 

.     24 

Charjui  . 

.       8 

152 

VOL.  II. 

Lansdell. 


Bokhara— 
Yakatut . 
Kara-Kul 
Daulet-bi 
Betik  . 
The  Amu 
Charjui  . 


28 

32 

24 
24 


120 


12 


178  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

their  best  to  make  us  comfortable.  It  was  not  easy  to 
feel  so,  however,  deprived  as  we  were  of  most  of  our 
toilet  gear.  But  we  were  not  to  lack  for  food,  and  they 
had  prepared  for  us  such  a  dostar  khan  (literally  "table 
cloth  ")  as  we  had  seldom  seen.  The  trays  and  dishes 
were  so  numerous  that  I  made  a  note  of  them.  They 
more  than  covered  the  table,  and  were  spread  likewise 
on  the  floor.  Our  European  decimal  system  was 
represented  by  lo  loaves  of  sugar,  lo  packets  of  tea, 
lo  boxes  of  sugar-candy,  lo  trays  of  sweets,  and  lo 
trays  more  of  parched  peas,*  pistachio  nuts,  natural 
and  sugared,  apricot  stones,  raisins  of  four  kinds,  flour 
cakes  of  grape  honey  and  sugar,  large  and  small  cakes 
of  bread,  eggs  coloured  red,  apples  in  syrup,  almonds, 
dough-nuts  of  grape  honey  and  flour,  called  cantle 
neskullak,  and,  lastly,  a  semi-liquid  concoction  of  sugar 
and  white  of  ^gg,  that  looked  tempting,  I  suppose,  to 
one  of  the  officers  talking  to  us,  for  in  the  absence  of 
a  spoon  he  extemporized  one  by  putting  in  his  finger, 
twirling  it  round,  to  make  as  much  as  possible  stick, 
and  then  sucked  it  dry.  They  brought  us  some  white 
fish  to  eat,  which  was  not  bad,  but  rather  salt,  and 
afterwards  came  pilau. 

When  extra  good  pilau  is  desired,  a  chicken  is 
cooked  in  addition  to  pieces  of  mutton.  This  was  a 
blessing  to  me,  for  not  being  fond  of  fat,  or  caring 
for  rice,  especially  when  greasy,  I  usually  made  my 
meal  from  the  chicken  and  native  bread.  Their 
bread  consists  of  unleavened  cakes  [nans),  about  the 
size  of  a  large  captain's  biscuit,  though  sometimes 
larger  and  thinner,  perhaps  9  inches  in  diameter.  I 
think  the  latter  is  Persian,  but  both  are  made  of 
wheaten  flour,  and  when  fresh  are  tolerably  good,  and 
*Used  as  food  in  Persia  by  Daniel  (i.  12). 


CHARJUI.  179 

much  more  to  my  liking  than  the  rye  and  oaten  breads 
of  Russia  and  the  Scandinavian  peninsula.  It  is 
strictly  ''  daily  bread,"  and  a  native  takes  in  a  supply 
each  morning  as  regularly  as  a  Londoner  purchases 
milk.*  Nans  cost  2  poolahs  each,  or  about  a  penny  for 
five. 

Soon  after  our  arrival  at  Charjui  they  asked  how 
soon  we  should  like  to  see  the  Bek.  I  replied, 
"  Immediately."  Seeing  we  had  not  our  luggage, 
they  asked  whether  I  had  my  presents.t  I  replied  in 
the  affirmative,  intending  to  take  off  the  watch  and 
chain  I  was  wearing,  and  send  them  in  with  other 
articles  small  in  bulk.  They  then  said  we  should  be 
received  in  two  hours.  The  Bek  proved  to  be  another 
son  of  the  Emir,  and  was  living  in  some  state  in  the 
fortress.  At  the  entrance  of  the  citadel,  which  re- 
sembled the  one  at  Kitab,  about  150  soldiers  were 
drawn  up.  We  were  saluted  with  a  fanfaronade  of 
trumpets  and  other  musical  instruments — "plus  bruyante 
qu'  agreable,"  as  Dr.  Capus  puts  it — a  grander  recep- 
tion than  we   received  from    the    Emir.      Attendants 

*  The  size  of  these  cakes  brought  to  my  mind  the  friend  coming  at 
midnight  and  saying,  "  Lend  me  three  loaves  ;  for  a  friend  of  mine  in 
his  journey  is  come  to  me"  (Luke  xi.  6).  An  English  child,  accus- 
tomed, as  I  was,  to  great  half-quartern  loaves,  might  naturally  wonder 
at  the  traveller's  appetite,  and  why  he  should  need  so  many  as  three 
loaves,  but  the  text  would  present  no  such  wonder  to  the  mind  of  a 
Bokhariot  boy.  May  not  this  also  illustrate,  and  perhaps  account  for, 
the  amount  of  "crumbs"  that  fell  from  the  rich  man's  table  (Luke 
xvi.  2i),  as  well  as  the  "  fragments  "  of  the  miracles  (Matt.  xiv.  20)  ? 
The  thinness  of  the  bread,  moreover,  illustrates  why  we  never  read  in 
Scripture  of  bread  being  cut,  but  broken,  as  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  and 
in  Lam.  iv.  4,  "  The  young  children  ask  bread,  and  no  man  breaketh 
it  unto  them." 

t  The  common-place  manner  in  which  this  was  asked  reminds  one 
of  Saul's  words  to  his  servant,  "But  behold,  if  we  go,  what  shall  we 
bring  the  man,  for  .  .  .  there  is  not  a  present  to  bring  ?  What  have 
we  ?"  (i  Sam.  ix,  7.) 


i8o  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

with  white  wands  ushered  us  forward,  and,  finally,  a 
military  commander  introduced  us  to  his  Highness 
the  Bek,  a  youth  of  i8  or  19,  perhaps,  dressed  in  a 
gold  brocade  and  Cashmere  turban.  I  apologized 
for  not  presenting  myself  in  courtly  apparel,  since  I 
had  parted  company  with  my  tarantass,  whereupon  he 
asked  us  to  stay  longer.  How  long  had  we  remained 
at  Kitab,  Karshi,  and  Bokhara  ?  I  told  him  the 
number  of  days  in  each,  whereupon  he  asked  why  I 
stayed  3  or  4  days  in  other  towns,  and  only  2  with 
him  ?  *  The  reason  was  not  far  to  seek,  and  I  told 
him  that  we  were  already  behind  our  time,  that  we 
had  a  long  and  difficult  journey  before  us,  and  we 
begged  in  consequence  that  we  might  not  be  detained. 
He  consented  that  our  journey  should  be  sped.  I 
then  requested  to  be  allowed  to  see  the  prison,  and 
also  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  the  fortress  or  some  high 
place,  my  object,  as  before,  being  to  get  a  bird's-eye 
view  of  this  wonderful  town  of  "  100,000  inhabitants." 
To  my  surprise  the  Bek  consented,  after  which  I 
invited  him  to  ask  me  questions.  He  had  none  to  put, 
he  said,  but  was  willing  to  listen  for  an  hour  if  it  would 
please  me.  This  was  an  unexpected  turn  of  the 
tables,  and  I  racked  my  brain  for  things  that  would 
give  him  some  idea  of  the  grandeur  of  England,  but  in 
vain  ;  for  he  seemed  to  have  no  bump  of  wonder,  or  of 
inquisitiveness,  and  I  gave  up  trying  to  enlighten  the 
youth. 

On  leaving  I  examined  some  antiquated  cannons 
lying  about  in  the  court,  some  old  matchlocks  and 
muskets   hanging    near   the   entrance,    and    also    the 

*  Resembling  on  the  surface  the  language  of  Jeremiah  (xiv.  8) : 
"  Why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  stranger  in  the  land,  and  as  a  wayfaring 
man  that  tumeth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night  ?  " 


CHARJUI.  i8i 

musical  instruments  of  the  band.  Later  in  the  day  I 
secured  a  wooden  pipe,  i6  inches  long,  with  an  ex- 
panding end,  like  a  clarionet,  called  surnoi.^  In 
addition  to  the  surnoi  and  other  instruments  previously 
mentioned,  there  is  used  also  in  Central  Asia  the 
kornoiy  a  large  brass  trumpet,  6  or  7  feet  long,  giving 
a  deep  base  note.  Drums,  too,  of  different  sizes  are 
used,  made  of  small  earthenware  vessels,  covered  with 
skins,  fastened  on  by  a  network  of  little  straps,  and 
played  with  two  sticks.  The  soldiers  appeared 
amused  at  my  examination  of  their  instruments,  and  I 
left  them  thinking  that  I  was  to  be  conducted  to 
the  top  of  the  fortress. 

Instead  of  this  they  took  me  outside  the  wall  to  a 
high  place  indeed,  but  whence  I  could  not  see  the 
whole  of  the  town,  and  I  was  beginning  to  regret, 
when  my  attention  was  called  to  an  object  the  sur- 
roundings of  which  far  outweighed  my  disappointment. 
"  That  is  the  gallows,"  said  they,  ''  where  we  hang  the 
Turkomans — about  30  or  40  in  the  course  of  the  year." 
I  had  the  curiosity  to  ask  what  they  did  with  the 
bodies,  and  their  reply  struck  me  at  once  as  note- 
worthy. *'  Oh  !  "  said  they,  "  we  pitch  them  in  a 
ditch,  or  their  friends  come  and  take  them  away." 
How  exactly,    I    thought,   like  the   case  of  John   the 

*  It  has  7  holes  on  the  upper  side  and  2  below  (one  stopped).  In 
the  small  opening  is  a  brass  mouthpiece.  Into  this  fits  a  brass  pipe, 
called  a  Jiil,  with  a  mouthpiece  of  reed,  and  close  to  the  mouthpiece  a 
horn  disc,  serving  as  a  support  to  the  lips  of  the  player.  When  not 
played  on,  the  farther  end  of  the  pipe  is  stopped  with  a  metal  rod,  and 
two  small  wooden  discs  cover  the  mouthpiece.  Attached  to  the  instru- 
ment (which  may  be  seen  in  the  ethnographical  department  of  the 
British  Museum)  is  a  copper  chain,  and  hanging  therefrom  8  reed 
louthpieces.  For  the  mouthpieces,  I  suppose,  would  be  used  in  some 
ases  a  yXcocro-oKo/xov,  which  also  served  as  a  "purse"  or  cashbox 
John  xii.  6  ;  xiii.  29). 


1 82 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


CHARJUI.  183 

Baptist,  when,  beheaded  by  Herod,  ''his  disciples 
came,  and  took  the  body  and  buried  it."*  The  gallows 
consisted  merely  of  two  posts  and  a  lintel,  and  after 
seeing  it  we  went  to  the  prison,  into  which  I  managed 
to  get  in  spite  of  the  Emir's  endeavour  that  I  should 
see  none  of  his  jails.  He  might  well  be  ashamed  of 
them,  for  this  one  at  Charjui  outdid  everything  of  the 
kind  I  had  seen.  It  was  situated  under  a  chamber  at 
the  gate  of  the  fortress,  and  was  about  10  feet  square 
by  5  feet  high.  The  one  doorway  was  3  feet  high 
and  18  inches  wide,  and  through  it  I  crept  into  the 
dismal  den,  which  had  no  window  or  ventilator,  so 
that,  when  the  door  was  shut,  it  was  a  veritable  ''  black 
hole  "  of  Calcutta,  while  the  only  thing  in  the  chamber 
was  a  thick  beam  down  the  centre  of  the  earthen  floor, 
wherein  the  feet  of  the  prisoners  might  be  confined.t 

*  Matt.  xiv.  12  ;  Mark  vi.  29.  The  place  reminded  me  also  reverently 
of  One  greater  than  the  Baptist,  for  we  stood  on  another  Calvary,  "a 
place  of  execution  nigh  to  the  city"  (Luke  xix.  20),  "outside  a  city 
wall."  As  a  further  illustration  it  will  be  remembered  that  when  the 
Jews  wished  that  their  approaching  feast  should  not  be  marred  by  the 
sight  of  corpses  remaining  on  the  cross,  they  besought  Pilate,  not  that 
they  might  be  buried,  as  would  be  the  case  with  us,  but  "that  they 
might  be  taken  away  "  (John  xix.  31).  The  exposure  of  the  dead  bodies 
of  the  Turkomans  is  regarded  by  them  as  a  defilement  and  an  insult, 
and  is  evidently  the  survival  of  a  very  ancient  custom,  just  as  Jeremiah 
(xvi.  4)  prophesied  of  his  people,  "  They  shall  die  of  grievous  deaths: 
they  shall  not  be  lamented,  neither  shall  they  be  buried ;  but  they  shall 
be  as  dung  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  So  again  it  was  foretold  by 
Jeremiah  of  Jehoiakimi  that  "his  dead  body  should  be  cast  out  in  the 
day  to  the  heat,  and  in  the  night  to  the  frost "  (Jer.  xxxvi.  30),  whilst 
the  other  custom  regarding  the  deceased's  friends  throws  light  on 
Acts  viii.  2,  "devout  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial,"  as  also  it 
emboldened  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  the  timid  disciple,  to  prevent  dese- 
cration of  the  body  of  his  Lord  by  undertaking  the  office  of  a  friend 
when  he  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus  (Matt,  xxvii.  58). 

•t  Illustrating  exactly  Acts  xvi.  24,  "Who,  having  received  such  a 
charge,  thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison  and  made  their  feet  fast" 
(tis  TO  ^vkov)  "  in  the  beam,"  the  definiteness  of  the  article  apparently 
implying  it  to  be  an  ordinary  feature  of  an  Oriental  prison. 


i84  RUSSIA  AT  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Six  prisoners  were  under  arrest,  wearing  iron  collars, 
through  the  ends  of  which  a  chain  was  passed  to  secure 
them  all  together,  and  with  a  spike  at  the  end  to 
fasten  into  the  wall.  Most  of  the  criminals,  they  said, 
were  sent  to  the  capital  quickly,  but  some  of  the 
present  batch  had  been  confined  3  months,  and,  to 
make  matters  a  little  worse,  we  heard  next  morning 
that  5  Turkomans  had  been  caught  in  the  Steppe 
during  the  night,  all  of  whom  had  been  thrust  for  the 
present  into  the  black  hole.  Thus  there  would  be  1 1 
persons  within  500  cubic  feet  of  air,  which  is  not 
much  more  than  half  the  amount  allowed  to  each 
prisoner  in  Newgate,  where  the  cells  measure  14  feet 
long,  8  broad,  and  8  high.  The  only  good  things  1 
remember  about  this  prison  were  that  it  was  dry  and 
fairly  clean,  nor  did  I  detect  any  unpleasant  smell, 
though  the  prisoners  were  said  to  leave  it  only  when 
necessity  required,  and  never  for  exercise.  I  managed 
to  get  into  my  hands  one  of  their  iron  collars,  and 
asked  where  I  could  get  one  like  it.*  They  said,  "  In 
the  bazaar,"  whereupon  I  seized  the  one  I  had  for  my 
collection  of  prison  curiosities,  and  gave  the  man  the 
sum  he  named  wherewith  to  purchase  a  substitute,  f 

*  It  is  comparatively  light,  and  the  iron  not  so  thick  as  the  littl 
finger,  but  I  had  seen  nothing  like  it  in  Europe.     Manacles,  or  chain.s 
for  the   hands,   referred  to   as   worn  by  Jeremiah  (xl.  4)   and   Peter 
(Acts  xii.  7),  and  perhaps  Paul  (Acts  xxviii.  20),  I  did  not  see  or  hear 
of  among  the  natives  of  Central  Asia. 

t  I  had  now  seen  or  heard  of  at  least  three  kinds  of  prisons  in 
Bokhara  illustrative  of  similar  places  of  confinement  mentioned  in 
Scripture.  That  at  Charjui  might  be  compared  to  the  common  prison 
(«V  rr)pr)(Tfi  Brffioaia)  of  Acts  V.  i8  ;  the  Zi?tda7i  at  Bokhara  calls  to  mind 
Jeremiah's  dungeon,  into  which  he  was  lowered  by  cords  (Jer.  xxxviii.  6). 
whilst  the  prison  in  the  palace  of  the  Khan  of  Khokand,  and  the  Kani 
Khaneh  in  the  palace  of  the  Emir,  remind  one  how  Jeremiah  tli 
prophet  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison,  situated  in  the  King  o; 
Judah's  house,  or  that  (Jer.  xxxii.  2)  whereinto  Joseph  was  thrust,  under 
the  captain  of  the  guard — a  place  that  is  not  for  ordinary'  felons,  but 


CHAR  JUL  185 

On  our  way  to  the  prison  at  Charjui  we  passed 
through  the  bazaar.  This  used  to  be  a  great  place 
for  slaves,  brought  thither  by  the  Turkomans,  who 
kidnapped  them  from  the  Persian  frontier.  M. 
Stremoukhoff,  writing  the  year  after  my  return  in  the 
St.  Petersburg  Gazette,  says,  "  Although  the  slave 
markets  In  Bokhara  are  officially  closed,  and  although 
It  is  strictly  prohibited  to  trade  In  slaves,  yet  slaves 
are  sold  and  bought  with  perfect  freedom  in  all  parts 
of  the  country,  and  the  Emir  himself  takes  an  active 
part  in  this  traffic  for  the  replenishment  of  his  harem, 
as  well  as  of  his  coffers." 

When  on  the  spot,  I  did  not  suspect  that  the  trade 
was  still  carried  on,  but  Colonel  Stewart  tells  me  that, 
on  inquiry,  he  learned  that  whilst  there  Is  no  buying  of 
slaves  in  Khiva,  yet  that  Persian  girls  can  be,  and  are, 
sold  at  Charjui,  and,  as  he  left  the  neighbourhood  only 
a  few  weeks  before  telling  me  this,  I  think  it  well  to 
state  the  allegation  openly,  and  with  his  permission 
thereby  to  corroborate  the  letters  of  M.  Stremoukhoff, 
which  state  that  this  odious  trade  is  not  yet  completely 
stamped  out  in  Bokhara. 

We  found  but  little  gold  money  current  in  Bokhara, 
and  were  told  that  it  is  used  chiefly  for  export,  especially 
to  Bombay.  For  this  purpose  Russian  half-imperials 
are  employed,  as  well  as  tillahs.  I  succeeded  in 
adding  to  my  Bokharlot  curiosities  from  the  bazaar  at 
Charjui  another  kind  of  skull-cap,  and  coming  out  of 

where  "the  king's  prisoners  were  bound"  (Gen.  xxxix.  20).  The 
Turkomans,  when  caught  on  the  Persian  side  of  the  desert,  would 
appear  to  fare  worse  than  at  Charjui,  for  less  than  a  week  before 
writing  this  I  met  Colonel  Stewart,  who  has  been  living  on  the  frontier, 
and  who  tells  me  that  one  Persian  prison  he  came  to  was  a  well  in  a 
house,  down  which  Turkoman  man-stealers  and  their  food  were  lowered, 
and  the  well  shut  in  with  a  covering  at  night ! 


i86  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

Bokhara  I  secured  a  curious  implement  for  driving 
donkeys.  It  consists  of  a  thick  handle  about  6  inches 
long,  with  a  goad  at  the  top,  and  two  thick  depending 
chains  about  the  same  length,  but  united  at  the  ends 
by  a  ring.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  chains  are  used 
for  striking  the  animal  as  with  a  whip,  but  rather  (as  I 
saw  them  employed)  the  chain  is  made  to  fall  lightly 
on  the  shoulder,  according  as  the  rider  wishes  the 
animal,  which  is  unbridled,  to  turn  to  right  or  left. 

On  returning  to  our  lodging,  it  seemed  as  if  the 
Bek  were  minded  that  we  should  come  to  no  harm  in 
the  night,  for  he  sent  a  guard  of  i6  soldiers,  4  to  each 
side  of  the  house.  I  cannot  say  much  for  their  arms, 
for  they  were  old  enough,  and  on  two  of  them  I  found 
stamped,  in  my  mother  tongue,  '' Wolley,  Serjeant,  and 
Fairfax." 

I  was  told  that  there  are  29  beks  throughout  the 
khanate,  all  appointed  by  the  Emir,  their  duty  being 
to  collect  the  revenues,  pay  for  their  personal  ex- 
penses and  those  of  their  officials,  and  hand  the 
balance  to  his  Majesty.  Bokhara  and  the  suburbs  for 
about  25  miles  round  is  under  the  Kush-beggi,  who  is 
chief  of  all  the  beks,  and  also  keeper  of  the  Emir's 
harem.  We  got  a  fair  idea  at  Charjui  of  a  bek's  staff 
of  officials,  which  consists  of  about  15  men,  some  of 
whom  are  mirzas,  or  secretaries  ;  others  are  djiguitts, 
whilst  others  have  no  specified  duties. '^^ 

*  Some  of  their  appellations  are  Divan-beggi,  the  highest,  and  Don- 
bashi,  the  lowest  [has hi  m.e.3imn^  head,  or  chief),  Toksaba,  Isha-bashi, 
Bi,  Datka,  Yuz-bashi,  Mirza-bashi,  Churagassi,  Jay-batchi,  Karaul- 
beggi,  Mirakhur  or  captain,  Bakaul  or  cook,  and  Khazinatchi  or 
treasurer.  The  Sharvadar  is  the  officer  who  stands  nearest  the  bek, 
and  presents  his  food  ;  the  Darban,  one  who  stands  always  at  the  door 
to  receive  orders,  which  he  passes  on  to  the  Shagaul,  whose  duty  it  is 
to  see  them  carried  out ;  and,  lastly,  the  Ullaitchi  is  the  master  of 
ceremonies,  to  introduce  dignitaries  and  visitors. 


CHARJUI.  187 

I  asked  about  taxes,  but  got  widely-divergent 
answers  in  various  parts  of  the  khanate.  The 
caravans  from  India  we  saw  between  Karshi  and 
the  capital  were  said  to  pay  duty  at  two  other  places 
in  the  khanate — on  the  Amu  and  at  Tash- Kurgan — 
besides  Bokhara,  at  which  last  it  was  2  J  per  cent,  on 
their  value.  At  one  place  they  said  that  out  of  10 
batmans  of  harvest  they  paid  8  for  taxes,  and  at 
another  place  4,  whilst  for  each  acre  of  clover  land 
they  paid  from  4  to  6  shillings.  According  to  law,  I 
think  I  gathered  that  2  J  per  cent,  was  the  proper  tax, 
but  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  beks  took  more  and 
more,  and  as  much  as  the,y  pleased.*  This,  they  said, 
the  Emir  allowed,  but  if  he  saw  one  getting  very  rich 
he  picked  a  quarrel  with  him,  threw  him  into  the 
Kana-Khaneh,  and  then,  according  to  Muhammadan 
law,  sold  his  property  in  the  bazaar,  took  his  money, 
and  turned  adrift  the  bek's  wives,  with  nothing 
but  their  clothes.  This  treatment,  however,  I  was 
told,  sometimes  overtakes  not  only  extortionate  beks, 
but  also  dishonest  judges,  or  Kazis,  who  are  practically 
the  lawyers.t  About  3  months  before  my  visit  7  Kazis 
had  been  dismissed  for  taking  bribes.  Their  goods 
were  sold,  and  from  the  proceeds  those  who  had  given 
the  bribes  were  allowed  to  reclaim  them,  the  surplus 
being  taken  by  the  Emir. 

I  was  curious  to  know  with  what  feelings  the 
Bokhariots  regard  their   Emir,   and  the  possibility  of 

*  Reminding  one  of  the  publicans,  or  tax-gatherers,  in  Judea,  who 
came  asking,  Master,  what  shall  we  do  ?  He  said,  Exact  no  more  than 
that  which  is  appointed  you  (Luke  iii.  13);  and  of  Zaccheus,  who, 
when  he  found  he  had  so  done,  restored  fourfold  (Luke  xix.  8). 

t  There  is  one  only  for  each  town,  even  for  all  Bokhara.  I  heard 
that  the  chief  Kazi  at  Samarkand,  who  is  elected  by  the  people,  makes 
as  much  as  ;i^i,ooo  a  year.  The  Kazis  judge  petty  matters  and  money 
affairs.     Greater  cases  are  brought  to  the  Kush-beggi  and  the  Emir. 


i88  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  occupation  of  the  khanate  by  the  Russians.  His 
Majesty  does  not,  it  was  said,  go  out  much  from  his 
palace,  except  on  Fridays  to  the  great  mosque  ;  and, 
though  he  is  nominally  the  ruler,  yet  the  real  poten- 
tates are  the  Kush-beggi  and  the  beks.  It  is  they, 
one  man  said,  who  ruin  the  land,  the  Emir  apparently 
not  troubling  himself  about  it,  and  consequently,  since 
he  shows  no  interest  in  his  people,  it  is  only  the 
mullahs  who,  out  of  religious  veneration,  like  him, 
whilst  the  rest  of  the  nation  hate  him.  Again,  it  was 
said  that  the  people  are  discontented,  but  dare  not  say 
anything.  On  the  other  hand,  as  compared  with  some 
of  the  inhuman  monsters  who  have  preceded  him, 
Muzaffar-ed-din  is  mild  ;  and  hence  one  man  said  his 
subjects  liked  him  because  of  his  negative  character, 
and  his  doing  no  harm  ! 

I  did  not  gather  that  either  the  Emir  or  his  people 
had  within  their  breasts  a  spark  of  patriotism.  I 
heard  on  Russian  soil,  with  other  chit-chat,  that  the 
Emir  had  more  than  once  asked  the  Russians  to  give 
him  a  pension,  and  take  his  khanate.  A  native  told 
me  also  that  though  the  Bokhariots  were  on  the  whole 
satisfied  with  the  Emir,  yet  at  his  death,  he  thought, 
they  would  be  ready  for  Russian  occupation.  Muzaffar 
had  recently  been  ill,  at  which  time  the  people  were 
ready  even  to  welcome  the  Russians,  who  were  liked, 
he  said,  at  Samarkand,  though  not  at  Khokand,  but 
neither,  he  added,  did  these  last  care  for  their  own 
Khan.  Another  informant  said  that,  from  talks  he  had 
had  with  the  people,  he  fancied  the  Bokhariots  would 
prefer  Russian  to  native  rule.  I  asked  how,  under 
ordinary  circumstances,  on  the  sovereign's  death  the 
succession  would  go.  They  replied  that  the  Emir  had 
several  sons  (about  lo  adults,  15  boys,  and  a  number  of 


CHAR  JUL  189 

daughters  unknown),  and  that  he  who  had  the  strongest 
party  of  followers  would  fight  for  the  throne.  Perhaps 
it  was  to  prevent  such  a  free  fight  that  the  Russians 
quartered  a  good  many  troops  in  Samarkand  when  the 
Emir  was  ill.  One  native  expected  in  that  event  that, 
xi  the  Russians  advanced,  the  Bokharlots  would  be 
goaded  on  by  the  mullahs  to  fight.  But  this  was  mere 
supposition  on  the  part  of  irresponsible  persons,  and  of 
course  it  was  a  very  delicate  subject  for  me  to  approach 
with  the  Kush-beggi's  messengers.  I  did,  however, 
make  bold  to  introduce  the  subject  one  morning  by 
asking  whether  the  Emir  were  quite  recovered  from  his 
illness,  and,  upon  their  replying  in  the  affirmative,  I  in- 
timated that  I  had  heard  the  people  were  ready,  if  his 
Majesty  had  died,  to  welcome  the  Russians.  I  thought 
these  courtiers  approached  the  subject  like  men  whose 
inmost  fear  was,  "  The  Romans  shall  come  and  take 
away  both  our  place  and  nation."*  They  cautiously 
replied  that  the  people  were  content  with  the  Emir, 
and  that  the  Russians  would  do  evil  if  they  came.  I 
ventured  to  ask.  What  evil  ?  and  they  gave  the  compre- 
hensive reply,  first,  they  would  abolish  the  Muham- 
madan  law  in  favour  of  their  own  ;  secondly,  they 
would  sanction  prostitution  ;  and,  thirdly,  they  would 
bring  drunkenness.  I  believe  that  in  the  conquered 
parts  of  Turkistan  the  Russians  have  to  some  extent 
allowed  the  Muhammadan  law  to  stand,  though  I  could 
not  but  feel  the  truth  of  the  last  two  objections. t 

On  the  evening  of  our  stay  at   Charjui  they  offered 

*  John  xi.  48. 

t  I  had  heard  before  that  they  had  no  houses  of  ill-fame,  and  that  if 
a  woman  was  publicly  immoral,  and  the  Kush-beggi  heard  of  it,  she 
was  executed.  At  the  same  time  they  did  not  pretend  that  there  was 
no  secret  immorality  in  Bokhara,  as  there  was,  they  said,  in  every  country. 


190  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

to  send  us  batchas,  and  I  accepted  them  for  the  sake  of 
Yakoob  and  the  natives,  who  were  said  to  have  the 
chance  of  seeing  such  performances  only  when  a 
visitor  came  ;  but  we  did  not  keep  them  late,  being 
anxious  to  get  to  bed  and  start  early  in  the  morning. 
Of  the  three  boys,  one  sang  and  danced  unusually  well, 
and  it  was  amusing  to  see  one  stout  old  man  drinking 
tea,  looking  admiringly  on,  and  getting  heated  with 
excitement. 

Next  morning  I  stirred  up  Yakoob  before  sunrise, 
and  tried  hard  to  put  the  Toksaba  in  a  bustle  ;  but  it 
is  not  easy  to  hurry  Asiatics.  The  Bek,  they  said, 
must  be  informed  of  our  departure,  and  this  took  some 
time  ;  but  when  the  messenger  returned  he  brought 
with  him  presents  of  khalats,  a  horse  and  saddle-cloth 
for  me,  and  khalats  for  Sevier.  Meanwhile  our  groom 
had  arrived  with  the  agreeable  intelligence  that  the 
tarantass  was  shipped  and  awaiting  us  some  1 1  miles 
off  at  Ghuzari-Tozakar.  This  hanger-on  also  put  a 
scrap  of  paper  into  my  hand  to  inform  me  politely  that 
he  wished  to  quit  my  service  (to  which,  by-the-bye,  I 
had  never  engaged  him),  and  return  to  Bokhara, 
Yakoob  pleading  that  he  had  been  very  useful  in 
taking  care  of  my  stud.  In  due  time,  therefore,  we 
started  once  more  for  the  Oxus.  It  was  a  bright,  fresh 
morning,  too  cold  by  half  to  think  of  sedate  riding,  so, 
as  soon  as  we  reached  the  fields,  I  galloped  off,  leav- 
ing those  to  remain  behind  who  pleased.  One  of  the 
Bek's  djiguitts  had  no  mind  to  be  outstripped,  and  took 
care  to  keep  ahead.  I  followed  his  fleet  horse,  and 
we  covered  the  distance  in  about  an  hour  and  a  half. 

Arrived  at  the  Oxus,  we  found  a  tent  put  up  for 
us,  with  bedsteads,  in  case  we  had  returned  to  sleep, 
and  Fazul  and    Kolutch  ready  to  give  us  the  story  of 


CHARJUI.  191 

their  difficulties  with  the  tarantass.  They  had  dragged 
it  over  the  sand  barkhans,  actually  without  a  scratch 
or  a  visible  strain,  and  it  was  now  safely  shipped  for 
our  departure.  Yakoob,  by  agreement,  was  to  go  on 
with  us  at  least  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  whilst  Fazul  and 
Kolutch  were  to  return  ;  and  the  latter  asked  that  I 
would  write  a  note  to  General  Korolkoff  to  say  how  they 
had  served  me.  I  had  only  one  peccadillo  to  complain 
of,  of  which  Yakoob  had  officiously  informed  me,  that 
when  I  had  sold  the  two  horses  at  Bokhara,  Kolutch 
had  seized  the  two  wooden  saddles,  sold  them  for  a 
trifle,  and  appropriated  the  money.  Accordingly,  after 
giving  Fazul  his  present,  and  paying  the  groom  with 
a  Cashmere  khalat,  of  which  I  did  not  know  the  value, 
but  was  afterwards  told  it  was  worth  three  or  four  times 
as  much  as  I  supposed,  I  took  Kolutch  alone  and 
quietly  lectured  him.  He  was  distressed  on  being 
accused,  said  he  thought  the  saddles  were  of  too  little 
value  to  be  of  importance,  and  urged  that,  had  he 
wished  to  steal,  he  could  easily  have  done  so  when  in 
charge-  of  the  tarantass.  I  tried  to  show  him,  however, 
the  Importance  of  honesty  in  trifles,  and  then  wrote  a 
letter  saying  how  well  Fazul  and  he  had  served  us, 
as  Indeed  they  had.  This  I  gave  him  with  his  present, 
and  added  a  pound  of  tea  for  each  of  the  three.  A 
crowd  had  assembled  on  the  bank,  who  bade  us  fare- 
well as  we  pushed  off  into  the  stream  ;  but  before  we 
commence  the  descent  of  the  Oxus,  I  purpose  to  say  a 
few  words  on  the  upper  portion  of  the  river. 


CHAPTER  LVI. 

THE     UPPER     OXUS. 

Names  of  the  Oxus. — The  Englishman  Wood,  its  first  explorer. — Its 
source  and  issue  from  the  mountains. — Strategical  importance  of 
the  next  reach  of  200  miles. — Alleged  feasibility  or  probability  of  a 
Russian  invasion  of  India. — Fords  and  ferries  on  the  Upper  Oxus. — 
The  Oxus  at  Kilif,  and  from  Khojah-Saleh  to  Charjui. — Reports  on 
the  profitable  steam  navigation  of  the  Oxus. — The  Amu-daria  at 
Charjui. — Our  boat  for  floating  down  the  river. 

IN  ParsI  books  the  Oxus  was  called  Veh-rud,  from 
which  Colonel  Yule  traces  Vakksh,  and  the 
classical  Oxus  ;  but  Colonel  Kostenko  would  trace 
this  last  word  to  the  name  of  what  he  regards  as  its 
head  waters,  the  Ak-Su.  In  early  Muhammadan 
history  its  title  is  Al-Nahr  (the  river),  whence  Mawa- 
ralnahr  signified  "  beyond  the  river,"  or  Transoxiana  ; 
whilst  the  name  now  common  in  Turkistan,  the  Amu. 
appears  to  be  comparatively  modern,  and  of  uncertain 
origin  ;  also,  I  was  told  by  a  native  that  in  Uzbeg 
books  the  river  is  called  Bilkandi  Frindin.  The 
ancients  thought  the  Oxus  one  of  the  rivers  of  Para- 
dise, whence,  probably,  the  arbitrary  name  oi  Jaihun, 
as  it  was  styled  by  Muhammadan  writers  of  mediaeval 
times.  By  whatever  name,  however,  it  has  been 
called,  the  Oxus  has  long  been  the  most  interesting 
river  of  Central  Asia.     In  the  middle  of  the  sixteentl 


THE   UPPER   OX  US.  193 

century  the  first  Englishman,  in  the  person  of  Anthony 
Jenkinson,  crossed  the  lower  part  of  the  stream  on  his 
way  to  Bokhara.  It  was  reserved  for  another  English- 
man to  trace  the  Oxus  to  its  source.  Lieutenant 
Wood,  in  1838,  ascended  the  River  Panj  to  a  lake, 
which  he  named  after  his  then  youthful  queen, 
Victoria,  15,600  feet,  as  he  estimated  it,  above  the  sea. 
Hence  the  Panj,  which  means  five,  after  a  notion  that 
the  river  is  made  up  of  five  streams,  came  to  be 
regarded  as  the  source  of  the  Oxus.  But,  says  Kos- 
tenko,  the  reconnaissances  in  the  southern  portion  of 
the  Pamir,  carried  out  by  members  of  the  English 
mission  under  Forsyth  in  1874,  and  in  the  northern 
portion  of  the  Pamir  by  the  Russians  in  1876,  have 
shown  that  the  River  Ak-Su,  which  flows  out  of  the 
lesser  Pamir  lake,  should  be  regarded  as  the  principal 
source  of  the  Amu. 

Accepting  this  correction,  then,  we  have  the  Ak-Su 
flowing  out  of  the  Oi-Kul,  or  goose  lake,  13,100  feet 
high,  and  about  30  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Sari-Kul, 
or  Lake  Victoria.  After  flowing  for  120  miles  the 
Ak-Su  unites  with  the  Murgab,  and  133  miles  beyond, 
at  Kila  Wamar,  with  the  Panj.  "  Beyond  Wamar  the 
Amu-daria  soon  enters,  first  Darwaz  territory,  then 
that  of  Badakshan,  and  lastly  serves  as  the  boundary 
which  separates  the  province  of  Kolab,  belonging  to 
Bokhara,  from  Kunduz  belonging  to  Afghanistan."* 
The  Amu  receives  its  largest  affluent  from  the  left  in 
the  Kokcha,  and,  after  flowing  143  miles  from  Wamar, 
receives  its  principal  tributary  on  the  right,  namely, 
the  Surkhab  or  Waksh,  the  upper  portion  of  which  is 

*  This  portion  of  the  Amu  to  the  mouth  of  the  Surkhab,   Kostenko 
added,  is  known  only  from  hearsay ;  but  later  information  concerning 
the  head  waters  of  the  Oxus  has  been  given  by  Mr.  Michell  in  the  Pro- 
ceedhigs  0/ the  Royal  Geographical  Society  for  September,  1884. 
VOL.  II.  I  3 


194  RUSSIAJV  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

called  Kizil-Su,  or  Red  river,  and  Its  middle  portion 
Surk-ab,  which  in  Persian  bears  the  same  meaning. 
At  this  point  the  river,  now  400  miles  from  its  source, 
emerges  from  the  mountains,  acquires  a  new  character, 
and  becomes  much  better  known.  Its  direction,  more- 
over, soon  changes  to  the  north-west. 

That  which  gives  greater  importance,  however,  to 
the  next  stretch  of  about  200  miles  to  the  Turkoman 
frontier,  is  that  here  are  the  principal  crossings  on  the 
route  from  Central  Asia  to  Hindustan  ;  and  should  the 
long-talked-of  Russian  invasion  of  India  ever  take 
place,  this  part  of  the  Amu  would  become  of  great 
importance  as  being  the  point  on  which  I  am  told  the 
Russian  left  wing  might  rest.  With  regard  to  the 
feasibility  of  such  a  movement,  since  Alexander, 
Jinghiz  Khan,  and  Tamerlane  invaded  India  from  the 
north-west,  it  would  not  be  complimentary  to  Russian 
military  skill  to  say  that  they  cotcld  not  do  the  same. 
Nevertheless,  after  passing  through  the  country,  and 
especially  across  the  desert,  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  in  this  region  they  would  have  before  them  what 
the  Americans  would  call  ''  a  big  job."  To  get  adequate 
troops  and  baggage  from  Russia  to  Samarkand  is  no 
trifle ;  and  though  the  distance  thence  to  the  Oxus  is 
only  about  350  miles,  a  road  for  a  modern  army  would 
have,  I  presume,  to  be  made  from  Ghuzar,  either  100 
or  153  miles  long.  Moreover,  the  Cossack  would 
hardly  be  content  to  let  blood  from  his  horse  and 
drink  that  for  a  meal  as  did  the  Mongol  soldiers  ;  and 
from  the  report  of  Colonel  Maieff  upon  his  routes  from 
Karshi  to  the  Oxus,  it  would  appear  that  the  tracks  lie 
through  an  unproductive  country,  where  there  is  little 
or  no  pasture  for  horses,  and  where  the  people  grow 
barely  enough  corn  for  their  own  consumption.      But 


i 


THE    UPPER    OXUS.  195 

what  strikes  my  non-military  mind  as  the  greatest 
difficulty  would  be  the  getting  an  army  across  the 
desert  portions  of  the  route  on  either  side  of  the  Oxus. 
It  took  six  camels  and  two  horses  to  run  me  and  my 
carpet-bag  across  the  Aralo-Caspian  desert.  What, 
then,  would  it  take  to  move  an  army  ? 

Nor  can  I  express  an  opinion  as  to  whether  the 
Russians  have  the  least  desire  to  attempt  such  a  thing. 
No  doubt  there  are  Turkistan  officers  to  whom  war 
means  medals,  promotion,  and  money,  who  are  quite 
ready  to  attempt  the  invasion  of  India,  or  for  that 
matter  of  Timbuctoo,  or  any  other  place,  as  there  are 
Indian  officers  who  for  similar  reasons  would  invade 
Turkistan.  So,  again,  as  during  the  Crimean  War 
the  French  and  English  invaded  Kamchatka  (and  a 
pretty  mess  they  made  of  it!),  so,  in  case  of  another 
Russo-English  war  in  Europe,  a  movement  by 
way  of  diversion  might  be  made  upon  India,  with 
perhaps  similar  consequences  to  the  invaders.  But  I 
was  not  led,  by  anything  I  saw  or  heard  in  Central 
Asia,  to  think  that  there  was  any  preparation  or  desire 
for  an  invasion  ;  and  when  now  and  then  I  broached 
the  subject  to  Russian  officers,  it  never  elicited  any 
suspicious  remarks,  or  was  treated  otherwise  than 
as  a  joke.  I  am,  however,  neither  a  soldier  nor  a 
politician,  so  that  I  had  better  perchance  leave  specu 
lation  and  continue  my  description  of  the  river. 

Before  the  river  leaves  the  mountains,  at  Sharwani, 
^  ^  miles  above  the  mouth  of  the  Surkhab,  there  is  an 
cellent  ford  that  is  considered  to  be  the  best  for  30 
miles  up  or  down  the  stream,  and  across  this  ford  guns 
ire  reported  to  have  been  taken  for  winter  forays  by 
he  Alir  of  Kunduz.  Also  immediately  below  the 
own  of  Hazrat   Imam,    still  above  the   Surkhab,   the 


196  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

river  is  fordable  for  artillery  during  six  months  of  the 
year  ;  but  from  a  point  about  30  miles  lower,  the  stream, 
having  received  the  Kunduz  river  on  the  left,  and  the 
Kafirnihan  on  the  right,  may  be  considered  unfordable 
at  all  seasons  throughout  the  remainder  of  its  course. 
As  for  ferries,  I  see  on  my  Russian  map  one  marked 
above  the  Surkhab  at  Kunda-Ghuzar,  and  others  below, 
near  the  mouths  of  the  Kafirnihan,  and  Surkhan,  at 
the  Karakhamar  ferry  near  Chuska  Hazar,  and  at 
Kilif.  Kilif  is  a  village  of  about  40  houses  on  the 
main  road  from  Bokhara  to  Balkh.  It  was  here  that 
both  Timur  and  Nadir  Shah  crossed  on  bridges  of 
boats,  the  river  being  only  334  yards  wide,  and  the 
current  not  too  swift  to  be  crossed  by  swimmers. 
The  banks,  of  equal  height,  are  of  calcareous  schist. 

From  Kilif  to  the  mouth  of  the  Amu,  a  distance  of 
about  700  miles,  the  river  has  been  scientifically  sur- 
veyed by  Russian  topographers.* 

After  the  little  Shirabad  river,  flowing  into  the  Amu 
near  Kilif,  no  more  tributaries  attain  thereto.  In  the 
Bactrian  plain,  that  is,  after  leaving  the  mountains, 
the  river  runs  between  uninhabited,  barren,  flat 
banks   formed  of  loess  and  alluvial  soil  deposited  by 

*  In  1876,  Kostenko  says,  at  the  request  of  the  Emir  of  Bokhara,  r 
survey  was  made  from  Charjui  to  Kilif,  and  levels  taken  of  the  countr} 
round  with  a  view  to  the  construction  of  new  irrigation  canals,  but  th( 
levelling-  did  not  give  encouraging  results.  Thirty-three  miles  belov 
Kilif  is  Khoja  Saleh,  where  Burnes  crossed  in  15  minutes,  in  a  ferr 
drawn  by  swimming  horses.  He  gives  the  width  of  the  river  as  upward 
of  800  yards,  and  its  depth  from  7  to  20  feet.  The  last  Europeai 
author,  I  believe,  who  has  visited  this  portion  of  the  Amu,  is  Dr.  Capm 
who  touched  the  stream  near  the  mouth  of  the  Surkhan  Dr.  Capu 
claims,  and  apparently  justly,  with  M.  Bonvalot,  to  have  been  the  firs 
to  visit  the  entire  ruins  of  the  Surkhan  valley.  Termez  and  Shahr-gul 
(rula,  he  says,  were  known,  but  not  the  more  important  group  ( 
Shahri-Saman.  They  took  sketches  there  of  the  most  characteristi 
substructures,  made  a  map  of  the  vast  necropolis  of  Shahri-Samai  | 
and  took  down  several  legends. 


I 


THE   UPPER   OX  US.  197 

the  water,  which  holds  in  suspension  also  a  large 
quantity  of  granitic  sand.  Dr.  Capus  describes  the 
deposit  as  of  dull  sandstone  which  contains  many  thin 
layers  of  mica.  It  gives  to  the  Amu  a  characteristic 
grey  colour,  which  becomes  yellowish  where  the  banks 
are  formed  of  loess  and  clay. 

Below  Khoja  Saleh  the  Amu  leaves  Afghanistan, 
and,  turning  to  the  north-west,  cuts  off  on  the  left  a 
riparial  strip  of  Bokhariot  territory.  West  of  this  is  the 
Turkmenian  desert,  continuing  to  the  Khivan  oasis.* 

Concerning  the  navigation  by  steam  of  the  Upper 
Oxus,  I  was  told  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  that  the 
Russians  had  proceeded  from  thence  up  the  river  to 
/Afghanistan  between  April  20th  and  May  19th  (O.S.), 
and  a  letter  concerning  a  similar  journey  appeared  in 
the  Russian  naval  journal  called  the  Yacht,  t 

This  was  at  the  time  of  high  water.  Another 
favourable  opinion  on  the  navigability  of  the  Oxus 
is  that  of  General  Grotenhielm,  who,  in  the  year 
before   (1877),    made   the  journey,    he   told    me,   from 

*  A  few  poor  Turkoman  families  here  and  there  cultivate  a  saline 
soil,  and  there  are  a  few  inhabited  points  on  the  road  from  Bokhara  to 
IMaimene  at  Kerki  on  the  left  bank  where  Vambery  crossed.  He  describes 
the  river  at  the  ferry  as  twice  as  wide  as  the  Danube  at  Pesth,  and 
Kerki  as  a  fortified  town.  Burnes  mentions  between  Termez  or  the  mouth 
of  the  Surkhan  and  Charjui,  nearly  300  miles  distant,  15  ferries,  few 
of  them  having  more  than  2  boats ;  but  on  my  Russian  map  I  do  not 
find  more  than  11,  and  I  know  of  9  only  between  Charjui  and  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk,  Thirty  miles  below  Kerki  is  another  ferry,  and  still 
lower,  on  the  right  bank,  is  Burdalik,  whence  there  is  a  route  north  to 
Bokhara,  and  east  to  Karshi.  Thirty  miles  beyond,  on  the  right  bank, 
is  Narizim,  connected  by  a  route  with  Karshi ;  and  rather  less  than 
this  distance,  beyond,  on  the  left  bank,  is  the  oasis  of  Charjui. 

t  It  stated  that  the  ss.  Samarkand  (drawing,  I  understand,  3  feet 
of  water,  and  of  24-horse  power),  commanded  by  Captain  Briukhoff, 
left  Petro-Alexandrovsk  on  the  26th  of  August,  1878,  and  on  the  8th 
September,  after  it  had  passed  the  Afghan  frontier,  at  Khoja  Saleh,  it 
turned  back,  returning  to  its  starting-point  on  the  i8th  September.  In 
the  captain's   report   it   said  :   '•  The  Oxus  presents   no  difficulties  to 


198  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Petro-Alexandrovsk  to  Charjui  in  the  same  steamer, 
embarking  on  the  22nd  of  March.  In  his  report 
General  (then  Colonel)  Grotenhielm  stated  that 
Captain  Briukhoff  had  demonstrated  the  navigability 
of  the  Amu  at  a  time  when  it  has  least  water.* 

These  favourable  reports  must  be  accepted  with 
caution,  for  opinion  is  by  no  means  all  on  one  side, 
some  authorities  considering  the  difficulties  such  as  to 
unfit  the  stream  for  ordinary  navigation.  M.  Shaba- 
shef,  who,  according  to  Kostenko,  explored  some 
506  miles  of  the  course  of  the  river,  was,  from  his 
researches,  brought  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
establishment  of  useful  navigation  of  the  Amu  was 
absolutely  impossible.f  Whether  or  no  this  may  be 
regarded  as  a  pessimist  view  I  cannot  say  ;  but  it  may 

navig-ation  in  its  upper  course ;  the  current  is  not  nearly  so  strong 
above  as  below,  the  banks  are  clayey,  and  fringed  with  reeds  and  fruit- 
trees,  and  the  bottom  is  soft ;  both  sides  of  the  river  are  densely 
populated." 

*  Kostenko  remarks,  however,  that  from  certain  parts  of  the  report, 
it  is  evident  that  the  trip  could  not  be  called  a  successful  one.  On 
two  days,  when  the  weather  was  bad,  a  strong  wind  blew  about  particles 
of  sand,  and  so  darkened  the  horizon  that  it  was  difficult  to  see  the 
channel,  and  the  steamer  several  times  grounded,  though  it  was  always 
easily  got  off.  I  learn  also  from  the  Turkistaii  Gazette,  of  2nd  October 
of  that  year,  that  the  matter  of  fuel  must  be  a  difficult  one.  The 
saxaul  forests  on  the  Amu  are  not  so  abundant  as  on  the  Syr,  and  for 
the  trip  just  mentioned  no  less  than  145  tons  of  saxaul  were  accumulated, 
the  steamer  carrying  2^2  tons,  and  the  rest  being  sent  up  stream  11  days 
in  advance,  in  11  boats,  which  deposited,  at  intervals  of  15  to  25  miles, 
a  store  of  8  tons  on  the  banks,  at  Pitniak,  Meshekli,  Itchke-Yar,  Uch- 
Uchak,  Sartarask,  Ak-Rabat,  Gugerdjeili,  and  Kabakli.  On  the  first 
day,  in  calm  weather,  the  steamer  made  47  miles,  at  the  rate  of  about 

5  miles  an  hour;  but  from  Uch-Uchak,  for  100  miles,  to  Kabakli,  the 
river  was  so  full  of  shallows,  and  so  difficult  to  navigate,  that  it  took  5 
days,  and,  with  other  hindrances,  the  trip  occupied  17  days.  Even  the 
return  journey  down  stream  took  8  days  to  accomplish  500  miles.  H 

+  His  reasons  were  that  the  swiftness  of  the  current,  in  some  placesBI 

6  miles  an  hour,  would  impede  the  progress  upwards  of  the  most 
powerful  steamers  the  Russians  had  in  Central  Asia,  and  that,  if  a  more 
powerful  class  of  steamers  were  built,  they  must  be  larger,  and  so  be 


THE   UPPER   OXUS.  199 

be  noticed  that,  when  I  was  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  in 
1882,  they  told  me  that  no  steamer  had  been  running 
for  two  years,  though  the  Russians  had  been  making 
experiments  in  navigating  the  river  since  1874. 

On  our  arrival  at  the  Amu,  approaching  Charjui,  it 
was  easy  to  perceive  that,  in  speaking  of  the  width 
and  depth  of  the  river,  it  was  essential  to  mention  the 
season,  for  we  were  pointed  to  a  spot  five  miles  distant 
up  to  which  the  natives  said  the  waters  reached  during 
four  months  of  the  year.*  It  is  characteristic  of  a 
large  portion  of  the  river  that  it  has  double  banks. 
The  inner  directly  skirt  the  river  at  low  water,  the 
outer  are  some  distance  off,  in  places  as  much  as  three 
miles,  with  tugais,  or  meadows,  between.     The  second 

unsuitable  for  what  is  in  many  places  an  extremely  narrow  and  tortuous 
channel.  Further,  the  narrowness  of  the  channel  and  its  constant 
shifting  would  interfere  with  the  towing  of  vessels,  because,  at  the  first 
grounding,  the  tow-rope  would  break.  Once  more,  the  unequal  and 
sudden  rise  of  the  waters  from  April  to  August,  and  the  fall  from  August 
to  October,  making  a  difference  of  level  of  8  feet,  would  render  the 
study  of  such  a  shifting  stream  almost  impossible,  and  make  regular 
voyages  altogether  impracticable. 

*  Burnes  gives  the  width  at  Charjui  in  August  as  650  yards.  At  time 
of  high  water,  however,  the  width  should  be  at  the  ferry  500  sajens,  or 
about  1,150  yards,  and  in  some  places  25  and  29  feet  deep.  I  observed, 
when  crossing,  that  20  feet  from  the  bank  the  water  hardly  covered  a 
man's  knees,  and  further  out  in  the  stream  it  did  not  appear  to  be  more 
than  10  feet  deep.  If  I  remember  rightly,  they  pushed  with  poles  all 
across.  Masts  and  sails  are  unknown,  nor  did  we  see  swimming  horses 
attached  to  a  boat  to  drag  it  across.  The  natives,  when  telling  me 
there  were  no  fords  below  Charjui,  added  that  they  sometimes  swim 
horses  across  at  low  water  in  the  narrow  parts,  putting  under  them  in- 
flated skins  on  either  side.  Communication  is  maintained  on  the  upper 
river  by  smaller  boats  than  those  I  have  alluded  to,  and  rafts  are  used 
there  for  the  transport  of  timber  and  firewood.  The  fall  of  the  river 
from  Khoja  Saleh  to  Charjui,  Burnes  estimated  at  600  feet,  in  which  he 
appears  to  be  a  long  way  out,  since,  according  to  Russian  reckoning, 
it  should  be  220  feet,  the  altitude  of  the  following  places  in  feet  being: — 
Kilif,  730;  Kerki,  640;  Burdalik,  580;  Narizim,  545;  Charjui,  510  ; 
after  which,   for  the  next  500  miles  to  its  mouth,  the   river  falls  to 


200  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

banks  are  high,  those  on  the  east  especially  so.  They 
are  even  precipitous.  In  these  cliffs  may  be  found 
fossil  remains,  easily  reached  by  the  hand.  The  space 
between  the  high  and  low  banks  now  increases  and 
now^  diminishes,  and  sometimes  they  unite,  the  river 
flowing  on  uninterruptedly  between.  The  native  boats 
are  rude,  flat-bottomed  barges,  built  of  dumpy  6-ft. 
logs  of  pakz  wood,  chipped  square,  and  cobbled  to- 
gether with  iron  clamps.  It  was  in  a  craft  of  this  kind 
we  were  to  descend  the  river  from  Charjui,  a  willow- 
built  barge,  costing  about  ^^22  in  value,  50  feet  long,- 
10  feet  in  beam,  and  4  feet  deep,  drawing  perhaps  18, 
inches  of  water.  The  gunwale  was  just  low  enough^ 
for  me  to  reach  over,  sponge  in  hand,  and  get  an! 
apology  for  a  morning  wash.  Such  boats  would  make 
an  admirable  bridge,  and  the  river  bed  offers  excellent 
anchorage.  These  Bokhariot  boats  are  said  to  carry 
150  passengers  and  20  tons  of  cargo,  or  20  mounted 
men  with  their  horses,  which  I  should  think  close  work 
for  a  journey,  though  it  might  do  for  a  ferry  passage. 
In  our  own  case,  we  were  favoured  as  the  Emir's 
guests  with  a  boat  to  ourselves.  The  tarantass  was 
placed  amidships,  and  abaft  were  five  horses  of  mine 
and  one  belonging  to  Yakoob,  whilst  the  fore  part  was 
occupied  by  8  oarsmen,  with  two  as  a  guard,  besides 
Khudaiar  Bek,  a  Karaul-beggi,  to  look  after  us. 

Having  described  now  the  Upper  Oxus  from  the 
information  of  others,  I  shall  proceed  to  state  what  I 
saw  myself  between  Charjui  and  Petro-Alexandrovsk  ; 
amplifying  my  own  observation  from  certain  un- 
published Russian  information  I  possess,  concerning, 
which  I  will  only  say  that,  when  giving  measurements] 
of  the  stream,  it  is  to  the  season  of  high  water  they  a 
to  be  understood  to  refer. 


CHAPTER  LVII. 

FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI. 

Prospect  of  floating  300  miles  on  the  Oxus. — Escort  for  protection 
against  the  Turkomans.— Hydrography  of  the  river. — Journey  to 
Kheradj. — Rough  hospitality. — Journey  to  Ustik. — Description  of 
the  river. — Compulsory  service  of  boatmen. — Geological  pheno- 
mena.— Arrival  at  Ildjik. — Change  of  boat  and  oarsmen. — A 
Bokhariot  "  Siberia." — Arrival  at  Kabakli. — Sheep  attacked  by 
wolf.— Visit  from  the  Bek. 

THE  prospect  of  floating  300  miles  down  the 
Oxus,  not  in  a  puffing  steamer,  but  in  a  fashion 
as  ancient  as  the  days  of  Noah  at  least,  was  to  me  a 
new  sensation,  and  one  heightened  in  interest  by  the 
recollection  that  over  this  part  of  my  journey  at  all 
events  no  Englishman  had  ever  preceded  me.  The 
authorities,  not  content  with  giving  us  two  guards 
against  Turkoman  robbers  in  the  boat,  furnished  us 
also  with  five  horsemen  to  ride  along  the  shore. 
Th^ese  latter  were  presented  to  us  at  Guzhari  Tozakar, 
after  which  they  got  into  a  ferry-boat  with  horses  and 
camels,  and  crossed  to  the  east  bank.  The  river  here, 
they  told  us,  was  2,000  kadarm  in  width,  or  rather 
less  than  2,000  yards.*     There  were  no  houses  near, 

*  A  kadarm  was  said  to  measure  i^  arshines,  which  would  make 
the  breadth  about  1,000  yards  less  than  at  the  Khandek-li  ferry  at  high 
water.  This  ferry  is  about  11  miles  from  Charjui,  and  I  suspect  we 
had  been  brought  there,  though  Guzhari  Tozakar  is  the  name  I  have 
entered  in  my  book. 


i 


202  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

yet  the  crossing  ferry-boat  and  the  crowd  attracted, 
I  suppose  to  see  the  foreigners  start,  made  rather  a 
Hvely  scene.  We  stepped  on  board  at  20  minutes 
past  I,  the  Muhammadans  giving  a  parting  blessing,  | 
and  stroking  their  beards  as  they  shouted  Allah  akbar! 
(the  mighty  God  !),  and  Yakshi  sagat !  (a  pleasant 
journey !) — the  former  intended,  I  suppose,  for  the 
"  faithful,"  and  the  latter  for  us  ''  infidels." 

We  soon  found  ourselves  on  the  bosom  of  a  rapid 
current,  and  the  wind  was  also  in  our  favour,  but  it 
was  rather  too  cold  to  be  quite  pleasant.  Faraub  and 
Betik,  on  our  right,  were  left  behind  ;  and  on  our  left,, 
after  floating  3  miles,*  seven  aryks  were  diverted  from 
the  river,  going  in  the  direction  of  Khoja  Kala,  an  1 
inhabited  district  with   7,000  dwellings.t  f 

At  2  o'clock  we  passed  a  wide  expanse  of  land, 
evidently  covered  in  the  time  of  flood,  and  on  the 
bank  were  fishing  nets.  In  half  an  hour  trees  were 
visible  a  mile  off  on  the  left,  and  the  depth  of  the 
water  near  the  left  bank  was  less  than  5  feet.  At 
half-past  3  we  were  proceeding  in  a  very  undignified 
manner.  The  wind  blew  us  against  the  west  bank, 
and  the  prow  and  stern  being  "  much  of  a  muchness," 
with  the  concern  guided  by  an  oar  instead  of  a  rudder, 
the  boat  was  allowed  to  perform  a  series  of  gyrations 

*  That  is,  I  presume,  according  to  the  channel,  rather  than  as  it 
appears  on  the  map,  and  so  hereafter  in  these  minute  measurements. 

f  For  5  versts  more  the  Oxus  continued  to  run  in  an  undivided  channel, 
and  then  aryks  went  off  on  the  right  to  the  villages  Alli-li  and  Alim-dor, 
the  latter  with  100  houses.  For  the  next  10  versts  the  river  widened  to 
4,000  yards,  with  numerous  islands,  one  of  them  3  miles  long,  and  then 
we  came  to  two  arms  of  the  river,  with  an  island  between  and  a  ferry 
connecting  Khandek  on  the  right  and  Khandek-li  on  the  left.  Five 
versts  more  got  us  clear  of  islands,  the  river  was  again  confined  to  2 
versts  in  width,  and  another  mile  brought  us  to  a  ferry  opposite  the 
tomb  of  Sumpana-Bi-baba  on  the  right,  with  an  aryk  going  off^ion 
the  left  bank  in  the  direction  of  Boiun-Uzun,  with  3,000  dwellings. 


FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI.  203 

In  obedience  to  the  sweet  pleasure  of  the  stream  Up 
to  four  o'clock  we  had  seen  only  3  men  ashore  and 
met  two  boats  being  tugged  up  the  stream.  Five 
o'clock  found  us  still  hugging  the  left  bank  because  of 
the  wind,  the  only  visible  reminders  of  human  kind 
being  the  banks  of  aryks.  Half  an  hour  later  the  first 
small  house  was  sighted  on  the  left  bank,  and  soon 
afterwards  the  moon  rose,  and  we  floated  on  till  7 
o'clock  to  Kheradj,  where  we  were  to  stop  the  night, 
thus  accomplishing  30  versts  only  out  of  the  435  (as 
measured  by  the  stream),  from  Charjui  to  Petro. 

What  good  things  they  may  have  prepared  for  us  in 
the  village  I  know  not.  We  were  pointed  to  a  dim 
line  in  the  far  distance,  as  a  haven  of  rest  and  refresh- 
ment, but  on  the  water's  edge  there  was  no  tent 
erected,  and  not  a  creature  to  be  seen,  and  I  did  not 
care  to  go  so  far  away  and  leave  my  tarantass  to  the 
tender  mercies  of  the  first  band  of  Turkomans  that 
might  happen  to  come  along.  I  therefore  declined 
with  thanks  to  go  so  far,  and  a  fire  was  made  on  shore, 
some  Oxus  water  heated,  and  we  sat  in  the  smoke 
drinking  our  classical  tea.  Afterwards  I  retired  to  the 
tarantass  to  write  my  journal,  leaving  Sevier  on  the 
bank  with  the  party  round  the  fire  ;  and  as  I  looked 
out  upon  them  I  could  not  but  be  struck  with  the 
peculiarity  and  novelty  of  the  weird  picture.  Our 
valiant  guard  of  cavaliers,  not  a  ghost  of  whom  we  had 
seen  all  day,  found  us  out  at  feeding  time,  and  swelled 
the  party  to  about  a  score.  One  wore  a  turban  of  red, 
white,  and  blue  ;  Yakoob  had  on  his  Tatar  cap  and 
cassock-like  robe ;  Sevier  had  arrayed  himself  in 
European  smoking-cap  with  his  fur  khalat  purchased 
in  Bokhara;  and  then,  far  outnumbering  these,  was  the 
crowd  of  Uzbegs,   with   their    tanned,    swarthy  faces. 


204  RUSSTAjV  central  ASIA. 

They  drank  tea,  and  lay  round  the  fire  to  sleep,  whilst 
Sevier  and  I  arranged  ourselves  in  the  tarantass,  and 
thus  spent  our  first  night  floating  down  the  Oxus. 

The  next  day  we  managed  to  accomplish  '^'^  miles* 
and  reached  Ildjik.  I  had  read  of  the  rough  delights 
of  taking  a  meal  in  primitive  fashion  round  a  camp 
fire ;  but  when  it  came  to  be  realized  at  breakfast  time  on 
the  morning  of  20th  October,  on  the  muddy  bank  of 
the  Amu-daria,  a  great  deal  of  the  sentiment  vanished. 
My  thermometer  had  fallen  during  the  night  to  7°  below 
freezing  point,  and  at  six  o'clock  the  sun  was  far 
from  hot,  but  we  battled  through  a  meal  by  the  fire, 
and  at  6.30  pushed  off  Matters  were  not  improved 
by  the  fact  that  our  oarsmen  considered  they  had 
now  done  their  duty,  for  they  expected  here  to  have 
been  met  by  a  relay  of  men  and  another  boat  to  carry 
us  on.  We  learned,  too,  that  the  reason  they  had 
not  continued  the  journey  on  the  preceding  evening 
to  Ustik,  as  they  expected  to  have  done,  was  for  fear 

*  In  this  stretch  of  river  we  passed  about  a  dozen  islands,  the 
largest,  at  our  point  of  starting,  being  upwards  of  two  versts  in  length. 
Two  versts  also  was  about  the  average  width  of  the  river  for  13  miles, 
and  then,  at  a  point  385  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  it  contracted 
to  half  this  width,  and  so  continued  for  10  versts,  when  it  once  more 
expanded  to  its  former  width  as  far  as  the  aryk  leading  off  to  Ildjik.  On 
the  left  bank  we  passed  Dekhnau  with  i,ooo  dwellings,  and  Guiniuk 
with  300,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  latter  the  vegetation  of  the 
Charjui  oasis  appears  to  come  to  an  end.  On  the  opposite  bank  it 
ceased  about  15  versts  below  Kheradj.  This  place  is  on  one  of  the 
roads  from  Bokhara  to  Mcrv,  and  there  comes  to  it  from  Kara-Kul,  40 
miles  distant,  a  small  caravan  route,  by  which  travellers  cross  the  river 
to  Dekhnau,  and  then  penetrate  the  desert.  This  route,  moreover, 
continues  from  Kheradj  all  along  our  right  bank  to  Petro-Ale.xandrovsk, 
though  we  were  rarely  within  sight  of  it.  The  noticeable  points  or 
stations  up  to  Ildjik  were  two  places  named  Kheradj,  Godyn  (with  20 
dwellings),  the  ruins  of  Ustik  or  Ost ;  the  fort  of  Ustik  and  Fort  Khoja- 
Kanaspi  (near  which  there  are  in  the  steppe  deposits  of  impure  salt 
worked  by  the  natives),  and  Ildjik  with  200  dwellings. 


I 


FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI.  205 

of  robbers.  Since  neither  boat  nor  men  were  there, 
I  was  obHged  to  be  firm,  and  insist  that  they  should 
take  us  forward,  promising  that  if  they  got  us  to 
Ustik  by  9  o'clock  1  would  give  them  a  sheep  to  eat — 
the  cost  of  the  said  animal  being  125.  At  9.45  we 
passed,  on  our  right,  the  ruins  of  the  fortress  Ustik, 
perched  like  a  stork's  nest  on  the  top  of  a  mound  of 
conglomerate  loess,  at  the  foot  of  which  are  some 
houses  enveloped  by  the  sand,  whilst  from  the  river 
we  could  discern  cupolas  among  the   ruins. 

Ustik  was  a  place  with  threescore  dwellings,  and 
the  residence  of  a  Toksaba,  who  was  unwilling  (and 
perhaps  reasonably  so)  to  let  us  have  the  only  boat  he 
possessed  for  the  service  of  the  ferry.  At  first  he 
rather  gave  himself  airs,  whereupon  I  took  out  my 
pencil  and  note-book,  solemnly  asked  his  name,  and 
wrote  "  Muhammad  Ziphar,"  threatening  to  tell  the 
Emir  that  the  Toksaba  had  declined  to  carry  out  his 
Majesty's  order^^  This  rather  frightened  him,  and 
he  proceeded  to  explain  in  some  way  that  he  was 
acting  for  our  advantage,  and  that  he  wished  our  men 
to  take  us  on  to  the  next  station  at  Kabakli.  It  had 
been  gradually  dawning  upon  me,  though  "  we  were 
appointed  a  daily  provision  of  the  king's  meat,"*  yet 
that,  by  command  of  the  Emir,  we  were  served  in 
travelling  with  forced  labour.  I  first  suspected  this 
with  those  men  who  ran  off  and  forsook  us  coming 
trom  Kara-Kul  in  the  Sundukli  sands.  ''They  appeared 
to  have  been  compelled  to  go  a  mile,"  and  were 
certainly  not  minded  to  go  with  us  twain.t  So  with 
our  present  oarsmen  ;  they  had  not  fulfilled  the  con- 

*  Dan,  i,  5. 

t  Matt.  V.  41.  A  capital  illustration  of  ayyapevw,  which  is  a  Persian 
word,  and  so,  indigenous  to  the  country  we  were  in.  In  fact,  I  could  not 
help  thinking-  how  closely  the   Persian  customs  obser\-ed  in  sending 


2o6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

ditlon  Stipulated  for  the  sheep,  but  I  promised  them 
that,  and  an  additional  present  to  take  us  on.  To  this 
they  consented,  but  unwillingly,  the  distance  by  road 
to  the  next  station,  they  said,  being  1 1  miles. 

After  leaving  Ustik  we  noticed,  at  11.45,  o^  both 
banks,  rounded  hills  of  sand  and  gravel,  with  the 
peculiarity  that  they  were  flattened  on  the  top,  and  all 
at  the  same  height,  so  that  it  was  suggested  whether 
these  flat  hill-tops  did  not  represent,  in  a  former  geo- 
logical epoch,  the  level  of  the  country  around,  the 
mounds  having  been  washed  to  their  present  form.* 

As  the  day  advanced  the  weather  improved  ;  there 
was  less  wind,  and  by  4.20  the  thermometer  had 
risen  to  64°.  We  now  hugged  the  right  bank,  and 
at  half-past  six  came  to  Ildjik  or  Ilchik.  The  Toksaba 
had  preceded  us,  and  was  awaiting  our  arrival,  bent,  I 

away  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  were  re-enacted  in  my  own  case.  "  In  any 
place  where  he  sojourneth,  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  with 
silver,  and  with  gold,  and  with  goods,  and  with  beasts  ";  *' let  the 
expences  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house  "  (Ezra  i.  4  ;  vi.  4).  ("  Now 
the  king  had  sent  captains  of  the  army  and  horsemen  with  me.")  "  More- 
over, I  said  unto  the  king,  If  it  please  the  king  let  letters  be  given  me 
to  the  governors  beyond  the  river  that  they  may  carry  me  over" 
(Neh.  ii.  9,  7).  For  my  part,  I  did  not  ask  for  "  a  band  of  soldiers  and 
horsemen  to  help  us,"  though,  when  provided,  I  saw  no  occasion  to 
decline  it ;  but  let  me  not  forget  thankfully  to  acknowledge  with  Ezra, 
that  "  the  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  us,  and  He  delivered  us  from  the 
hand  of  the  enemy,  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way  "  (Ezra  viii. 
22,31). 

*  I  suppose  it  is  to  these  Dr.  Capus  refers  when  he  says  that  some- 
times one  sees  isolated  hills  of  loess,  and  knows  not  how  to  account 
for  their  presence.  Perhaps  it  is  hazardous,  then,  on  my  part  to  con- 
jecture, but  they  remind  me  of  the  cap-shaped  hillocks  of  which  M.  N. 
P.  de  Marny  speaks  on  the  Lower  Oxus.  He  combats  the  idea  of  their 
origin  being  due  to  the  action  of  the  waves  of  an  ocean,  but  says  they 
are  due  to  atmospheric  erosion.  On  the  other  hand,  Major  Herbert 
Wood  states  that  he  found  the  surface  of  the  hillocks  near  the  Aral  to 
be  composed  of  a  thin  layer  of  sandstone,  showing  very  distinct  ripple 
marks,  which  he  thinks  is  some  primd  facie  evidence  of  the  existence 
of  an  Aralo-Caspian  sea  in  tolerably  recent  times. 


FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI.  207 

fancy,  upon  extorting  money  if  he  could.  Perhaps  he 
had  heard  what  I  had  promised  the  oarsmen.  I  had 
been  warned  as  far  back  as  Samarkand  to  be  very 
careful,  if  I  hired  a  barge,  to  make  a  bargain  before 
starting.  The  Toksaba  now  asked  us  about  paying 
for  the  boat.  I  simply  replied  that  we  were  the 
Emir's  guests,  and  were  being  provided  with  all  things 
necessary  to  take  us  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk  by  his 
Majesty's  commands.  To  this  charge  he  did  not 
return,  though  he  afterwards  endeavoured  to  have 
money  dealings  with  me  to  his  advantage,  and  also  tried 
to  deceive  me  respecting  the  number  of  men  at  his 
disposal.  They  had  erected  no  tent,  and  we  had 
again  to  eat  our  supper  by  moonlight  surrounded  by 
Turkomans,  whose  swarthy  faces  beneath  their  sheep- 
skin hats  looked  grimly  fierce  in  the  glare. 

Our  next  stretch  of  river  was  to  Kabakli,  or  Karakli, 
distant  47  miles.*  We  were  promised  overnight  by  the 
Toksaba  that  a  boat  some  miles  off  should  be  sent  for, 
but  in  the  mornfflTg  it  had  not  come.  We  proceeded, 
therefore,  to  breakfast  leisurely  in  the  open  on  cream, 
tea,  chicken,  bread  and  butter,  and  then  looked  about 
at  some  Turkoman  boats  and  rough  shelters  they  had 

*  Thus  far  from  Charjui  we  had  been  running  due  east  and  west,  but 
now  the  river  turned,  and  resumed  its  normal  direction  to  the  north- 
west, not,  however,  in  a  straight  line,  but  in  three  bends  to  Kabakli. 
Opposite  Ildjik  the  river  contracted  to  a  verst  in  width,  10  versts 
further  on  enlarged  to  3  versts,  with  an  island  in  the  middle,  and  again 
contracted  5  versts  further  on,  where,  on  the  right  bank,  was  the 
tomb  of  Ak-rabat,  and  on  the  left  the  town  Moor,  with  500  dwellings 
(which  Walker's  map,  by-the-bye,  places  on  the  wrong  side  of  the 
river),  and  2  versts  beyond,  on  the  left  bank,  the  ruin  of  Kyzyl-Bash. 
Another  8  versts  brought  us  due  north  of  the  fortress  of  Ist-poos,  on 
the  left  bank,  where  are  said  to  be  half-a-dozen  houses  and  a  garrison. 
About  a  verst  further  are  ruins  of  a  fort  of  the  same  name.  For  the 
previous  10  miles  there  is  vegetation  on  the  left  bank,  but  not  on  the 
right,  and  both  banks  now  become  barren.  For  the  next  30  versts  the 
stream  continues  contracted,  for  the  most  part  to  one  verst  in  width. 


2o8  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

constructed  with  their  oars  and  poles  and  pampas 
grass,  one  of  them  having  a  hawk  tied  near.  Mean- 
while our  Karaul-beggi,  the  five  horsemen,  and  the 
oarsmen  wished  to  return  to  Charjui,  and  proposed  to 
take  the  tarantass  out  of  the  boat  to  be  left  on  the 
bank  till  the  other  boat  arrived  ;  but  this  I  forbade, 
having  no  wish  to  find  myself  stranded  on  the  banks 
of  the  Amu.  Moreover,  I  would  have  preferred  to 
keep  the  boat  we  had,  and  I  could  not  see  how  the 
carriage,  without  mechanical  appliances,  was  to  be 
transferred  from  one  boat  to  the  other.  When  at  length 
the  new  craft  arrived,  it  was  older  and  smaller  than 
the  one  we  had,  but  they  called  everyone  to  work, 
and,  to  my  no  little  surprise,  with  their  hands  lifted^ 
the  heavy  machine  out  of  one  boat  into  the  other.* 
The  Turkomans  had  lent  their  assistance,  and  I  dis- 
tributed three  boxes  of  sugar-candy,  not  supposing 
that  such  a  ragged-looking  lot,  whose  only  belongings 
appeared  to  be  a  few  bales  of  tobacco,  and  those, 
perhaps,  committed  to  them  for  transport,  would  have 
anything  to  offer  in  return  ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  they 
offered  a  few  nice-looking  apples  from  Khiva,  the 
first  I  had  tasted,  but  of  disappointing  flavour. 

We  now  dismissed  our  escort,  and  at  12.45  P^^  off 
with  only  3  oarsmen  and  the  Toksaba,  our  two  selves 
and  Yakoob,  and  5  horses.    The  quarrelsomeness  of  our 

after  which,  10  versts  above  Kabakli,  it  expands  to  a  width  of  2^ 
versts  by  reason  of  two  wooded  islands,  one  of  which  is  4  versts  long. 
All  the  way  from  Charjui  to  Ist-poos  the  banks  had  been  of  loess  and 
flat,  but  at  a  point  330  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  and  5  versts 
further,  opposite  the  ruin  of  Nar-kiz-kala,  on  the  right  hand,  there  is  a 
stony  cliflf  2  versts  long.  There  is  a  similar  cliff  on  the  left  bank,  10 
versts  further,  at  Mys-ak-tur,  or  Tashakhur,  that  I  estimated  at  from  40 
to  60  feet  high.  Five  versts  further,  sand  barkhans  take  up  nearly  half 
the  river  bed  opposite  a  tugai,  or  spit  of  land,  Djegdiari,  the  first 
marked  in  our  course. 


I 


FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI.  209 

Stallions  was  a  constant  nuisance.      As  they  could  not 
be  tied  other  than  close  together,  and  Yakoob's  horse 
threatened   to    kick    Sevier's,    it    caused  the  latter  in- 
cautiously to  spring  out  of  the  way,   and  in  so  doing, 
much   to  his  own  surprise  and  ours  likewise,  to  jump 
into  the  water.       He  had  therefore  to  swim  until  the 
boat  could  be  brought  to  land,  whence  he  re-entered, 
with  his   courage  evidently  cooled.     At  3  o'clock  the 
right  bank  was  from  10  to  15  feet  high,   and  at  5.20 
we  came  to  sand  barkhans,  on  the  same   side  of  the 
river,   from   30  to  40  feet  in    height.      After   leaving 
Ildjik    we    overtook    only   one    small     boat,    saw    no 
houses,  and  only  one  man  on  the  banks  before  night 
came  on.     The  maximum  temperature  during  the  day 
rose  to  63°,   and  the  wind  had  so  gone  down  that,  as 
we  drank  our  tea  by  moonlight,   Sevier  sitting  on  the 
box  with  a  light  and  I  inside,  the  candle  for  a  long  time 
was  not  blown  out.     They  had  given  out  on  Thursday, 
when    we    left    Charjui,   that   they   expected   to   reach 
Kabakli  in  two  days,  and  I  had  intended  there  to  spend 
something  like  a  quiet  Sunday.     Waiting  for  the  boat, 
however,  had  hindered  us,  and  I  now  urged  the  men 
CO  take  advantage  of  the  moon,  and  go  on  as  far  as 
'possible  during  the  night.     This  they  consented  to  do 
long  as  they  could  see,  after  which  we  were  to  lay  to 
:ill   break  of  day.      Accordingly,  after  tea,    we  turned 
11  to  rest,   our  slumbers  being  soothed  by  the  ripple 
)t    the     waters,    and    occasionally    disturbed    by    the 
shouting  of  the  men,  when   running  on  a  bank.     We 
stopped    for    only   about    4    hours    during    the    night, 
md  by  8  next  morning  were  opposite  the  Tash-akhur 
:liffs  on  the  left  bank.       Fifteen  versts  further,  beyond 
wo  wooded  islands,  we  had  on  our  left  the  ruins  of 
"^engr  Rabat,  and  on  the  opposite  bank  Chidari  Kaya 
VOL.  II.  14 


210  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

in  the  Saradar  or  Soratas  tugai,  and  by  half  an  hour 
before  midday  we  reached  Kabakh. 

The  fame  of  Siberia  as  a  place  of  exile  is  not  un- 
known in  Bokhara,  and,  in  imitation  thereof,  the  Emir 
is  said  to  banish  some  of  his  criminals  to  Ustik,  and 
on  the  other  side  of  the  flood  to  Charjui  and  Kabakli, 
which  three  places  are  called  a  la  BokJiarienne,  Little, 
Middle,  and  Great  Siberia.* 

We  had  approached  Kabakli  during  the  great 
Muhammadan  feast  of  Kurban-Bairam,  to  which 
Yakoob  had  been  looking  forward,  and  the  Toksaba 
asked  me  to  sell  him  a  silk  khalat  wherein  he  might 
attend  the  mosque  in  grand  array,  taking  good  care, 
however,  to  offer  me  little  money  and  to  say  that  he 
had  no  more.  When  we  landed  and  despatched  a 
messenger  to  the  Bek  to  announce  our  arrival,  he  sent 
to  say  that  prayers  were  over,  and  that  he  was  re- 
ceiving visits,  but  that  he  would  shortly  send  a  djiguitt 
or  come  himself  to  see  us.  Meanwhile  a  tent  was 
erected  for  our  use  in  a  wood  among  stunted  trees  and 
stalks  of  pampas  grass,  one  of  which  last  I  had  the 
curiosity  to  cut,  and  found  it  measured  1 7  ft.  6  in.  in 
length.  This  wooded  tract  of  country  we  had  had  on 
our  left  for  half  an  hour  before  arriving.  Near  at  hand 
was  a  flock  of  sheep,  and  during  our  stay  the  shepherd 
came,  saying  that  a  wolf  had  just  killed  a  sheep  and 

*  Dr.  Capus  speaks  of  Kabakli  as  an  advanced  post  of  tht 
Bokhariots  against  the  Turkomans  of  the  desert,  and,  in  a  letter  to  thi 
Geographical  Society  of  Paris,  mentions  300  or  400  Bokhariot  soldier; 
kept  there  to  repress  the  brigands.  This  looks  rather  like  anothe 
version  of  my  Russian  information  I  have  given  concerning  Ist-poos 
for  I  can  hardly  think  there  would  be  two  garrisons  so  near  togethef^ 
We  did  not  leave  the  margin  of  the  river,  but  the  fortress,  wiiP| 
crenelated  walls  200  yards  square,  is  described  as  enclosing  the  habi 
tations  of  the  military,  and  surrounded  by  4  or  5  hovels  or  saklioi 
some  stalls,  a  bath,  tombs,  and  a  little  mosque. 


FROM  CHARJUI  TO  KABAKLI.  211 

was  making  off  therewith,  but,  on  being  chased,  dropped 
it.*  The  shepherd  said  also  that  the  Bek  was  on  his 
way  to  us.  We  had  dined  in  the  tent,  and  it  was  now 
well  on  in  the  afternoon  when  the  old  gentleman  arrived, 
so  infirm  that  one  almost  wondered  at  his  being  able  to 
mount  a  horse.  I  had  once  more  to  drain  my  stock  of 
European  articles  for  presents,  and  I  gave  him,  among 
other  things,  my  gorgeous,  gold -embroidered,  Servian 
vest  that  had  done  such  good  service,  a  pair  of  spectacles, 
a  ring,  and  some  English  needles.  The  one  burden  of 
my  request  was  that  he  would  send  us  forward  to  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  with  more 
oarsmen.  He  promised  to  give  us  two  additional  men 
and  a  mirza  to  represent  himself,  adding  that,  if  the  men 
did  not  bring  us  there  in  two  days,  they  should  receive 
five-and-twenty  lashes.  In  the  same  breath,  however, 
he  intimated  that  in  fine  weather  the  journey  took  three 
days,  whereupon  I  promised  that  if  in  that  space  of 
time  they  brought  us  there,  I  would  give  a  present,  but 
that  if  they  failed  so  to  do,  I  would  let  him  know.  I 
asked  if  it  would  expedite  matters  to  have  our  horses 
sent  by  road,  but  he  preferred  not  to   undertake  the 

*  A  modern  illustration,  I  thought,  of  an  ancient  story  :  "  Thy  servant 
kept  his  father's  sheep,  and  there  came  a  lion  and  a  bear,  and  took  a 
lamb  out  of  the  flock ;  and  I  went  out  after  him,  and  delivered  it  out 
of  his  mouth  "  (i  Sam.  xvii.  34,  35).  The  Kirghese  on  horseback  hunt 
the  wolf  and  beat  him  to  death  with  their  riding- whips,  and  the  fighting 
of  men  with  bears  is  said  to  be  sometimes  done  still  by  the  Gilyaks, 
amongst  whom  I  travelled  on  the  Amur  in  1879.  John  x.  12  seems  to 
contemplate  the  shepherd  fighting  the  wolf,  even  to  the  laying  down  his 
life  for  the  sheep.  In  the  Caucasus,  where  wolves  abound,  I  learned,  in 
1880,  that  the  shepherds  provide  themselves  with  wolf-like  dogs  in  large 
numbers  to  protect  their  flocks  from  beasts  of  prey,  but  I  am  not  sure 
whether  or  no  this  practice  obtains  among  the  natives  of  Central  Asia. 
Further  down  the  Amu  we  saw  a  shepherd  with  his  flock,  but  I  do  not 
remember  anything  about  a  dog.  I  learned,  however,  that  the  Bo- 
khariot  shepherds  do  not  lead,  but  drive  their  sheep,  which  would  seem 
to  require  the  employment  of  canine  help. 


212  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

responsibility  of  sending  them.  All  else,  however, 
that  I  asked  he  promised  to  do,  and  said  that  we  should 
start  early  on  Monday  morning. 

We  slept  that  night,  if  I  remember  rightly,  one  in 
the  tarantass  and  one  in  the  tent,  and  early  next  morn- 
ing were  astir.  There  were  provisions,  of  course,  to 
be  taken  in.  The  Bek  sent  no  present,  but  provided 
us  with  fodder  for  5  horses,  besides  4  live  chickens, 
bread,  eggs,  milk,  cream,  and  melons.  This  was  much 
the  same  as  had  been  provided  for  us  at  Charjui. 
The  local  cost  of  clover,  I  heard,  was  12^.  6d.  for  100 
snaps  of  an  armful  each,  or,  according  to  the  time  of 
year,  from  lod,  to  2od.  per  donkey-load  of  about  11 
bundles,  April  being  the  dearest  season.  The  Bel 
was  spoken  of  as  stingy,  but  fond  of  turning  a  penny, 
and,  though  he  had  sent  no  present,  they  said  he  would] 
purchase  the  bridles  other  beks  had  given  me.  I  ha( 
more  than  I  wanted,  and  offered  him  two  by  the  hand 
of  the  Toksaba,  for  which  he  gave  me  two- thirds  of 
what  I  asked.  I  had  an  offer  also  at  the  place  for  a 
pair  of  my  horses,  but  not  knowing  whether  I  might 
not  want  them  beyond  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  I  declined 
to  sell  for  less  than  ^3  each,  and  took  them  on.  The 
Toksaba  had  told  us  at  Ildjik,  as  the  reason  for  giving 
us  only  three  men  instead  of  the  eight  we  had  had  from 
Charjui,  that  his  men  had  run  away ;  but  we  learned  at 
Kabakli  that  it  was  a  falsehood,  for  he  had  only  three, 
of  whom  one  was  ill.  I  cannot  say  that  I  liked  this 
official,  and  I  was  accordingly  glad  to  give  him  his 
congd  when  he  desired  to  return. 


i 


CHAPTER  LVIII. 

FROM  K ABA KLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK. 

Hydrography  of  river  to  Russian  frontier. — Departure  from  Kabakli. — 
Ruins  on  the  banks  and  tugais. — Precautions  against  robbers. — 
Fauna  of  the  islands  and  river  banks.— Native  information. — Uzbeg 
notions  of  a  future  life. — Singing  oarsmen. — The  Bokhariot  frontier. 
—Flora  of  the  river  islands  and  banks. — The  "  Pitniak  Curve" 
and  "  Lion's  Mouth." — A  dumb  journey  thence  by  horses.— Shura- 
kaneh. — Arrival  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk. 

THE  journey  before  us  to  the  Russian  frontier 
beyond  Ust-Uchak  measured  by  the  bed  of  the 
river  113  miles.*  We  launched  forth  at  7. 10  on  a 
morning  cloudy,  but  not  windy,  and  after  rowing  7 
miles,  passed  on  our  left  the  ruins  of  Katta-kala,  and 
after  7  miles   more,  arrived  at    10  o'clock   at  the  Bish 

♦  Five  versts  from  Kabakli  the  river  contracts  to  875  yards,  and  con- 
tinues almost  without  islands  for  15  versts  more.  Afterwards,  for  10 
versts,  it  widens  to  2:^  versts,  enclosing  numerous  wooded  islands.  Then 
comes  a  course  of  25  versts  of  river  (to  a  point  240  versts  from  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk)  about  the  same  width,  with  only  one  large,  treeless  island, 
4  versts  long.  The  banks  for  35  versts  from  Kabakli  are  of  loess  and  flat, 
with  a  few  trees  on  the  left.  Four  versts  further,  however,  the  right 
bank  changes  in  appearance,  and  presents  cliffs  of  clay  for  60  versts, 
except  at  the  Shurtankali  tugai,  which  is  bounded  by  sand  barkhans. 
On  the  left  bank  the  clay  cliifs  do  not  continue  unbroken  for  so  long  a 
stretch.  Opposite  the  tugai  just  mentioned  there  is  a  clay  cliff,  a  verst 
long ;  then  come  flat  banks  for  4  versts  on  either  side  of  the  ruins  of 
Kitmenchi  fortress  ;  a  verst  beyond  that  place  clay  cliifs  run  again  for 
II  versts  to  the  before-mentioned  point,  240  versts  from  Petro-Alexan- 
drovsk. 


214  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Arandjan  tugai,  with  the  ruins  of  Uch-Keran  (seem- 
ingly also  called  Kavakli),  on  the  left  bank,  whilst 
opposite  are  two  ruined  castles,  with  a  legend  worthy 
of  the  banks  of  the  Rhine. 

One  is  called  Kyz-kala,  or  Maiden  fortress,  and  the 
other  that  of  her  lover,   Im-  or  Djiguitt-kala.       Kyz- 
kala  is  an  extensive  ruin,  situated  on  the  top  of  a  hill 
about  a  mile  from  the  river,  and  enclosing  13  acres  of^ 
land.      We  could  discern  from   the  river  the  remains 
of  a  gateway,  apparently  of  burnt  brick,  and  we  were] 
told  that  it  contains  still  a  bath  and  a  prison.     There' 
is  a  subterranean  aqueduct  from  this  ruin  to  the  river, 
and  a  well  inside  the  fortress.      Even   the   woodwork 
may  be  seen,  and  the  well,  being  built  of  baked  brick, 
is    admirably    preserved.     The  ruins  on  the  banks  of 
the  Amu  are  said  to  be  of  two  kinds,  namely,  fortresses 
of  considerable  strength,  such  as  Kyz-kala,  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  frontier,  and   fortified    caravansaries    to 
afford  shelter  to  passing  caravans.     Somewhat  to  the 
south,    and  near  the  Amu,   is  the  ruin  of  the  fortress 
of  Djiguitt-kala,    anciently   enclosing    8,     but    now   3, 
acres  of  land.     Here  also  was    visible  a  cupola   over 
the    bath,    but    both    places    are    uninhabited.       The 
legendary  origin  of  these  two  was  given  me  as  follows  : 
About  400  years  ago   there   lived   a  princess,  who  did 
not  wish  to  be  married,  whereupon  she  ran  away  into 
the  Steppe,  and  built  Kyz-kala,  wherein  to  live  in  single 
blessedness.     Her  lover  followed,  and  erected  Djiguitt- 
kala  near,  but  to  no  purpose  ;  for  the  damsel  remained 
obdurate.     Soon,   however,   it  came  to  pass  that  she 
was  at  a  loss  for  water,  and  determined  to  excavate  a 
subterranean  way  to  the  river  ;  but  the  lover  discovered 
this,  and  stopped  it  up,  whereupon  the  princess  fled,  and 
her  lover  after  her,  and  they  were  never  heard  of  more  ! 


i 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     215 

At  10.15  we  came  to  three  boats  near  the  bank,  and 
S  miles  from  the  lovers'  fortresses  we  passed,  on  the 
left  hand,  the  ruins  of  Eshik-rabat,  in  a  tugai  of  that 
name,   and,   on  the  opposite  bank,    Kheik   tugai.     At 
1.45    I    judged  the  cliffs  on  our  right  to  be  from  60 
to  80  feet  high,  and   half  an  hour  later   we  passed,  on 
the  left  bank,  a  wood  of  small  deciduous  trees,  within 
sight    of  the  ruined  town    of   Daiakatyn-kala,    said  to 
have  been  built   in  the  time   of  Abdullah    Khan.     The 
mud  walls  and  a  high    gateway,  apparently    of  burnt 
brick,    were  visible,    and   on   the  opposite  bank  was  a 
stone  erected  in   memory  of  a  hero,  who,  it  was  said, 
used  to  ride  across  the  river  (from  Kok-oguz-kala  T)  to 
the  town.      A  little  further  on  were  the    ruins    of    a 
fortress  and  tomb,  named  after  a  saint,  one   Kitmenchi- 
baba.     Opposite  is  the  large  Shurtankali  tugai,  4  versts 
along  the  bank,  and  on  the  map  is  marked  the  Tekke 
ferry,  the  first   below  the   one  at    Kabakli,  where,   by 
the    side    of   the  place    we    landed,    we    had    seen    a 
Turkoman  barge  proceeding  in  the  same  direction  as 
ourselves.     At  3.20,  the  banks  on  the  right   I  judged 
to  be   from  40  to   50   feet   high,  and  sandy.     Yakoob 
here  went  ashore  to  find  some  large  stones,  if  possible, 
whereon  to   rest  his  kettle  in  the  boat  during  cooking 
operations,   but    he  was  obliged  to  return  with  lumps 
of  earth.      At  4.15    we   had    on   our   right    the    Gurli 
tugai,  where  we  saw  a  shepherd  with  a  staff  indeed, 
but  straight,  the  Bokhariot  staff  having  no  crook.     At 
5   o'clock    we    were    floating   between  lofty  banks    on 
either  side  of  the  river,   the  right  cliff  some  distance 
from  the  water  now  ;  though   I   should  suppose,  when 
the  river  is  high,  the  stream  touches  both  cliffs. 

At   sunset  the   men   wished   to    stop.      This    I    en- 
deavoured to  prevent,  reminding  them  that  my  reward 


2i6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

was  offered  on  condition  of  their  bringing  me  to  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk  in  three  days.  They  said,  however,  that 
the  mud  banks  rendered  navigation  perilous  by  night, 
and  they  drew  to  land  ;  but  hearing  there  that  the 
Turkoman  boat,  that  left  Kabakli  before  us,  had  passes 
only  an  hour  before,  they  put  off  again,  caught  up  th 
craft,  and  stopped  alongside  for  the  night* 

I   suppose  that  our  men  sought  the  company  of  thi 
friendly     Turkoman    boat    as     a    precaution    against 
robbers,  for  we  were  now  in  the  most  dangerous  part 


*  Beyond  this  point  the  river  for  20  versts  widens  to  2\  versts,  en 
closing  several  islands,  the  largest  6  versts  long,  opposite  th 
Gugerdjli  or  Kukertli  tugai  on  the  flat  left  bank.  Beyond  this 
tugai  sand  barkhans  prevail  for  6  versts,  and  then  comes  a  stony  cliff 
to  the  river,  3  versts  long,  near  At-Khor-Kaya,  opposite  Kukertli. 
Between  this  cliif  and  the  opposite  clay  cliff,  2\  versts  distant,  the  river 
contracts  to  1,750  feet,  leaving  dry  a  strip  of  wooded  land  on  the  right, 
8  versts  long.  The  stream  then  regains  its  normal  width  of  500  sajens, 
and  so  continues  for  20  versts,  where,  after  a  contraction  to  half  this 
width  near  the  tomb  of  Dargan-ata  (called  also  Ak-Kala),  it  expands 
to  nearly  4  versts,  the  widest  part  we  had  seen,  and  includes  its  largest 
island,  8  versts  long,  called  Dargan-baba.  Here  the  long  clay  cliff  on 
the  right  ceases.  At  a  point  197  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk  both 
banks  are  flat  with  the  ruins  of  Kyzyl- rabat  (called  also  Urus  or 
Russian  fort)  on  the  right,  and  Ak- rabat  on  the  left.  Three  versts 
beyond,  the  river  contracts  again,  and  then  rolls  on  for  20  versts.  On 
the  right  bank,  opposite  the  ruin,  rises  a  clay  cliff  a  verst  long ;  then 
comes  the  Shura  tugai,  6  versts  long  ;  and  afterwards  another  clay  cliff 
of  the  same  length,  called  Pik-Suat  or  Dik-Suat.  Opposite  to  this,  on 
the  left  bank,  ends  also  in  the  same  latitude  a  clay  cliff  extending  from 
within  3  versts  of  Ak-rabat,  which,  opposite  an  island  5  versts  long,  is 
called  Gerchegen-Tau  or  mountain.  Both  banks  now  continue  flat  for 
5  versts  to  a  point  170  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk.  Then  begins  the 
last  clay  cliff  on  Bokhara  soil,  on  the  right  bank,  10  versts  long,  near 
Burlius-ulade  tugai,  whilst,  on  the  left  bank,  at  a  point  168  versts  from 
Petro-Alexandrovsk,  are  Kara-shir,  which  is  the  Bokhariot  frontier,  and 
Kichekran-kaya  or  kala,  which  is  the  Khivan  frontier.  Here  the  river 
contracts  to  less  than  a  verst,  and  then  flows  on  for  8  versts,  with  the 
Kumalapyn  tugai  on  the  left ;  and  on  the  right,  at  the  end  of  the  cliff 
just  mentioned,  the  ruin  of  Sertarash.  The  river  now  for  25  versts 
widens  sometimes  to  4  versts,  to  the  Bokhara  Lager,  or  camp  fortess, 
on  the  right  bank,  135  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk.     The  banks  for 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.    217 

of  our  course.*  Our  men  were  evidently  shy  of 
travelling  after  dark.  One  evening  they  wished  to 
stop  soon  after  six  o'clock,  and,  in  answer  to  my 
urging  them  on,  they  replied  by  a  threefold  argument, — 
that  I  was  in  the  first  place  the  guest  of  the  Emir  ; 
secondly,  the  guest  of  the  Kush-beggi  ;  and,  thirdly, 
the  guest  of  their  own  Bek.  Consequently,  being 
responsible  for  our  safety,  they  did  not  like  to  ven- 
ture further  for  that  night.  Tekkes,  however,  were 
not  the  only  foes  we  had  to  fear,  for  just  before  going 
to  rest  one  night,  Yakoob  came  from  shore  to  say  they 
thought  there  were  wolves  about,  and  asked  me  to  let 
off  2  or  3  pistol-shots  to  scare  them  away.  I  emptied 
3  barrels  of  my  revolver  into  the  air.  Whether  or  no 
the  wolves  were  frightened  I  know  not.  The  horses 
were,  and  it  was  well  they  did  not  take  it  into  their 
heads  to  break  loose. 

We  started  on  Tuesday  morning  at  6.15,  and  soon 
after  saw  a  jackal  (they  call  it  shakal)  on  the  left  bank. 
At  8  we  breakfasted,  on  coffee,  cream,  cold  chicken,  and 

this  stretch  on  either  side  are  flat,  except  on  the  left,  opposite  the  fort, 
where  is  a  stony  cliff,  7  versts  long,  called  the  Burliu  boundary,  and 
opposite  to  which,  a  couple  of  versts  beyond  the  fort,  on  the  other  bank, 
are  the  three  hills  called  Uch-Uchak. 

*  When  Capus  and  Bonvalot  descended,  12  months  before  us,  they 
appear  to  have  taken  great  precautions  against  the  bandits,  especially 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Tekke  ferry,  where  they  avoided  shouting 
and  unnecessary  noise  by  day,  and  the  lighting  of  fire  by  night.  They 
certainly  had  good  reason  to  know  of  the  vicinity  of  robbers,  inasmuch 
as  they  picked  up  in  their  boat  two  miserable  wretches  who,  leading 
camels  to  Bokhara,  had  been  robbed  of  everything  by  the  Turkomans, 
and  one  of  their  companions  killed.  After  the  Khivan  war  the  Russians 
gave  a  part  of  the  territory  ceded  to  them  to  the  Emir  of  Bokhara,  on 
condition  that  he  would  establish,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Amu,  posts 
of  vigilance  and  refuge  for  caravans.  The  bandits  were  said,  however, 
to  cross  the  river  at  the  narrowest  places  on  inflated  skins,  holding  their 
horses'  bridles,  or  sometimes  they  spied  a  boat  starting,  and  waylaid  it 
in  a  difficult  part  of  the  stream. 


2i8  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

bread  and  butter;  and  at  lo  our  head  cook  came  for 
orders  for  dinner.  I  said,  ''  Soup  as  yesterday  ;  a 
boiled  chicken  ;  and,  for  a  third  course,  rice-pudding, 
with  milk  and  eggs  and  sugar.  To  be  served  at  one." 
We  had  met,  an  hour  and  a  half  before,  a  boat  with 
a  very  rough-looking  crew,  from  whom  we  had  ob- 
tained, by  borrowing,  begging,  stealing,  or  some  law  of 
exchange  unknown  to  me,  an  extra  man  and  a  kettle, 
concerning  which  latter,  when  the  dinner  came,  we 
asked  no  questions,  but  ate  what  was  given  us.  We 
were  now  becoming  somewhat  accustomed  to  roughing 
it,  and,  besides,  the  weather  was  becoming  more  agree- 
able. My  thermometer  at  Kabakli  fell  during  the 
night  to  2)7°,  but  went  up  next  day  to  a  maximum  of 
70°.  whilst  on  the  24th  October  it  stood  at  80°  in  the 
shade,  though   I   must  add  that  the  wind  was  cold. 

At  1 1  o'clock  we  went  on  shore,  near  the  hut  of  a 
solitary  fisherman,  who,  to  my  surprise,  had  in  his 
possession  a  Russian  breach-loading  rifle,  the  only  one, 
so  far  as  I  remember,  that  we .  saw  in  the  Bokhara 
Khanate.  He  had  shot  some  wild  animals  and  caught 
a  young  hawk,  which  he  sold  me.  They  snare  hawks 
and  young  eagles  by  tying  a  sparrow  on  a  fishing  net,  in 
the  meshes  of  which  the  bird  of  prey,  as  he  pounces  on 
his  quarry,  entangles  his  claws.  The  numerous  islands  of 
the  Amu  contain  abundance  of  game.  The  native  names 
of  some  of  these  they  gave  us  as  Yilbai^s,  Doltaburd, 
Gawas,  Ka'tks  (or  Antilopes),  Kashkir  (or  Wolves), 
Rabbits,  Hares,  Wild  Boars,  and  even  Tigers.  Besides 
these  may  be  shot  Pheasants  and  Partridges,  Geese, 
Ducks,  Swans,  Herons,  Storks,  Falcons,  Buzzards,  and 
Ravens,  which  nest  in  the  cliffs ;  but  of  these  I  cannot 
say  we  saw  many,  though  I  noted  the  appearance 
of  Eagles,   Magpies,  and  Wagtails. 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     219 

We  continued  to  pass  various  ruins.  Thus,  on  the 
left  bank,  below  the  Tekke  ferry,  there  was  the  ruin  of 
the  fortress  of  Shirin  Khatun,  and,  beyond  that,  of  the 
fortress  Pitchke  tugai/'^ 

I  liked  the  men  we  had  from  Kabakli  better  than 
any  of  the  previous  sets.  The  old  Bek  had  been  not 
only  as  good  as  his  word,  but  better;  for,  in  addition 
to  the  three  men  from  Ildjik,  who  were  content  to  go 
foward  with  us,  he  gave  us  three  oarsmen,  also  an  Issaul- 
(orYessaul)-Bashi,  or  centurion,  named  Hadji  Muham- 
mad, and  a  Mirza,  or  secretary,  Jurabai.  The  last 
two,  as  well  as  Yakoob,  I  think,  occasionally  took  their 
turn  at  an  oar  as  volunteers,  and  I  made  further  use  of 
them  in  calling  them  to  the  tarantass,  and  pumping 
them  with  questions.  They  said  the  Amu  begins  to 
rise  in  April,  is  high  in  May,  June,  and  July,  but 
highest  in  June,t  and  lowest  at  the  end  of  November.;]: 
Boats  such  as  ours,  they  said,  could  navigate  the  river 
at  all  seasons,  but  that  steamers  in  winter  could  not  go 
above  Charjui.  The  water  is  always  muddy,  so  much 
so  that  there  was  room  for  doubt,  in  the  absence  of  a 
mirror,  whether  one's  face  were  cleaner  or  the  reverse 
after  a  morning  wash  therein.     This  was  not  at  all  to 

*  Walker's  map  has  next  a  place  called  Deveh  Bayun,  of  which  I 
can  learn  nothing-  elsewhere.  Then  comes,  on  my  Russian  map, 
Svar-djeli,  Sad-Djargan-bai,  and  Buz-Karaul-Khana,  Next  we  came, 
at  noon,  to  Dargan-ata,  or  baba,  a  large  fortified  place  in  ruins. 
On  the  other  bank,  but  not  quite  so  far,  is  Kukurtli,  a  Bokhariot 
resting-place  and  refuge  for  caravans,  which  strike  off  from  this 
spot  for  Kara-Kul,  no  miles  distant.  At  half- past  twelve  we  passed, 
on  the  right  bank,  the  ruins  of  Kyzyl-rabat,  said  by  our  guides  to  have 
been  inhabited  in  the  time  of  Abdullah  Khan. 

t  Thus  it  might  be  said  of  the  Oxus,  as  of  the  Jordan,  that  it  "  over- 
floweth  all  his  banks  all  the  time  of  harvest"  (Joshua  iii.  15);  both 
rivers  being  fed  by  the  melting  of  snow  on  the  mountains  about  their 
sources — the  Lebanon  and  the  Pamir. 

X  All  old  style. 


220  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

be  wondered  at,  however ;  for,  apart  from  the  detritus 
brought  down  from  the  mountains,  the  stream  eats 
away  its  muddy  margins,  and  the  falling  into  the  water 
of  banks  undermined  caused  a  series  of  detonations 
that  constantly  fell  upon  our  ears  like  the  booming  of 
distant  guns.  Though  so  muddy,  however,  the  sedi- 
ment quickly  settles,  and  for  cooking  purposes  we  found 
the  water  neither  unwholesome  nor  distasteful,  though 
I  do  not  remember  drinking  it  unboiled. 

The  Mirza  carried  about  him,  in  a  long,  narrow, 
Chinese-looking  box,  his  trade  implements,  reed  pens« 
ink,  penknife  (truly  so  called),  and  scissors  wherewitHt 
to  cut  paper.  I  was  taken  with  his  scissors,  which  were 
so  made  that  the  hole  for  thumb  and  finger  were 
placed  not  by  the  side  of,  but  behind,  each  other,  and 
thus  the  instrument,  when  not  open,  measured  barel}f^ 
half  an  inch  at  the  widest  part.  He  gladly  exchanged 
them  for  an  English  pen  and  pencil  case,  and  I  addecL 
them  to  my  collection  of  curiosities.  As  he  was^ 
supposed  to  be  educated  I  asked  him  sundry  questions 
on  religious  matters,  and  among  others  what  were  his 
notions  of  a  future  life.  He  said  that  as  a  man  dies, 
so  he  remains  until  the  resurrection,  when,  the  earth 
being  fiat,  the  dead  grow  out  of  it  like  grass.  Then  God 
divides  the  bad  from  the  good  :  the  bad  He  sends  to 
hell,  and  the  good  to  heaven.  Heaven  is  a  place,  he  said, 
where  persons  live  immortal,  and  where  every  wish  is 
fulfilled ;  but  then  the  Mirza  added,  what  hardly  agreed 
with  the  foregoing  statement,  that  the  creditor  there 
might  seek  out  his  debtor,  and  though  he  could  not 
demand  his  money,  yet  if  the  debtor  were  a  good  man, 
and  the  creditor  a  sinner,  the  creditor  might  take  away 
the  virtue  of  all  the  debtor's  good  deeds,  so  appropri- 
ating them  as  to  be  saved  thereby. 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     221 

In  the  course  of  the  day  the  men  asked  permission 
to  sing  Bokhariot  and  Turkoman  songs,  and,  of  course, 
we  consented.  One  man,  for  want  of  a  tambourine, 
took  a  basin,  and  they  sang  the  praises  of  their  heroes, 
but  Turkoman  singing  is  very  monotonous. 

Our  gondoHers  tokl  us  on  Tuesday  night  that  we 
had  made  during  the  day  12  tashes,  as  also,  they  said, 
1 1  tashes  the  day  before  ;  but  we  put  little  confidence 
in  their  statements,  since  they  seemed  to  reckon  pretty 
much  by  the  rule  of  thumb.  Starting  next  morning, 
however,  at  6.15,  in  two  hours  and  a  half  we  came 
within  sight  of  Uch-Uchak.  The  only  objects  worthy 
of  notice  we  had  recently  passed  on  the  banks  were 
at  103  miles  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  the  ruin  of 
Shurpak-kala  on  the  right,  and  on  the  left  the  tomb 
of  a  saint,  Djegerment,  beyond  which,  on  the  same 
side  of  the  stream,  was  a  tugai  named  after  him, 
whilst  10  miles  beyond  was  a  ruin  on  the  right  called 
Eshek-rabat,  and  3  miles  further  the  Bokhariot  frontier 
fortified  camp.  Near  this  spot,  about  2  miles  inland, 
is  the  small  Sardaba  Kul,  a  blue  lake,  surrounded  by  a 
frame  of  green  reeds.  Near  it  passes  the  diverging 
caravan  route  to   Bokhara.* 

Uch-Uchak   derives   its    name  from    "  three    hills," 

*  At  this  spot  the  river  is  one  verst  wide,  and  so  continues  for  10 
versts  to  just  beyond  the  ruins  of  Dagen-ishur,  on  the  left  bank.  Here, 
between  stony  chffs.  for  2,000  feet  on  the  left,  and  9,000  on  the  right, 
the  river  contracts  to  900  feet.  For  nearly  10  versts  it  does  not  widen 
much,  but  rushes  past  It  to  the  Siunuk-tarak  tugai  on  the  left,  and  on 
the  right  to  Dul-Atlagan  and  Yastkhy,  whence  runs  a  distant  line  of 
sand  barkhans  7  versts  long,  ending  at  the  cliff  of  Ichke-yar  (Walker's 
map,  by-the-bye,  terms  this  Nuke-yar,  perhaps  from  the  Nukus 
boundary  or  district  just  beyond).  Ichke-yar  is  the  Russian  frontier 
fortress,  so  that  henceforward  the  Oxus  runs  between  Khivan  and 
Russian  territory.  Below  Itchke-yar  for  45  versts  the  stream  widens  to 
2  and  sometimes  3  versts  nearly  to  Uch-Tiube  on  the  left  margin.  The 
banks  are  flat,  except  a  clay  cliff  about  2  versts  long  on  the  right  bank, 


222  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

whereon  they  fancifully  say  a  kettle  might  be  placed  as 
on  a  tripod.  Here,  at  9.45,  we  went  ashore,  the 
centurion's  business  being  to  look  after  a  man,  who 
had  under  cultivation  1 30  acres  of  linseed,  besides  other 
crops.  In  the  previous  year  he  had  sowed  one  batman 
of  seed,  and  reaped,  they  said,  a  hundred  batmans, 
but  this  year  the  floods  had  destroyed  his  harvest,  and 
he  professed  to  have  reaped  nothing.  Consequently 
the  Bek  had  told  the  "  Issaul,"  or  centurion,  to  look  at 
the  land.  The  farmer  was  found  and  presented  to  us, 
and  a  very  rough  object  he  was,  without  stockings,) 
and  with  a  skin  resembling  leather.  He  was  reported, 
however,  to  employ  12  men,  and  lived  in  the  village,  so- 
called,  of  Uch-Uchak,  not  visible  from  the  river.  For 
9  versts  beyond  the  rocky  projection  at  Itchke-yar 
there  runs  along  the  right  bank,  between  the  river  and 
the  heights,  a  narrow  tugai,  which  is  partly  under  culti- 
vation, and  in  other  portions  covered  with  excellent 
pasture.  Moreover,  on  the  face  of  the  steep,  rocky 
bank  is  a  narrow  foot-path,  along  which  travellers  can 
walk  or  ride  in  single  file  on  sure-footed  horses.  At 
1 1. 1 5  we  noticed  large  sandstones  fallen  away  from 
the  bank,  and  at  2.30,  in  the  right-hand  cliffs,  was  ex- 
posed a  thick  stratum  of  dark-coloured  earth.  At  3.15 
we  had,  on  our  left,  the  Sadivar  ruins,  and  opposite,  on 
the  right  bank,  the  ruins  of  Meshekli,  whose  clay  walls 
and  towers  form  a  small  square.     At   the  time   of  the 

nearly  opposite  the  ruins  of  the  town  of  Sadivara  or  Saudager  on  the 
left  bank  ;  also  at  points  85  and  75  versts  from  Petro-Alexandrovsk  there 
are  stony  cliffs  2  and  4  versts  in  length  respectively.  Opposite  the 
former  cliff  is  Yani  tugai  on  the  right  bank,  and,  a  versl  inland,  a  line 
of  sand  barkhans  5  miles  long,  having  at  the  south  end  the  tomb  of 
Kurumbet,  and  at  the  other,  a  hill  apparently  called  Zenke-Kurgan, 
The  river  in  this  stretch  has  many  islands,  several  of  them  being  sand- 
banks covered  at  high  water,  and  others  being  separated  from  the 
banks  by  only  a  very  narrow  strip  of  water. 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     223 

Russian  invasion,  in  1873,  these  were  said  to  have  been 
well  preserved,  and  apparently  not  long  deserted.  At 
4  o'clock  the  Mirza  went  on  shore,  professedly  to  get 
melons,  but  I  fancy  to  execute  some  other  com- 
mission. I  followed  him  for  some  distance,  through 
reeds,  long  grass,  and  bushes  of  tamarisk  (called 
ytclgun),  but  found  him  going  too  far,  and  returned. 

This  gave  me  a  short  opportunity  of  seeing  some- 
thing of  the  vegetation  on  the  banks  of  the  Amu.  It 
is  poor  enough,  and  generally  saline.  Where  the 
banks  are  not  inundated  one  meets  with  scrub  jungle, 
consisting  of  Halimodendron  Argenteum,  Lasiagrostis 
Splendens,  the  Wild  Djida  [Eleagnus  Angustifolid),  a 
kind  of  Poplar  {Populus  Diversifolia),  the  Pakz,  or 
Shishan  tree,  Guzan  (or  Wormwood),  Saxaul,  Willows, 
and  thickets  of  Briars.  Also,  where  the  banks  are 
inundated  for  a  season,  there  spring  up,  on  the 
receding  of  the  water,  a  few  annual  plants.  These, 
with  the  vast  beds  of  pampas  grass,  and  the  varie- 
gated colours  of  the  tamarisk,  afforded  occasionally 
a  little  relief  to  what  was  otherwise  a  dreary,  and 
I  must  also  add  a  lonely,  landscape,  for  we  saw 
scarcely  any  inhabitants.* 

The   Mirza    came  at  last,  bringing    melons,   which 

*  Below  Charjui  I  have  mentioned  towns,  and  in  keeping  with  my 
unpubUshed  Russian  information  have  given  the  number  of  "  dwel- 
hngs."  The  word  I  have  thus  translated  is  dvo7',  which  means  a  yard 
or  court,  and  so  a  house  or  dwelling  ;  but  the  high  numbers  sometimes 
mentioned  would  lead  me  to  suspect  either  that  the  figures  are  put 
down  from  the  mouths  of  natives,  and  so  not  much  to  be  trusted 
for  accuracy;  or  ''dwellings"  may  also  include  shops,  stalls,  and 
perhaps  also  tents  of  the  district.  The  distance  the  floods  extend  on 
either  side  of  the  river  cause  the  habitations  to  be  built  a  long  way  off 
from  our  route,  but  the  fewness  of  boats  we  saw,  and  the  rarity  of 
human  beings  led  me  to  think  the  river  banks  almost  uninhabited  ;  and 
if  Ustik  and  Kabakli  be  excepted,  this  remark  as  applied  from  Charjui 
to  the  Khivan  oasis  would,  I  suppose,  be  true. 


224  J^USS/AJV  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

did  not,  however,  atone  for  the  long  time  he  kept  us 
waiting,  so  that  our  two  stoppages  had  been  a  decided 
hindrance,  and,  to  make  matters  a  Httle  worse,  we  ran 
aground  towards  evening  on  a  mud  bank.  Upon  this 
the  men  first  got  out  and  waded  about  the  river  to 
find  the  channel,  and  then  the  horses  were  taken  out. 
After  this,  the  boat  being  floated,  all  were  reshipped, 
and  we  went  on  till  2  o'clock.  The  temperature 
during  the  preceding  night  had  sunk  to  36°,  and  rose 
during  the  Wednesday  to  87° ;  but  a  change  of  weather 
was  coming,  and  on  the  Thursday  morning  a  strong  wind 
blew,  rendering  our  progress  slow\  The  temperature 
of  the  air  did  not  rise  above  65°,  and  of  the  water 
50°,  the  specific    gravity  when    I    tried    it  being  96. 

We  were  now  approaching  a  remarkable  portion  of 
the  river,  termed  by  the  natives  ''  Touja-moujoun,"  or 
Camel's  Hump,  and  by  the  Russians  Pitniaksy-louka, 
or  the  ''  Pitniak  bend."  It  is  perhaps  the  sharpest 4- 
curve  of  the  Amu  throughout  its  course — certainly  so* 
after  leaving  the  mountains.  The  arc  measures  13 
miles  round,  and  4  miles  across.* 

We  passed  the  sand  barkhans  on  the  right  bank,  and 

*  The  stream,  continuing  in  its  normal  direction  to  a  point  75  versts 
from  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  trends  during  the  next  5  versts  to  the  left,  till, 
between  the  three  hills  called  Uch-Tiube  on  the  left,  and  the  sand 
barkhan  of  Ak-pash,  or  white  mouth,  on  the  right,  its  course  is  inter- 
rupted by  a  perpendicular  eminence  rising  above  the  water  to  a  con- 
siderable height.  In  consequence  the  river  turns  sharply  to  the  south, 
almost  at  a  right  angle,  and  for  6  versts  from  the  turn,  the  right 
bank  is  a  perpendicular  wall.  After  this  the  wall  is  replaced  on  both 
banks  for  some  scores  of  yards  by  high  and  almost  perpendicular  rocky 
cliffs,  and  the  bed  at  Piuia  Muiun  is  narrowed  to  from  1,400  to  i,70oH 
feet.  This  is  the  Dahan-i-shir,  or  Lion's  Mouth,  through  which  the  ™ 
river  rushes  as  if  enraged  by  the  obstacle.  On  getting  clear  of  the 
clififs  it  expands  to  its  normal  width,  and  opposite  Pitniak  makes  a 
detour  to  the  right  for  12  versts,  finishing  the  curve  at  Sheikh-aryk. 
Subsequently  sending  off,  on  the  left  bank,  5  versts  distant,  the  great 


I 


i 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     22$ 

the  tomb  of  Bazerviak  opposite  Uch-Tiube,  and  about 
2  o'clock  were  approaching  Pitniak,  and,  just  beyond, 
on  the  right  bank,  the  fort  Kurtli  (built  by  the 
Khivans  to  oppose  the  Russians  in  1873,  and  from 
whence  the  natives  fled  on  the  enemy's  approach), 
when  our  men  told  us  that  we  were  only  9  miles  dis- 
tant by  land  (though  much  further  by  water)  from 
Petro-Alexandrovsk.  It  occurred  to  me  to  escape  the 
slow  journeying  by  boat,  and  proceed  on  horseback,  the 

Palvan  Ata  canal,  the  river  curves  again,  and  resumes  its  normal 
direction  to  the  ferry  that  connects  Hazarasp  and  Petro-Alexandrovsk. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  "  Camel's  Hump"  are  cliffs  of  millstone 
grit  and  conglomerate,  as  also  fossiliferous  deposits.  On  the  right 
bank,  from  the  Lion's  Mouth  to  Sheikh-aryk,  are  sand  barkhans,  and  on 
the  left,  opposite  Pitniak,  the  flat  bank  is  cut  by  many  aryks.  In  the 
stream  is  the  small  island  of  Airangi-baba,  covered  with  pyramidal 
poplars,  and  almost  the  only  island  in  the  river  with  long-stemmed  trees. 
Five  versts  beyond  is  a  rocky  cliff,  3,500  feet  long,  near  Ike-gugurdi, 
and  beyond  that  a  clay  cliff  to  Sheikh-aryk,  both  banks  being  flat 
down  to  the  ferry  just  named.  The  width  of  the  stream  in  the  great 
bend  varies  from  4,000  to  7,000  feet,  and,  opposite  Pitniak,  nearly  10,000 
feet,  whilst  at  the  diversion  of  the  Sheikh-aryk  it  is  2,800  feet.  The 
depth  of  the  Amu  in  Russian  territory  between  Meshekly  and  Uch- 
Tiube  is  in  some  places  as  much  as  12  feet.  Near  Zenke  Kurgan,  the 
line  sounded  from  i^  to  7  feet.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Pitniak 
bend  it  is  about  10  feet.  Beyond  the  gardens  of  Pitniak  it  diminishes 
in  the  middle  of  the  stream  to  6  and  7  feet.  The  bed  of  the  Sheikh- 
aryk  is  10  feet  deep. 

To  the  foregoing  concerning  the  Amu  I  may  add  that  Colonel  Yule, 
from  observations  taken  at  Khoja  Saleh  and  Charjui  by  Burnes, 
computes  roughly  that  the  summer  discharge  of  the  Oxus  is  70,000 
cubic  feet  per  second,  that  is  (according  to  statistics  kindly  supphed 
me  by  the  Engineer  of  the  Thames  Conservancy),  rather  more  than 
double  the  discharge  per  second  of  the  Thames  at  London  Bridge 
during  the  spring  ebb,  and  four  times  the  volume  of  the  same  river  at 
Kingston  Bridge  at  the  highest  flood  of  1882,  which  happened  on 
October  30th.  Again,  I  have  the  following  Russian  figures,  by  Mr. 
F.  B.  Dorand,  of  the  dimensions  of  the  Oxus,  as  measured  on  July 
7-i9th,  1875,  2  versts  above  Pitniak  : — 

Width  of  stream  .         .         .         1,963  ft. 

Average  depth      .        .         .         12  ft. 

Average  rapidity  .         .         5  ft.  6  in.  per  second. 

Discharge     ....         126,140  cubic  ft.  per  second. 
VOL.  II.  I  5 


226  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

Mirza  and  Centurion  undertaking  to  bring  us  there. 
Accordingly  we  charged  Yakoob  to  accompany  the 
tarantass,  and  to  bring  it,  with  all  our  belongings,  to 
Petro-Alexandrovsk,  whilst  Sevier  and  I,  and  the  two 
Bokhariots,  were  to  ride. 

I  little  knew  what  we  were  undertaking  ;  but  we 
started  in  excellent  spirits.  Our  horses,  after  standing 
so  long  in  a  leaky  boat,  were  delighted  to  use  their 
legs.  The  Centurion  had  asked  Yakoob  privately, 
before  we  started,  whether  we  were  fast  riders  or  slow, 
and,  as  Yakoob  told  him  unhesitatingly  the  former,  we 
set  off  at  a  dashing  pace.  Our  route  at  first  lay  over 
a  desert  almost  as  bad  as  the  sands  of  Sundukli,  save 
that  here  and  there  were  bushes  of  tamarisk,  nor  did 
we  see  any  footprints.  At  length  we  recognized  the 
tracks  of  camels'  feet,  and  knew  that  we  had  struck 
the  Khiva- Bokhara  caravan-route.  Then,  turning  to 
the  left,  we  entered  the  cultivated  region  of  Ak-Kamysh, 
supplied  with  water  by  aryks  from  the  right  bank  of 
the  river  beyond  the  point  where  we  had  left  it.  We 
passed  Turkoman  farms  with  havlts^  or  fortress-like 
farm-houses,  and  had  gone  on  some  miles  when  the 
Centurion  and  I,  being  ahead,  missed  Sevier  and  the 
Mirza.  At  first  I  thought  nothing  of  it,  supposing 
they  would  catch  us  up,  but  when  this  did  not  happen 
I  began  to  get  uneasy.  The  Centurion  galloped 
about,  but  could  see  nothing  of  them.  At  length  we 
mounted  a  knoll,  and  saw  them  coming,  Sevier  in  tht 
gallop  having  lost  his  overcoat,  and  gone  back  to  seek 
and  fortunately  to  find  it.  As  the  afternoon  grew,  and 
we  had  ridden  fast,  I  began  to  think  the  9  Bokhari< 
miles  were  uncommonly  long  ones,  and  matters  wei 
worsened  by  the  fact  of  our  being  -unable  to  ask  ai 
questions.     We  could  only  make  signs  to  our  guid( 


FROM  KABAKLI  TO  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK.     22- 

who  I  was  afraid  did  not  know  the  way,  and,  if  they 
did,  could  communicate  nothing.  They  kept  pointing 
ahead,  and,  as  the  sun  began  to  go  down,  I  saw  on 
the  horizon  a  belt  of  trees  that  reminded  me  of  those 
planted  by  the  Russians  at  Tashkend  and  Vierny,  and 
from  the  nodding  of  the  men  we  thought  we  must  be 
within  sight  of  our  destination.  My  Diotrephes  sus- 
tained his  character,  and  kept  on  well  ahead^  but  it 
was  bitterly  disappointing,  when  almost  dark,  on 
reaching  the  trees,  to  find  we  were  not  at  the  end  of 
our  journey.  Moreover,  it  now  grew  cold,  and  "the 
fun  of  the  thing"  was  all  gone,  to  say  nothing  of 
want  of  food. 

At  length  we  came  to  a  collection  of  houses,  and 
could  make  out  from  the  men  that  it  was  Shurakaneh, 
which  is  about  5  miles  east  of  the  river.  It  was  one 
of  the  tow^ns  through  which  Vambery  passed,  which 
he  speaks  of  as  having  a  weekly  market,  as  surrounded 
by  an  earthen  wall,  and,  though  boasting  of  only  a  few 
houses  for  dwellings,  yet  consisting  of  300  shops.  The 
Turkistan  Almanack  gives  it  now  only  200  inhabitants. 
Its  distance  from  Petersburg  is  2,500  miles.  It  was 
nearly  dark  when  we  passed  through  the  bazaar, 
which  looked  very  small,  but  remarkably  strange,  since 
many  of  the  houses  were  built  in  havli  fashion,  though 
opening  on  to  the  street.  The  place  appeared  empty, 
and  we  looked  in  vain  for  signs  of  Russians.  Presently, 
beyond  the  bazaar,  we  crossed  an  aryk  by  a  wooden 
bridge  that  was  unmistakably  of  European  build,  and 
this  revived  our  spirits  for  a  moment,  thinking  we  must 
be  near  Petro-Alexandrovsk.  But  a  greater  trial  of 
our  faith  awaited  us  ;  when,  passing  on,  we  seemed  to 
leave  every  human  being  behind,  and  were  making 
once  more  for  the  desert,  and   to  travel  there,  too,  in 


228  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  dark !     I  confess  to  not  liking  this,  for  the  guides 
were  unable  to  give  us  any  idea  how  much  further  we 
had  to  go  ;  we   were   leaving  habitations    behind    for 
sand  in  front,  and  I  had  heard  too  much  of  Turkomans 
to  have  unbounded  faith  in  their  honesty.      It  was  of 
no  use,  however,  to  object,  and  I  was  resigning  myself 
with    a    heavy    heart   when  the   Centurion,   going    on 
ahead,  saw,  from  a  hillock,  something  that  caused  him 
to  exclaim,  and  very  shortly  I    did  so  too  ;  for  in  the 
distance  were  visible  a  row  of  lighted  windows  that  I 
knew    must    belong    to   houses   of  Europeans,    and    it 
proved  to   be  the  windows  of  the   Russian  barracks,  4 
miles  from    Shurakaneh,  at    Petro-Alexandrovsk.       It 
subsequently  appeared  that  the  distance  we  had  ridden, 
instead  of  being  14,  was  40  versts — that  is,   27  miles 
instead  of  9.     This,  however,   was  soon   forgotten,  for 
on  presenting  my  letters  we  received  a  welcome  from 
Madame  and  General  von  Grotenhielm,  the  Governor, 
in  whose  house  we  were  not  sorry  to  return  once  more 
to  the  comforts  of  a  Russian  home. 


CHAPTER   LIX. 

PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS. 

By  what  route  homewards  ? — The  Orenburg  and  Aralo-Caspian  routes. 
— A  social  evening  at  the  Governor's  house. — Change  of  weather. 
—  Petro-Alexandrovsk  and  its  institutions.  —  Proposed  desert 
journey. — Arrival  of  tarantass.  —  Distribution  of  Scriptures. — 
Results  of  Bible  work  in  Siberia  and  Central  Asia. — The  Lower 
Oxus  and  its  hydrography  :  its  delta  and  fall  into  the  Aral. — 
Fish  of  the  Amu-daria.— Discovery  therein  of  the  Sca^phyrhynchus. 
— Geological  questions  concerning  it. 

A  QUESTION  of  prime  importance  to  be  dis- 
cussed on  our  arrival  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk 
was,  ''How  should  we  get  away  again?"  We  had 
lighted  for  a  moment  upon  an  oasis  of  civilization,  but 
''  many  miles  from  everywhere,"  and  so  completely 
desert-locked,  that  we  could  not  proceed  in  any  direc- 
tion without  crossing  hundreds  of  versts  of  sand.  We 
were  400  miles  west  of  Tashkend,  in  which  direction 
there  is  a  route,  on  Russian  territory,  followed,  I 
suppose,  by  Conolly  when  going  from  Khiva  to 
Khokand,  and  striking  the  Russian  post-route  at 
Jizakh.  Another  route  attaining  at  Perovsk  the 
Tashkend-Orenburg  post-track  would  be  by  the  one 
just  mentioned  as  far  as  the  Bukan-Tau,  and  then 
proceeding  north  through  Irkibai, — the  difficult  road 
that  was  so  bravely  taken  by  MacGahan,  the  corre- 


230  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

spondent  of  the  New  York  Herald^  at  the  time  of  the 
Russian  conquest  of  Khiva.  Or,  once  more,  if  I  wished 
to  return  by  Orenburg,  there  was  the  comparatively 
easy  road  taken  by  the  late  Captain  Burnaby  on  his 
ride  from  Khiva.  I  infer  its  comparative  ease  because 
Madame  Grotenhielm  told  me  she  accomplished  it 
in  the  depth  of  winter.  It  is  very  common  in  Asiatic 
Russia,  when  a  lady  or  gentleman  is  travelling  alone, 
to  seek  for  a  poputckik,  or  companion,  which,  among 
other  advantages,  halves  the  expense  for  the  hire  of 
horses.  Whether  Madame  had  inquired  for  2. poputchik 
I  know  not,  but  she  told  me  that  at  Kazalinsk,  or 
some  preceding  station,  they  had  mentioned  to  her  I 
that  there  was  a  lady  and  an  English  captain,  both 
journeying  independently  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  and 
she  was  asked  if  she  would  like  a  travelling  companion. 
Madame  joined  the  lady  ;  and  thus,  whilst  the  English 
officer,  who  was  none  other  than  the  late  Captain 
Burnaby,  was  doing  his  "  ride  to  Khiva,"  these  two 
ladies,  unprotected,  were  accomplishing  a  similar  thing, 
but  travelling  in  a  tarantass  drawn  by  a  camel. 

This,  I  was  told,  must  be  my  method  of  progression, 
and  the  only  one  possible  if  I  wished  to  go  forward 
with  my  tarantass.  The  distance  to  Kazalinsk  would 
be  400  miles,  taking,  at  the  least,  11  or  12  days,  and 
beyond  Kazalinsk  was  another  sandy  tract  of  180 
miles,  that  must  be  traversed  similarly  before  coming 
to  a  road  where  horses  could  speed  forward  my 
carriage.  Matters,  too,  just  then  were  made  tempora- 
rily worse  owing  to  the  postal  service  having  broken 
down  through  the  contractor  coming  to  grief  finan- 
cially. I  had  heard  at  Tashkend  with  what  difficulty 
and  expense  private  horses  could  be  obtained  to  cover 
the  disorganized  portion  of  the  road  ;  and  though  I  had 


A 


PETRO'ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OX  US.  231 

it  in  my  favour  that  General  Chernaieff  had  recently 
travelled  by  the  post-road  to  Tashkend  ;  that  the 
Kirghese  would  be  wandering  along  the  line  with 
their  horses  to  winter  quarters ;  and  further,  that  General 
Grotenhielm  would  do  all  in  his  power  to  help  me 
forward, — yet  I  could  not  but  see  that  to  proceed  to 
Orenburg  promised  to  be  a  long  business. 

Besides,  I  did  not  wish  to  return  by  Orenburg. 
From  the  day  I  left  London  my  heart  had  been  set 
upon  crossing  the  Aralo-Caspian  desert.  Some 
thought  the  project  for  me  impossible.  Another 
considered  it  so  dangerous,  owing  to  the  uncertainty 
of  the  Turkomans,  who  one  day  may  be  amicable,  and 
on  the  next  bloodthirsty,  that  he  strongly  counselled 
me  not  to  venture,  even  though  the  authorities  at 
Petro-Alexandrovsk  should  pronounce  it  safe.  The 
Governor-General  at  Tashkend  offered  no  opinion, 
but  said  General  Grotenhielm  would  advise  me. 
Meanwhile  we  heard  of  two  parties  of  Europeans 
who,  as  travellers  and  without  a  military  escort,  had 
accomplished  the  journey  in  safety.  The  first  was  a 
doctor,  and  an  engineer,  Russians,  with  an  Armenian 
clerk,  who  left  Petro-Alexandrovsk  in  March  of  the 
previous  year,  and  crossed  by  the  most  direct  route, 
past  the  well  Charishli  to  Krasnovodsk,  the  460  miles 
needed  for  this  being  too  great  a  temptation  to  them, 
compared  with  the  longer  Kazalinsk  route,  even  though 
people  thought  it  risky,  and  called  them  madmen. 
An  account  of  their  journey  was  published  in  the 
Petersburg  Vedo7iiost,  23rd  March  (4th  April),  1882. 
Sevier  translated  the  account  for  me  as  we  floated 
down  the  Oxus  ;  but,  from  the  hills  of  sand  that  were 
mentioned,  it  seemed  clear  we  could  not  cross  this  way 
in  our  tarantass.     The  second   party  alluded  to   con- 


232  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

sisted  of  Messrs.  Capus  and  Bonvalot,  who  crossed  by- 
the  same  route  six  months  later. 

If,  then,  two  Russians  had  accompHshed  the  journey 
and  two  Frenchmen,  why  not  also  two  Englishmen  ?' 
The  General  thought  it  safe,  and,  besides  the  novelty 
of  the  route,  it  promised  not  only  to  save  me  time,  but 
to  take  us  towards  the  Caucasus,  where  I  was  anxious 
to  see  how  fared,  in  the  prisons  and  hospitals,  the 
distribution  of  Bibles  I  had  set  on  foot  there  in  1880, 
and  which  I  have  since  learned  has  been  carried  out. 
Another  circumstance  favourable  to  my  going  to  the 
Caspian  was  that  the  General  was  about  to  despatch 
his  monthly  letter  to  Krasnovodsk,  to  be  forwarded 
thence  to  Askabad,  and  the  man  who  acted  as  post- 
man could  be  my  guide.  This  was  opportune,  and,  all 
things  considered,  I  decided  to  go,  so  that  the  next 
question  was — by  what  route  }  The  General  could 
send  me,  he  said,  to  Kizil  Arvat,  the  Trans-Caspian 
railway  terminus,  but,  as  it  was  so  late  in  the  season,  he 
was  not  sure  whether  I  might  not  find,  on  reaching  the 
other  end  of  the  line,  that  the  local  steamboat  to 
Krasnovodsk  had  ceased  running,  in  which  case  I 
should  have  to  make  a  land  journey  of  about  80  miles 
round  the  bay,  with  such  convenience  for  transport  of 
baggage  as  I  could  get.  As  this  might  detain  me 
several  days,  1  determined  not  to  run  the  risk,  but 
to  go  instead  by  a  more  northerly  route. 

These  questions,  so  full  of  interest  to  us,  were  dis- 
cussed over  glasses  of  hot  tea  in  the  Governor's  house 
on  the  evening  of  our  arrival.  In  riding  costume,  with 
high  boots,  and  all  in  the  rough  as  we  came  off  our 
journey,  we  were  not  highly  presentable  objects  for 
a  lady's  drawing-room  ;  but  Madame  von  Grotenhielm 
made  us  welcome,  and  it  was  a  great  treat  to  me  to 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AAW  THE  LOWER  OX  US.  233 

be  able  once  more  to  speak  direct  in  French  to  a 
European,  and  not  through  double  interpreters  as 
with  the  Asiatics.  Some  of  the  officers  of  the  garrison 
came  in  to  spend  the  evening,  and  among  them  was 
a  Captain  Gidayat  Ullah  Hadji  Mirbadaleff,  a  native, 
who  had  been  taken  from  Bokhara  as  a  boy,  educated, 
and  half- Russianized  at  Orenburg.  He  played  the 
violin,  accompanied  by  our  hostess  at  the  piano,  and 
whilst  my  ears  were  thus  entertained,  my  eyes  were 
feasted  with  amateur  photographs  of  some  of  the  ruins 
we  had  seen  in  descending  the  Amu,  and  others  of 
Kunia  Urgenj,  the  ancient  capital  of  Khiva,  through 
which  the  General  said  we  should  pass. 

We  slept  that  night  near  the  Governor's  house,  in 
the  apartments  of  Captain  Mirbadaleff,  and  as  we  had 
not  taken  off  our  clothes  since  leaving  Charjui,  I  need 
hardly  add  that  we  slept  soundly.  But  what  a  change 
had  come  over  the  scene  next  morning !  The  windows 
were  frosted,  the  ground  and  water  frozen,  and  the 
fresh  wind  of  yesterday  had  increased  to  a  gale,  and 
become  so  cold,  that  I  thought  somewhat  uneasily 
what  it  would  be  to  cross  the  desert  in  such  weather. 
This,  they  said,  was  the  beginning  of  winter,  for  which 
I  had  better  prepare ;  and  so  it  seemed,  for  the 
soldiers  were  walking  in  sheepskins,  and  civilians  with 
their  fur  collars  turned  up,  and  looking  the  reverse  of 
cheerful.  As  I  had  nothing  warmer  than  a  Maude 
shawl,  my  Ulster  being  in  the  tarantass,  the  General 
clothed  me  in  a  thick  officer's  overcoat,  and  in  this 
uniform,  after  morning  tea  at  his  house,  took  me  to 
see  the  "lions." 

Petro-Alexandrovsk  was  not  ten  years  old  at  the 
date  of  my  visit,  but  looked  as  Russian  as  other  towns 
of  its  class,  forming  a  great  contrast  to  the   crowded 


234  RUSSIA]^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

houses  of  the  Asiatics.  Here  was  a  huge  square,  big 
enough  for  a  parade  ground,  and  the  domiciles  of  the 
few  inhabitants  were  so  spread  around  as  to  make  it 
quite  a  journey  from  one  part  of  the  Httle  town  to  the 
other.  The  troops,  at  the  time  of  my  visit,  stand  in 
my  notes  thus:  2  battahons  (1,000),  4  sotnias  (600), 
and  a  battery  of  artillery  (350) ;  but  my  memory  does 
not  serve  me  as  to  whether  the  figures  in  brackets  are 
comprehensive  or  distributive.  The  principal  building 
of  the  place,  on  one  side  of  the  square,  is  the  fortress, 
with  a  somewhat  imposing  gateway,  built  upon  the  site 
of  a  house  and  garden  once  belonging  to  an  uncle  of 
the  Khan  of  Khiva.  A  wall  surrounds  the  fort,  and 
within  are  the  Governor's  house  and  public  offices, 
besides  officers'  quarters.  Autumn  was  too  far  ad- 
vanced to  leave  any  beauty  in  the  trees  and  gardens, 
in  which  latter  generally,  at  Petro,  the  rose  is  the  only 
flower  cultivated.  But  the  last  rose  of  summer  had 
long  since  disappeared,  though  one  could  imagine  the 
trees  to  afford  a  grateful  shade  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  year. 

We  visited  first  the  hospital,  with  80  beds.*  Each 
tent  of  the  nomads  of  the  province  pays  2s.  6d.  yearly, 
for  which  the  local  government  provides  for  the  repair 
of  roads  and  bridges,  and  a  hospital,  dispensary,  and 
school.  The  natives,  however,  find  their  children  too 
valuable  to  spare  them  from  work,  so  that  there  were 
in  the  Sart  school  only    15  boys.     The  girls  are  not 

*  There  were  45  patients,  fever  being  the  prevailing  disease,  though 
it  was  said  to  be  less  dangerous  here  than  in  some  parts  of  Turkistan. 
One  poor  fellow  with  typhus  was  very  ill,  and  evidently  dying.  The 
mattrasses  for  the  soldiers  were  of  straw,  for  the  officers  of  straw 
and  hair,  and  in  one  case  of  hair  only.  The  rooms  were  large  and 
airy,  one  of  them  containing  8,232  cubic  feet  for  8  patients — 1,030  feet 
for  each  man — a  contrast  to  the  prison  at  Charjui,  that  gives  less  thaD_ 
one-tenth  of  this  ! 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS.  235 

taught  at  all.  Hence  only  a  small  proportion  of  the 
natives  can  read.  For  the  Russians  at  Petro  they 
have  a  school  of  two  classes,  containing  40  scholars. 

Besides  the  foregoing  there  was  in  the  town  a  public 
bath,  that  we  patronized,  and,  let  me  not  fail  to 
add,  a  general  shop,  where  we  laid  in  provisions,  also 
a  lantern,  a  pail,  and  a  kettle,  for  we  were  now  to  ''do 
for  ourselves"  in  a  very  practical  sense  of  the  phrase. 
It  was  desirable,  however,  that  we  should  not  purchase 
here  such  things  as  we  could  get  in  Khiva,  because  of 
the  trouble  of  carriage.  Shall  I  add  the  prices  of 
articles  in  this  out-of-the-way  part  of  the  world  ? 
Rusks,  the  staff  of  life  to  the  desert  traveller,  cost  li". 
per  lb.,  and  biscuits  \s.  ^d.  ;  candles  2od.  Native 
articles,  however,  were  cheaper;  mutton  3^^.,  beef  \\d. 
to  2d.,  grapes  from  2  to  5  farthings,  and  butter  2s. 
per  lb.  Carrots  and  potatoes,  \d.  per  lb.  We  thought 
we  should  get  potatoes  at  Khiva,  but  were  dis- 
appointed. Eggs  cost  \d.  each,  and  cabbages  from 
\os.  to  18^.  a  hundred.  Prices  of  other  things,  not  in 
our  line,  were,  3^".  <^d.  per  yard  for  camlet  for  ladies' 
dresses;*  saxaul  for  fuel,  16  lbs.  for  \d. ;  burnt  bricks  30^". 
to  40^.,  and  dried  4^-.  to  6^-.  per  1,000.  Monthly  wages 
of  women-servants  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  stood  at 
14^.,  and  of  a  coachman  £\,  each  with  food ;  a  horse's 
food  costing  14^.  a  month. 

We  had  been  favoured  with  some  private  introduc- 
tions to  officers,  and  amongst  others  to  Captain  Kryloff, 
whom  we  visited.  He  would  have  liked  to  accompany 
us  across  the  Aralo-Caspian  desert,  but  he  was  ill  in 
bed.     Another  officer,  who  proved  a  valuable  acquaint- 

*  This  was  the  finest  material  of  bond  fide  camel's  hair  I  had  seen, 
and  very  different  from  the  thick  camel's  hair-cloth  made  into  a  prison 
garment  I  bought  in  Siberia,  than  which  the  Baptist  could  hardly 
have  had  anything  coarser  (Matt.  iii.  4). 


236  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

ance,  was  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pevtzoff,  who,  at  the 
Governor's  request,  took  great  pains  in  equipping  us 
for  our  journey,  provided  a  small  tent,  and  lent  us 
a  couple  of  water-barrels.  We  did  not  fully  under- 
stand at  the  time  the  value  of  this  arrangement,  foi 
we  must  otherwise  have  taken  water-skins,  which  art 
not  so  desirable.  A  native,  too,  was  presented  to  us 
one  Tailly,  who  usually  undertook  the  carriage  of  the 
Governor's  monthly  despatch  to   Krasnovodsk. 

On  the  morning  after  our  arrival  we  were  anxiousl) 
looking  for  Yakoob,  but  no  news  came  of  the  tarantasj 
all  that  day,  nor  was  it  till  Saturday,  the  day  follow 
ing,  about  noon,  that  it  arrived,  whereupon  I  sent  ni) 
promised  presents  to  the  men,  by  the  Centurion  anc 
the  Mirza,  and  gave  them  a  letter  to  the  Bek.  I  hac 
now  to  become  salesman,  as  hitherto  a  buyer,  and  t( 
get  rid  of  my  tarantass  and  two  of  my  horses.  I  wa: 
not  very  canny  in  selling  the  animals,  for  when  a  mar 
came  to  look  at  them  I  asked  only  £6  for  the  two 
He  took  the  better  of  them,  and  obligingly  told  m( 
that  I  had  asked  too  little.  I  did  better  with  th( 
tarantass,  which  had  accompanied  me  for  5,000  miles 
for  I  now  sold  it  for  more  than  half  as  much  again  a 
it  cost  me.  It  was  cheap,  however,  even  so,  to  th< 
purchaser  at  such  a  distance  from  the  place  of  manu 
facture.  In  fact,  I  had  asked  a  higher  price,  and  m; 
purchaser,  knowing  that  I  must  sell,  had  quietly  sen 
something  more  than  half  the  sum  demanded,  sayin< 
that  I  might  take  the  roubles  if  no  one  would  gi^ 
more.  Being  in  a  corner  I  was  obliged  to  accept  th 
offer,  but  it  was  satisfactory  even  then  to  be  able  t< 
score  on  the  right  side. 

I  had  now  to  make  arrangements  for  the  transpor 
of  ourselves    and    baggage    across    the    desert.     Th 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OX  US.  237 

Governor  kindly  interested  himself,  and  arranged  with 
the  man  Tailly  that  he  should  go  forward  and  hire 
camels  for  us.  The  next  need  was  a  native  inter- 
preter, for  Yakoob's  engagement  extended  only  to 
Petro-Alexandrovsk.  Meanwhile  he  had  improved 
upon  acquaintance,  and  I  was  anxious  that  he  should 
go  on  to  Krasnovodsk.  Like  a  wise  man,  he  took  time 
to  consider,  and  sleep  upon  it,  with  the  result  that  on 
the  morrow  he  decided  to  go  as  far  as  Sary-Kamish. 
For  this  he  was  to  have  at  the  rate  of  ^4  per  month, 
with  everything  found,  and  I  promised  an  additional 
present.  Yakoob  bought  the  remaining  horse  I  had 
to  sell — the  vicious  Arab,  of  whom  everyone  fought 
shy,  for  ^3,  so  that  our  steeds  were  reduced  to  the 
two  I  had  bought  at  Samarkand  for  Sevier  and  myself, 
and  it  only  remained  to  pack  four  arbas,  hired  at  ^s. 
each,  to  take  our  goods  before  us  to  Khiva. 

On  Sunday  I  asked  the  Governor's  acceptance  of  22 
New  Testaments,  and  about  100  tracts,  the  remainder, 
or  thereabouts,  of  my  stock  of  5,064  Scriptures  and 
12,000  other  publications,  given  and  sold  since  leaving 
Petersburg.  !  had  now  been  privileged  to  accomplish 
my  heart's  desire  in  distributing  enough  copies  of  the 
Bible  and  portions  thereof,  so  that  at  least  one  might  be 
placed  in  every  room  of  each  prison  and  every  hospital 
in  Russian  Central  Asia,  the  complement  to  what  I 
had  done,  three  years  before,  for  each  prison  and  hospital 
in  Siberia.  I  had  also  left  a  large  number  to  be  dis- 
tributed to  free  exiles  passing  to  their  remote  destina- 
tions in  the  interior.  These  have  been  distributed  as 
I  wished,  and  thankfully  read  on  the  way,  as  there  is 
written  testimony  to  show. 

I  hear  that  several  books  have  fallen  into  other, 
but  most  suitable,  hands.      Many  of  the  poorer  class 


238  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

of  Russians,  located  near  Samara,  where  living  is  dear, 
have  lately  been  migrating  with  their  families  into 
Siberia,  far  beyond  Omsk  and  Tomsk.  They  are 
described  to  me  as  all  decent  well  behaved  people,  a 
great  many  of  them  being  able  to  read  ;  and  my  corre- 
spondent says,  '*  It  would  do  one's  heart  good  to  see 
how  glad  they  are  of  the  Bibles,  and  how  carefully 
they  wrap  them  up."  And  well  they  may,  for  they 
will'  perhaps  not  have  the  chance  of  getting  more  for 
years  to  come.  The  books  in  quantities  for  the  hos- 
pitals and  prisons  I  had  to  leave  with  the  authorities, 
and  in  the  case  of  those  who  bought  I  have  little  to 
tell,  because  I  was  as  one  deaf  and  dumb,  and  I  could 
only  hold  up  the  book,  and  name,  or  point  to,  the 
number  of  kopecks  demanded. 

Many  will  be  sceptical,  no  doubt,  as  to  the  ultimate 
worth  of  such  an  undertaking.  Its  value,  however,  must 
not  be  judged  as  if  it  had  been  done  now  in  Englanc 
There  was  not  a  Bible  depot  in  all  Turkistan  until  tl 
year  I  went  there,  and  the  open  distribution  of  tractj 
1  wot,  had  never  been  seen  there  before.  Not  that 
would  seem  to  forget  what  has  been  done  in  Europe^ 
Russia.  As  I  walked  through  the  Moscow  Exhibitioi 
I  came  to  a  stall  whence  300,000  tracts  had  been  dij 
tributed  in  40  days,  and  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society  had  given  10,000  copies  of  the  Gospels  to  be 
similarly  distributed  there.  Again,  I  was  cheered  in 
Ekaterineburg  to  meet  with  an  agent  of  the  Bible 
Society,  who,  in  8  years,  had  sold  8,079  copies  for 
£22,^.  Telling  me  of  his  difficulties  in  so  doing,  he 
said  he  had  sometimes  striven  to  incite  inquiry  by 
offering  to  sell  a  peasant  a  New  Testament  for  k 
kopecks,  and,  when  read,  to  take  it  back  at  the  samj 
price.      But  in  this  he  had  not  always  met  with  success 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS.  239 

for  SO  densely  ignorant  were  they,  that  they  preferred 
to  keep  the  2\d.  in  their  pocket,  and  forego  the  reading 
of  the  book.  So,  too,  I  have  mentioned  an  officer  at 
Tashkend  distributing  Scriptures  among  his  soldiers. 

Fallow  ground,  therefore,  is  being  broken  in  various 
parts  of  the  Empire,  and  I  have  heard  incidentally  from 
travellers,  who  have  been  in  Siberia  after  me,  that  the 
books  I  left  are  exceedingly  valued.  The  2,498  Scrip- 
tures distributed  in  Siberia  and  Central  Asia  by  the 
agents  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  in 
1881,  increased  in  1882  sixfold,  to  14,638,  and  of  three 
causes  contributing  to  this,  the  Committee  were  good 
enough  to  reckon  my  efforts  as  one.  I  am  hopeful, 
therefore,  that  my  labour  has  not  been  in  vain,  and  I 
am  still  more  hopeful  of  what  is  to  follow,  for  the 
experience  of  all  ages  has  been  that  those  who  submit 
themselves  to  the  teaching  of  this  book  are  elevated, 
improved,  and  blessed  thereby.  I  strongly  urged  upon 
the  Committee,  in  1879,  the  hastening  of  what  they 
had  long  been  contemplating,  namely,  the  opening  of 
a  depot  in  Siberia,  and,  what  is  better,  I  have  been 
able  to  find  a  Finnish  nobleman,  who  for  this  purpose 
was  willing  to  give  up  his  father's  home  and  family, 
and  go  into  voluntary  exile  to  Irkutsk.  A  depot  is  now 
opened  there  ;  1,048  copies  were  sold  during  the  first 
three  weeks,  and  by  the  latest  report  of  the  Bible 
Society  (for  1883-4)  I  perceive  that  Tomsk,  Blagovest- 
chensk,  Kiakhta,  and  even  Yakutsk  are  indicated  as 
future  centres  around  which  colporteurs  may  travel 
with  the  Word  of  Life.  To  have  initiated  or  helped 
forward  such  a  work,  therefore,  I  count  an  honour  to 
be  remembered  through  life,  and  I  was  thankful  for 
the  point  attained  to  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk.^ 

*  From  the  last  report  I  see  the  circulation  from  the  new  Tashkend 


240  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Some  weeks  after  writing  the  foregoing  paragraphs 
I  happened  to  pick  up  part  of  a  report  of  the  Bible 
Society  (1882-3),  ^.nd  my  eye  chanced  to  fall  on  the 
following : — 

"A  Man  of  the  World  Arrested. 

"  A  worldly  man  in  a  good  position,  but  alienated  from  God,  was  in 
Helsingfors  on  business,  when  he  received  a  telegram  from  his  wife, 
saying  that  his  favourite  child  was  dying,  and  that  if  he  wished  to  see 
her  alive,  he  must  hasten  home.  He  set  off  with  his  heart  full  of 
bitterness  against  God,  so  much  so  that  he  cried  out  as  he  sat  in  the 
sledge,  '  Thou  mayest  take  my  child,  but  me  Thou  shalt  never  have  !  ' 
The  driver  was  shocked  by  his  language,  and  cried,  *  Such  a  blasphemer 
I  never  met !  '  Coming  to  a  station  where  he  had  to  change  horses, 
while  he  was  inscribing  his  name  in  the  way-book  he  observed  a  copy 
of  the  New  Testament  and  Psalms  on  the  table,  one  of  the  books  which 
we  (the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society)  have  helped  to  place  in  each 
inn,  station-house,  and  passe?tger  steamer  i?i  Finla?id.  Almost 
automatically  he  opened  it,  and  his  eyes  fell  upon  the  first  verse  of  the 
first  Psalm,  '  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the 
ungodly,'  etc. 

"  The  words  fastened  on  his  mind,  and  he  could  not  drive  them  from 
bis  thoughts.  As  the  horses  were  not  ready,  he  took  a  turn  in  the 
open  air,  brooding  over  the  words,  and  when  he  came  to  the  next 
station  he  read  them  again  in  the  book  he  found  there,  and  in  order  to 
retain  them  he  copied  them  on  a  piece  of  paper.  As  he  thought  about 
them,  he  felt  that  'the  way  of  trangressors  was  hard,'  and  began  to 
realize  his  sinfulness. 

"When  he  came  home  he  learnt  that  his  dear  child  was  gone. 
Though  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  he  sought  the  Bible  for  comfort ; 
there  was  no  copy  in  the  house  ;  and  he  had  to  send  out  to  procure  one, 
but  in  its  pages  he  found  consolation.  He  has  not  only  continued  to 
read  it,  but  he  makes  it  the  guide  of  his  life." 

The  reader  will  understand  my  thankful  surprise  on 
reading  this  when  I  add  that  the  narrator  of  the  story 
was  none  other  than  my  friend  Miss  Alba  Hellmann, 
who  put  it  into  my  head  to  go  to  Siberia ;  and  the 
words  I   have    italicised  represent   the   distribution  of 

dep6t,  for  1883,  amounted  to  3,202  copies,  and  for  Siberia  and  Central 
Asia  combined,  10,864  copies,  besides  the  circulation  effected  in  Khiva 
and  Bokhara  by  colporteurs  from  the  Caspian,  as  will  be  mentioned 
hereafter. 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS.  241 

Scriptures  In  Finland  as  the  outcome  of  my  journey 
there  in  1876.  Here,  then,  is  fruit  found  after  many 
days,  and  not  a  few,  I  am  sure,  will  join  in  the  prayer 
that  it  may  be  so  again  and  again  in  Asiatic  Russia. 

I  have  intimated  that  our  tarantass  arrived  on  Satur- 
day, but  I  have  omitted  to  say  that  it  narrowly  escaped 
a  watery  grave,  for  the  boat  ran  aground  after  we  left 
it,  and  was  so  damaged  thereby  that  they  were  obliged 
to  bring  forward  the  carriage  in  another  boat  to,  I 
suppose,  the  ferry  connecting  Hazarasp  and  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk,  down  to  which  point  I  have  brought 
my  description  of  the  Amu-daria.  Two  days  later,  I 
had  to  cross  the  river  once  more,  and  say  farewell  to 
this  noble  stream,  but  I  ought  not  so  to  do  without 
pointing  out  the  characteristics  of  the  Lower  Oxus.* 

The  whole  course  of  the  river  below  Petro-Alexan- 
drovsk  goes  through  a  low-lying  country.  The  basin 
is  covered  with  bushes,  sometimes  thickly,  the  tamarisk 
being  specially  abundant,  and  with  this  growth  below 
Nukus  reeds  and  rushes  intermingle.  At  Nukus  the 
delta  of  the  Amu  begins,  so  that  the  waters  of  the 
river  ultimately  reach  the  Aral  Sea  by  three  outlets — the 

*  The  course  of  the  Amu  from  the  Hazarasp  to  the  Khanki  ferries, 
a  distance  of  13  miles,  and  for  4  miles  beyond,  rolls  on  in  one  stream 
with  islets,  after  which,  for  16  miles,  the  Oxus  spreads  out  in  some 
places  to  a  width  of  4  miles,  with  numerous  channels  and  larger  islands, 
one  5  miles  long.  Near  this  reach  of  the  river  lie  the  towns  of  Urgenj 
on  the  left,  and  Sheikh-abbas-Ali  on  the  right.  Further  down  the 
stream,  on  the  left,  is  Gurlen,  up  to  which  point  the  banks  are  flat,  and 
in  summer  standing  only  from  6  to  20  feet  above  the  water.  At  Gurlen, 
the  right  bank  begins  to  be  skirted  by  the  rocky  ridges  of  the  Sheikh- 
djeiU  mountains,  which,  opposite  the  Khivan  town  of  Manghit,  project 
into  the  river,  forming  the  Kishak  gates,  w^here  the  width  of  the  Amu 
is  about  600  yards.  Seven  miles  below  Manghit  is  the  small  Uzbeg 
town  of  Kipchak,  opposite  Lake  Khoja  on  the  Russian  side.  On  the 
same  left  bank,  40  miles  beyond,  is  the  Khivan  town  of  Khojeili,  and 
nearly  opposite  is  the  Russian  fort  Nukus. 

VOL.  IL  \6 


242  RUSSIA  AT  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Kuvan-Jarma,  or  Yangi-Su,  the   Ulkun-daria,  and  the 
Kunia-daria,  or  Taldik.* 

Prior  to  1859,  the  waters  of  the  Amu  reached  the 
town  of  Kungrad,  66  miles  from  Nukus,  so  that 
Captain  Boutakoff  took  his  two  steamers,  the  Perofski 
and  Obrucheff,  by  the  main  channel  to  Kungrad,  and 
passed  by  the  Taldyk  and  Ulkun-daria  to  the  Aral. 
In  1859,  the  Khivans  built  dams  on  the  Taldyk  and 
Ulkun-daria.  These  have  completely  prevented  the 
entrance  there  of  ships  from  the  Aral.  Along  the  banks 
of  the  Taldyk  are  ruins  of  forts  and  traces  of  canals 
and  engulfed  fields  ;  this  desolation  dating  from  1858, 
during  the  war  between  the  Ruler  of  Kungrad  and  the 
Khan  of  Khiva.  Thus  the  noble  Oxus,  on  which  I 
had  floated  above  Pitniak,  where  it  has  a  volume  of 
126,000  cubic  feet  per  second,  enters  the  Aral  by  three 
ignoble  streams,  the  river  having  been  drained  of  half 
its  waters  before  reaching  Nukus. 


*  The  Kuvan-Jarma  is  now  the  most  important  of  the  branches  01 
the  Amu.      Eighty-seven  miles  from  Nukus  it  enters  lakes  Kungra 
and  Kara-Teren,  emerges,  after  17  miles,  as  the   Yangi-Su,  or  Ne 
River,  and  falls  into  the  Aral  40  miles  beyond.     This  branch  of  th 
Oxus   was   navigated,  in  1873,  by  some  of  the  Aral  flotilla,  but  wit 
difficulty.    It  appears  that  this  waterway  would  be  practicable  for  vessel 
only  in  time  of  flood,   since  at  other  times  of  the  year  the  depth  of 
Lake  Kungrad  does  not  exceed  a  foot.     At  the  mouth  of  the  Yangi-Su 
shallows  abound,  and  the  passage  through  these,  with  their  5,  6,  and 
7  feet  of  water,  is  possible  only  in  calm  weather  and  by  day.    The  Amu 
at  Nukus,  having  discharged  about  one-sixth  or  seventh  of  its  water 
into  the  Kuvan-Jarma,  has  still  a  considerable  volume  of  water  for  30 
miles  further,  flowing  north-west.     Then  there  begin  to  diverge  to  the 
right  four  branches,  one  after  the  other,  and  these  completely  drain  the 
principal  stream  dry.     It  is  then  called  the  Kunia-daria,  or  Old  River 
The  bed,  after  being  dry  for  17  miles,  collects  from  the  backwater  of 
several  channels,  the  largest  of  which  is  the  Sar-Krauk,  that  enters  the 
Kunia-daria  2^t^  miles   above   the    Khivan   town   of  Kungrad.      Fro 
Kungrad  the  Amu  reaches  the  Aral  by  two  channels,  the  one  on  th 
left  flowing  due  north,  under  the  name  Taldyk  (or  Tardyk),  and  th 
principal  stream  to  the  north-east,  called  the  "  Ulkun,"  or  Great-dari 


i 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS.  243 

There  is  one  more  subject  connected  with  the  Amu 
that  ought  not  to  be  omitted — I  mean  its  fish,  and  espe- 
cially one  species,  called  the  Scaphyrhynchus.  Whilst 
floating  down  the  river,  the  natives  gave  me  the  local 
names  of  Amu  fish  as  Sougan,  Laka,  and  Zaggara. 
Yalbashi  is  their  smallest,  and  Nahajtg  their  largest, 
which  last  sometimes  weighs  up  to  13  cwt.  They 
gave  me  the  price  of  fish  at  6^.  per  cwt.  At  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk  they  quoted  the  price  of  sturgeon  at  /i^d. 
per  lb.,  but  from  ^s.  to  6^-.  for  a  whole  fish  of  from  30  to 
40  lbs.  weight.  They  have  no  eels,  they  said,  and  do 
not  eat  pike,  nor  the  scaphyrhynchus,  which  last  the 
natives  called  Tash-bakrd,  and  the  Russians  Chaklik. 
It  is  a  kind  of  sturgeon,  and,  when  discovered  in  the 
Syr-daria  by  Fedchenko,  it  excited  a  good  deal  of 
interest  amongst  naturalists  by  reason  of  its  resem- 
blance to  one  of  the  species  of  North  American 
sturgeons.*  The  Turkistan  fish  was  at  first  supposed 
to  inhabit  the  Syr-daria  exclusively,  but  some  time 
afterwards  interest  in  the  matter  was  heightened  by 
the  discovery  of  another  species  of  scaphyrhynchus,  by 
M.  H.  Bogdanoff,  in  the  Amu-daria. 

The  fish  belongs  to  the  order  Ganotdei,  of  the 
family  Acipenseridae.  One  form  was  found  for  a 
long  time  in  the  Mississippi  only,  till  Fedchenko 
unexpectedly  brought  to  light  his  specimen  taken 
near  Chinaz,  which  has  been  named  after  him  Sca- 
phyrhynchus Fedchenkoi.  This  discovery  suggested 
that  a  similar  form  might  perhaps  be  found  in  the 
Amu,  and  so  it  proved.  The  new  species  was  called 
Scaphyrhynchus   Kaufmanni,-\    and    is    especially    in- 

*  The  Syr-daria  species  was  described  by  Kessler  in  the  Annals 
and  Magazine  of  Natural  History  for  October,  1873,  and  a  note  was 
added  by  Dr.  Albert  Gunther. 

t  The  Scaphyrhynchus  Kaufmanni,  according  to  Bogdanoff,  is  dis- 


244  RUSSIA  AT  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

teresting,  Bogdanoff  points  out,  from  a  geological 
point  of  view.  In  the  Palaeozoic  period,  he  says, 
the  ganoid  fishes  used  to  inhabit  all  the  waters  of  the 
world  in  a  great  number  of  forms,  and  composed 
almost  entirely  the  Ichthyological  fauna  of  that  period. 
During    the    Devonian    period    this    group    of    fishes 

tinguished  from  the  American  and  Syr-daria  species  by  the  following 
marks.  The  head  is  large,  equal  to  one-third  of  the  entire  length  of 
the  fish.  The  front  is  broad  and  flat,  and  has  the  form  of  an  equilateral 
triangle,  with  the  sides  bent  out.  The  bony  shields  on  the  "  temeni  " 
and  between  the  eyes  have  sharp  spines  turned  backwards,  two  pairs 
in  number.  On  the  upper  side  of  the  head,  near  the  summit,  are  from 
3  to  5  long,  sharp,  small  hooks.  With  other  scaphyrhynchi  similar 
hooks  are  found  in  elementary  form,  or  not  at  all.  The  plates  over  the 
gills,  at  each  side  of  the  head,  have  also  two  hooks.  The  eyes  are 
very  small ;  the  mouth  very  broad ;  the  bony  shields  on  the  head 
are  well  seen,  and  not  covered  with  visible  skin  as  in  the  American, 
form.  The  gill  covers  are  broad,  and  the  back  border  has  a  soft  skin. 
The  body,  beginning  from  the  head,  gradually  tapers  towards  the 
tail,  without  any  thickening  of  the  abdominal  region  as  with  the 
American,  The  rays  are  fewer  in  number  in  the  dorsal,  pectoral,  an< 
ventral  fins,  than  with  the  other  two  species  of  the  scaphyrhynchuj 
The  root  of  the  tail  is  very  short ;  the  thread  with  which  it  ends  is  lonj 
The  air-bladder  is  not  large,  but  entirely  developed.  In  the  work 
Bogdanoff  is  a  table  comparing  further  the  Amu,  Syr,  and  Americ< 
forms.  The  eyes  of  the  Chaklik  are  smaller  than  those  of  the  Syr-dari 
species,  and  twice  as  small  as  the  American  ;  but  the  mouth,  on  tl 
other  hand,  is  twice  as  broad.  The  largest  Chaklik  caught  by  Bo| 
danoff  measured  700  millimetres  from  the  point  of  the  nose  to  the  en^ 
of  the  tail.  The  natives  say  they  catch  much  bigger  ones.  The  colour^ 
of  the  fish  is  very  changeable,  sometimes  blackish,  and  darkly  marked. 
Some  have  no  markings,  but  are  of  yellow  tint,  through  which  the  pinky 
colour  of  the  muscles  is  seen.  Up  till  now,  Bogdanoff  says,  the 
Chaklik  has  been  found  in  the  Amu  only  between  Ust-Uchak  and 
Nukus.  Probably  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  delta,  but  not,  he  thinks,  in 
the  Aral  Sea.  It  does  not  migrate  into  the  canals,  nor  the  lakes,  and 
keeps  always  at  the  bottom  of  the  river,  choosing  places  with  a  rapid 
current  and  sand-banks.  This,  probably,  accounts  for  the  natives  calling 
it  *'  Tash-bakre,''  or  "  stone  ossitrina."  Its  food  is  exclusively  anim* 
such  as  worms,  mollusks,  and  fish. 

Besides  the  two  species  already  mentioned,  I  am  informed  on  tl 
authority  of  Mr.  Alpheraky,  that  a  third  species  from  Turkistan  is  noi 
known — Sca^hyrhynchus  Hermanniy  Sem. 


PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  AND  THE  LOWER  OXUS.  24s 

seems  to  have  reached  its  highest  development,  and 
in  the  strata  of  this  formation  are  preserved  the  most 
numerous  remains  of  its  representatives.  In  the 
succeeding  geological  period,  this  group  appears  to 
fall  and  die  out,  giving  place  to  the  Teleostei,  or  bony- 
fishes,  of  numerous  forms  and  widely  distributed.  At 
the  present  time  the  ganoid  fishes  are  but  of  6 
forms,  with  bony  skeletons  (that  is,  sub-order  Holostei), 
and  about  20  forms  of  ganoids,  with  cartilaginous 
skeletons  {Chondrostei).  To  the  last  belongs  the 
family  of  these  Acipenseridae,  consisting  of  four 
genera,  the  Acipenser,  Scaphyrhynchus,  Polyodon,  and 
Psephai^us.  This  paucity  of  forms  of  a  once  rich  group 
of  ganoid  fishes  makes  every  discovery  of  great  value, 
because  each  newly-discovered  species  increases  the 
possibility  of  tracing  the  progressive  development  of 
the  organisms  of  the  group,  and  also  the  history  of 
their  life  in  the  waters  of  the  world,  together  with  the 
part  they  play  in  nature. 

Only  three  European  authors,  other  than  Russians, 
so  far  as  I  know,  have  travelled  the  Lower  Oxus, 
namely.  Professor  Vambery,  Mr.  MacGahan  (who, 
by-the-bye,  was  American),  and  the  late  Major  Wood, 
each  of  whom  have  published  their  experiences  ;  and 
now,  having  added  such  information  as  I  can,  chiefly 
from  Russian  sources,  I  shall  proceed  to  the  de- 
scription of  my  journey  to  the  capital  of  the  Khivan 
Khan. 


CHAPTER  LX. 

FROM  PETRO'ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA. 

Departure  with  the  Khivan  Consul. — Journey  to  the  Oxus  and  crossing — 
Arrival  at  Khanki.  —  Extraordinary  sepulchres.  —  Central  Asian 
funerals. — Our  lunch  and  native  food. — The  Khivan  oasis  and  its 
dimensions. — Its  gardens  and  principal  aryks. — Arrival  in  Khiva 
at  the  house  of  the  Divan-beggi. — His  antecedents  and  visit. — 
Inspection  of  his  premises. — Our  visit  to  the  Khan. — Khivan  manu- 
scripts and  documents. — Bumaby's  "  Ride  to  Khiva." 


WE  left  Petro-Alexandrovsk  on  Monday  morning, 
October  30th,   at    7    o'clock,    having    broke^, 
our  fast,  not  with  beefsteaks  and  coffee  as  an  Englishjj 
man  would  before  starting  for  a  40-mile  ride,   but  on 
tea  and  biscuits,   which   is  the  usual    beginning  of  ai 
Russian  day's   eating.     The   ground    and    trees   werPI 
covered  with  rime.      Diotrephes  was  fresh  after  three 
days'  rest,  and  he  and   I   soon  agreed  upon  a  gallop. 
Sevier  was  ready  to  follow,   but  the  rest  of  the  party 
lagged.     We  were   escorted  by  an  old  Uzbeg  whom 
the  General  called  *'the  Consul,"  a  djiguitt,  and  two  or 
three  followers,  all  of  them  natives.     The  Consul  was 
a  sort  of  representative  of  the  Khan  at  Petro-Alexan- 
drovsk, so  that  when  the   Russian  authorities  had  an] 
communication    to    make    with    his    Highness,   it   wj 
done  through  this  man.     The  General  spoke  of  hii 
not  quite  as  his  lackey,  indeed,  but  he  bade  me  fix  th< 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.       247 

time  I  would  start  in  the  morning,  and  he  would  then 
"  tell  the  Consul  to  be  ready  to  take  me,"  and  so  on. 
Accordingly,  when  I  found  my  attendants  lagging,    I 
sent  back  to  urge  them  to  mend  their  pace  ;  but  the 
Consul  sent  me  word  that  he  was  a  man  of  importance, 
and    that    to    hurry     would     be    beneath    his    dignity. 
Whereupon   I  examined   him  attentively.      He  was  of 
more  than  three-score  years,  dressed  in  a  blue   cloth 
outer  khalat,  edged  with  fur,  and  two  khalats  beneath, 
confined  by  a  girdle  with  an  agate  clasp,   from  which 
were  suspended  two  knives,  a  hone,  and  scissors,  the 
last  stamped  "  London."     He  wore  a  very  tall,  black 
hat,  I  think  of  Kara-Kul  lambskin,  and  out  of  the  top 
peeped  a  piece  of  blue  cloth.      He  was  mounted  on  a 
tall  Turkoman  horse,  whose  tapering  neck  was  encircled, 
like  a  lady's  waist,   with  silver  straps,  the  bridle  also 
being  mounted  with  silver  and  with  agate.      I  had,  by 
chance,  spoken  to   Madame   von   Grotenhielm  of  this 
provoking  nonsense    about  grandees    riding    sedately, 
and  she  had  told  me  that  her  husband,  when  accom- 
panied by  the  Consul,  rode  ahead  at  his  own  pace,  and 
left  the  old  man  to  follow  ;  which,  in  this  case,  was  all 
very  well,   partly  because    his    Excellency    knew    the 
road,  and  next,  being  Governor,  the  Consul  could  give 
himself  no  airs. 

In  my  own  case  I  modified  the  General's  plan  by 
riding  forward,  but  frequently  turned  off  the  road  to 
look  at  objects  of  interest,  of  which  there  were  plenty 
in  a  country  where  to  me  almost  everything  was  new. 
Our  route,  at  starting,  lay  for  7  miles  to  the  north- 
west, parallel  with  the  Amu,  and  about  3  from  it.  We 
passed  the  Cossack  cavalry  station,  and  also,  a  mile 
after  starting,  a  tower  in  ruins,  a  minaret  of  burnt 
brick,  and  adjacent  tombs,  some  of  them  being  partly 


2^8  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

covered  with  vegetation,  whilst  others  were  simply 
mounds  of  clay.  On  coming  opposite  to  the  Khanki 
ferry  we  turned  to  the  left  at  right  angles,  and,  cross- 
ing four  narrow  canals,  bore  down  straight  to  the  river, 
a  good  part  of  the  way  over  land  that  is  submerged  in 
time  of  flood.  On  a  Russian  map  I  have,  13  versts  to 
the  inch,  the  river's  width  at  the  ferry  is  2  J  versts, 
and  it  took  us  about  an  hour  to  cross.  We  did  not 
float  all  the  way,  but  were  three  times  landed  on 
islands  that  look  small  in  the  map,  but  whose  area  in 
each  case  was  sufficiently  large  to  lead  me  to  think,  in 
getting  out  of  the  boat,  that  we  had  reached  the 
Khivan  bank. 

When  this  was  really  the  case  we  rode  across  steppe 
country  till  10.45,  ^^^  then  began  the  fields,  or  so- 
called  Khiva  '* gardens";  this  word  being  applicable  in 
the  fashion  that  one  speaks  in  Kent  of  hop  "  gardens," 
only  that  the  Khivan  ones  are  not  a  tenth  so  pretty. 
The  ditches  round  the  fields  were  skirted  by  willows, 
djida,  and  pollard  mulberry  trees.  At  1 1  we  reached 
Khanki,  where  Vambery  spent  a  night  in  the  Kalanter 
Khane,  or  quarter  for  dervishes,  and  where  Captain 
Burnaby  slept  in  the  house  of  the  governor. 

As  Diotrephes  and  I,  ahead  as  usual,  approached 
the  town  we  came  to  a  cemetery,  and  seeing  some  of  the 
tombs  in  a  very  dilapidated  condition,  I  had  the  curio- 
sity to  dismount  and  peep  within,  when,  to  my  surprise, 
I  saw  two  or  three  skulls  and  other  bones  lying  on  the 
surface,  as  if  they  had  never  been  put  beneath  the 
ground.     And  this  I  gathered  is  sometimes  the  case.* 

♦  Funerals  among  the  Sarts,  it  would  appear,  are  not  attended  with 
much  ceremony.  As  soon  as  a  person  dies,  the  women  of  the  household 
collect  in  a  corner,  and  begin  to  wail  and  beat  their  heads.  The 
apprised  neighbours  come  in,  and  grief  reigns  within  the  house  of  the 
deceased,  whose  acquaintances  flock  together  during  the  whole  of  that 


FROAI  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.       249 

I  could  hardly  believe  Yakoob,  on  his  coming  up, 
when  first  he  said  this,  because  in  such  a  hot  country 
it  occurred  to  me  that  the  effluvia  of  a  graveyard  would 
be  terrible.  But  he  said  that  it  was  so  even  in  Bo- 
khara, where  the  graveyards  do  smell  offensively  in 
summer.  At  Samarkand  he  said  the  graves  are  made 
6  feet  deep,  but  that  at  Bokhara,  as  at  Khanki,  there 
is  lack  of  room,  and  hence  the  practice  alluded  to. 
Moreover,  he  added  that  the  same  vaults  are  used  over 
again,  the  bones  of  the  former  occupants  being  pushed 
into  a  corner  to  make  way  for  the  new  corpse,  which 
might  have  been  the  case  with  the  three  skulls  I  saw 
in  one  tomb  ;  or,  again,  it  seemed  they  may  have  been 
originally  placed  there  together.* 

In  this  graveyard  at   Khanki   the  orders  of  Josiah 

day.  It  was  one  of  these  assemblies  I  had  asked  to  see  in  Bokhara. 
Conversing  afterwards  with  Yakoob,  I  gathered  that  the  probable 
reason  why  I  had  not  been  allowed  to  do  so  was  the  propriety  of  intro- 
ducing strangers  to  the  presence  of  women,  Yakoob  said  that  we  had 
passed  houses  in  Bokhara  where  the  wailing  was  audible,  whereupon  I 
reproached  him  for  not  telling  us,  but  he  said  he  supposed  we  heard  it. 
On  the  day  after  death,  the  corpse,  shrouded  in  a  cloth,  is  taken  to  a 
mosque,  whence,  after  some  reading  of  passages  from  the  Koran,  it  is 
borne,  in  a  sort  of  coffin,  to  the  cemetery,  or  wherever  the  testament  of 
the  deceased  directs.  The  kinsmen  and  acquaintances  divide  amongst 
them  the  shroud,  and  the  coffin  is  brought  away  again,  the  body  (when 
not  buried)  being  laid  under  a  clay  tomb,  of  which  the  ends  present  the 
form  of  an  equilateral  triangle  with  the  sides  bent  out. 

*  May  not  this  illustrate  i  Kings  xiii.  31  :  "When  I  am  dead,  then 
bury  me  in  the  sepulchre  wherein  the  man  of  God  is  buried :  lay  my 
bones  beside  his  bones"  ;  or,  again,  the  hurried  thrusting  of  a  corpse 
into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha  (2  Kings  xiii.  21)?  Evidently  it  was  this 
kind  of  sepulture  adopted  in  the  case  of  Lazarus  (John  xi.  38,  39),  and 
not  our  fashion  of  putting  beneath  the  ground  ;  so  also  in  the  case  of 
our  Lord  (John  xix,  41  ;  xx.  11). 

After  a  Sart  funeral,  those  collected  at  the  deceased's  house  listen  to 
the  reading  of  the  Koran.  The  next  day  the  same  thing  is  repeated. 
The  third  da}^,  after  morning  pra3^er,  the  mourners  go  straight  from  the 
mosque  to  the  I'eqiiiems,  and  again  listen  to  recitations  from  the  Koran, 
and  then,  having  eaten,  disperse.     Requiems  are  repeated  for  7  or  10 


250  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

could  have  been  easily  executed  when  he  "  sent  and 
took  the  bones  out  of  the  sepulchres  and  burned  them 
upon  the  altar."*  By  way  of  explaining  why  the 
cemetery  was  so  full,  Yakoob  said  the  cost  of  land  at 
Khanki  was  as  much  as  ^55  the  acre.  This  certainly 
was  a  great  jump  from  that  of  Petro-Alexandrovsk, 
where  I  heard  of  a  man  buying  poor  land  for  1 2s.  the 
acre. 

Lunch  was  prepared  for  us  at  Khanki,  in  a  suburban 
house  with  farm  buildings,  and  we  squatted  round  a 
fire  on  the  hearth  in  the  centre  of  the  room.  I  offered 
the  Consul  a  glass  of  my  English  tea,  which  won  his 
keenest  approbation.  They  used  to  get  in  Khiva 
Indian  tea,  but  the  Russians  have  practically  shut  it 
out  of  the  market  by  a  prohibitive  duty.  Conse- 
quently the  natives  drink  "green  tea,"  as  they  call  it, 
costing  from  3^-.  to  4^^.  a  pound,  or,  if  they  desi 
better,  black  Russian  "family"  tea.  The  Consul  pr 
nounced,  however,  "  Green  tea  is  good  ;  family  t 
is  better  ;  but  that  tea  would  make  one  as  '  fat  as 
a  camel ' !  "  I  observed  on  the  hearth  a  curious  pair 
of  tongs,  so  clumsy  that  I  thought  to  get  the  like  for 

days.     On  the  occasion  of  yearly  festivals  the  women  collect  at  tlui- 
grave,  and,  with  wailings  and  lamentations,   call  up  memories  of  tlflj 
departed.     Women  are  paid  to  do  this,  and  the  Muhammadan  ju™ 
alluded  to  told  me  they  wail  so  loudly  as  to  make  one  run  away.     This 
appears  to  agree  with  the  custom  obtaining  in  the  time  of  the  Evange- 
lists, of  whom  Matthew  (ix.  2t,)  records,  "  He  saw  the  minstrels  "  (I  did 
not  hear  of  these  in  connection  with  Central  Asian  funerals)  "  and  the 
people  making  a  noise  "  ;   and  Mark  employs  a  stronger  term  (v.  t^^), 
"them  that  wept  and  wailed  "  (or  shouted)  "  greatly." 

Those  who  assemble  at  the  requiems  give  alms  for  the  poor  and  th{ 
insane,  and  the  mention  thus  together  of  funerals  and  insanity  recall 
what  they  told  me  at  Bokhara,  of  turning  loose  the  incurably  mad 
Indeed,  one  could  easily  picture  neglected  lunatic  s  taking  refuge  ii 
empty  sepulchres,  like  those  I  saw,  and  "  coming  out  of  the  torn 
exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way  "  (Matt.  viii.  2 

*  2  Kings  xxiii.  16. 


It, 

1 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.       251 

a  curiosity,  and  I  asked  the  Consul  whether  they  could 
be  purchased  in  Khiva.  He  said  "  Yes,"  or  they  would 
make  a  pair  like  the  English  to  order  ;  but  I  told  him 
I  was  anxious  to  take  the  native  article,  with  a  view 
to  improving  the  English  taste  !  This  joke  tickled 
the  fancy  of  the  old  fellow,  who  had  already  thawed 
under  the  influence  of  tea,  and  his  tongue  wagged 
apace. 

I  had  made  several  inquiries  concerning  the  food 
of  the  natives,  for  with  this  we  were  to  be  regaled 
again  for  some  time.  Of  course,  they  eat  no  pork,  and 
some  eat  neither  hares  nor  rabbits,  though  they  are 
not  forbidden.  Camel,  I  believe,  is  forbidden,  and  in 
Bokhara  not  eaten,  neither  there,  they  said,  are  horses, 
but  the  Kirghese  eat  both.  Goats  would  appear  to 
be  not  much  used  for  food  in  Bokhara.  We  heard 
there  of  a  porridge  of  rice  and  milk,  and  of  lapsha,  a 
sort  of  vermicelli.  To  these  may  be  added  fowls, 
ducks,  and  geese,   and,   near  the  Oxus,  pheasants.* 

They  gave  us  at  Khanki  some  gravy  soup,  which  was 
thought  a  delicacy,  and,  after  resting  for  an  hour  and 
a  quarter,  we  resumed  our  journey  under  a  bright  sun, 
but  without  sufficient  power  to  melt  the  rime  and  thin 
ice  on  the  ponds.  About  5  miles  from  Khanki  we  passed 
the  ruins  of  Nakhaia,  a  small  stronghold  ;  then  5  miles 
beyond,  the  village  Gudja  ;  and,  3  miles  further,  another 
village,  Nadubak.      For  the  first  hour  we  had  gardens 

*  It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  people  in  general 
feast  on  these  dainties  daily.  The  rich  live  on  pilau.  The  well-to-do 
families  live  on  bread  and  tea  daily,  but  pilau  on  Thursday  and  Sunday. 
Workmen,  carters,  etc.,  have  pilau  daily,  and  shopkeepers  eat  pilmain, 
or  pieces  of  meat  on  a  skewer,  costing  a  poolah  each,  and  not  all  off 
prime  joints,  but  some  of  liver  and  inferior  parts.  They  drink  a  good 
deal — in  summer,  ice  and  honey.  The  poor  make  soup  out  of  wheat 
and  other  grain,  and  the  poorest  eat  sorghum. 


252  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

right  and  left,  and  then  came  a  patch  of  unoccupied 
land,  needing  water  only  to  make  it  fruitful,  as  was 
apparent  from  the  portions  of  it  enclosed  and  irrigated, 
giving  a  lively  picture  of  garden  and  desert  side  by 
side,  with  only  a  wall  dividing.  In  my  note-book  I 
have  marked  the  road  to  Khiva  as  traversing  gardens, 
desert,  and  steppe,  for  we  saw  some  of  each,  though 
we  were  supposed  to  be  passing  through  a  rich 
country. 

The  Khivan  oasis  is  in  some  respects  unlike  any 
other  country  I  have  visited.  A  well-written  article 
on  Khiva,  in  the  ''  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  de- 
scribes the  khanate  as  a  fertile  oasis,  200  miles  long 
and  from  25  to  30  miles  wide,  stretching  along  the  left 
bank  of  the  Lower  Oxus,  between  Pitniak  and  the  Sea 
of  Aral,  with  an  area  of  from  5,000  to  6,000  square 
miles,  or  about  three-fourths  the  size  of  Wales.  So 
far  as  mere  area  is  concerned  these  figures  are  ap- 
proximately correct,  but  the  reader  will  have  an 
exaggerated  idea  of  the  oasis  if  he  supposes  it  to 
consist  throughout  of  gardens  and  fields.  I  have 
before  me  my  Russian  map  of  largest  scale,  wherein 
the  cultivated  soil  is  coloured  green,  the  sands  orange, 
and  the  uncultivated  land  is  not  coloured  at  all.  On 
this  map  the  famous  gardens  of  Khiva  shrink  to  very 
small  proportions.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  lands  bor- 
dering on  the  aryks  and  canals  ;  and  where  the  water 
from  these  does  not  reach,  there  is  sandy  desert,  or 
barren  or  unoccupied  land.* 

*  I  can  fitly  describe  the  arable  surface  of  the  khanate  in  connection 
with  its  aryks  and  canals.  At  Pitniak  there  is  a  small  patch  of  green 
about  8  miles  long  and  f  'mile  wide.  Ten  miles  further  down 
the  Amu  there  leaves  the  river  the  great  Palvan-Ata-aryk,  running 
almost  due  west,  a  course  of  about  50  miles  past  Hazarasp  and  Bagat  to 
Khiva.     It  throws  out  canals  and  smaller  branches  all  along  this  stem, 


254  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  was  reminded  of  the  arid  character  of  the  soil  by 
my  horse  making  for  a  water-trough  at  the  side  of  the 
road,  which  was  unhappily  empty,  and  we  had  to  go 
some  distance  further,  not  seeing  a  road-side  pool,  or 
stream,  till  we  came  to  what  they  called  a  Sart  station, 
where  water  was  drawn  from  a  well  for  our  animals. 
We  saw  cattle  in  two  or  three  places  near  the  numerous 
fortified  farm-houses,  or  havlis,  and,  as  we  drew  near  to 
Khiva,  met  a  large  number  of  arbas  returning  from 
market.  At  sunset  we  came  in  sight  of  the  city,  and 
beholding,  with  satisfaction,  its  towers  and  minarets 
standing  out  against  a  reddened  sky,  we  entered  the 
gates  at  half-past  5.  They  called  the  distance  60 
versts,  or  40  miles,  but  by  neither  of  my  maps  can  I 
make  it  more  than  50  versts.  Captain  Burnaby  rode 
between  Khiva  and  Khanki,  a  distance  he  calls  60  (but 
which  should  be  30)  versts,  in  6  hours,  so  I  suppose  we 
had  done  fairly  well  in  accomplishing  50  versts  in 
hours,   excluding  rest,  and  crossing  the  Oxus.     Any 


) 


like  a  well-trained  espalier  tree,  till  it  disappears  in  the  desert,  3  mile 
west  of  the  capital.  This  aryk  waters  a  larger  area  than  any  in  Khiva, 
an  expanse  of  garden  ground,  say  45  miles  long,  and  varying  from 
6  to  12  miles  wide.  The  next  large  aryk,  called  Khazavat,  or  Gazavat, 
leaves  the  Amu  5  miles  below  the  Hazarasp  ferry,  flows  off  to  the 
north-west  past  Khanki,  Kosh-Kupyr,  and  Khazavat,  and  into  the 
desert  70  miles  from  its  source.  This  ar5'k  is  longer  than  the  former, 
but  it  gives  verdure  to  a  belt  of  country  not  usually  more  than  a  mile,  and 
never  more  than  4  miles  wide  on  either  bank.  The  next  large  aryk, 
Shakh-abad,  leaves  the  Amu  opposite  Urgenj,  gives  off  no  small 
canals  until  it  comes  to  Shakh-abad,  then  continues  north-west  past 
Ambar,  Tashauz,  and  Iliali,  and  disappears  near  the  ruins  of  Kokchuk 
after  a  course  of  80  miles.  Between  this  aryk  and  the  preceding  one 
there  is  a  tongue  of  sandy  desert,  varying  from  i  to  7  miles  wide,  and 
the  band  of  verdure  on  either  bank  rarely  exceeds  3  miles  in  width.H 
The  foregoing  are  the  largest  three  of  the  Khivan  aryks  ;  the  remainingiP 
two,  Yarmysh  and  Klych-niaz-bai,  run  in  a  similar  direction  further 
north,  but  present  on  the  map  the  appearance  of  bare  branches  with  a 
few  leafy  sprigs  at  the  ends,  whilst  nearly  all  the  land  between  the 
Shakh-abad  aryk  and  the  Amu  is  barren  or  uncultivated. 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.        255 

how,  it  was  the  longest  day  I  had  spent  in  the  saddle, 
and  I  was  thoroughly  tired. 

They  conducted  us  through  many  streets,  nearly 
empty  at  dusk,  though,  of  the  few  inhabitants  that 
were  about,  some  saluted  us,  and  I  observed  one  man, 
on  recognizing  the  Consul,  formally  descend  from  his 
horse.  After  winding  about  a  long  time  we  came  to 
the  house — or  shall  I  call  it  palace  ? — of  no  less  a  person 
than  Matmurad,  the  Divan-beggi,  or  prime  minister  of 
the  Khan.  We  passed  through  sundry  courts  and 
passages,  and  entered  the  guest-room,  where  I  fancy 
Russian  embassies  are  usually  lodged.  It  was  less 
Oriental,  but  more  comfortable,  than  the  rooms  we 
occupied  at  Bokhara.  The  windows  were  glazed, 
there  was  a  petchka,  and  an  iron  stove,  also  a  table  at 
which  one  could  sit  without  having  to  stoop  unduly.  On 
this  was  a  Russian  lamp,  and  in  the  room  two  clocks, 
each  bearing  false  witness  against  its  neighbour,  and 
both  being  many  hours  wrong.  At  one  end  of  the 
chamber  was  a  divan,  and  in  the  opposite  wall  were 
indented  niches  containing  sundry  Russian  confections, 
coffee,  wine  and  champagne  bottles.  The  last  agreed 
with  a  whisper  I  heard  at  Petro  that  champagne  was 
not  tabooed  at  the  most  orthodox  court  of  the  Khan, 
Muhammadan  though  he  be.  From  this  apartment 
a  curtained  doorway  led  to  what  was  to  be  my  bed- 
room. The  walls  were  papered,  and  adorned  with  a 
mirror  and  Turkoman  carpets,  the  most  noteworthy 
object  in  the  room  being  a  large  bedstead,  stretching 
lengthwise  all  across  the  room,  with  a  gateway  into  it. 
It  must  have  been  a  peculiar  bed,  however,  whereon  I 
could  not  have  slept  that  night,  and  when  I  awoke  in 
the  morning  my  limbs  had  not  perfectly  recovered  from 
the  effect  of  the  previous  day's  exertion. 


256  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Soon  after  breakfast  we  received  a  visit  from  our  old 
conductor,  the  Consul,  and  our  host  Matmurad,  who 
had  thoughtfully  spared  us  a  visit  immediately  on  our 
arrival.  This  Matmurad,  it  should  be  observed,  is  a 
man  whose  name  will  go  down  to  posterity  in  the 
pages  of  MacGahan  and  Ho  worth.  At  the  time  of 
the  Russian  conquest  there  was  a  division  of  opinion 
among  the  Khan's  counsellors.  Some  urged  sub- 
mission, but  Matmurad,  having  headed  the  militant 
party,  and  being  very  hostile  to  Russia,  was  sent  a 
prisoner  to  Kazalinsk,  and  thence,  as  he  told  us,  to 
Kaluga  in  Russia,  his  son  Polvan,  in  his  absence, 
taking  his  place  at  court.  Subsequently  Matmurad 
was  allowed  by  the  conquerors  to  return,  after  which 
he  was  reinstated  as  Divan-beggi,  *'  next  iinto  the 
Khan,  and  great  among  the  Khivans,  and  accepted  of 
the  multitude  of  his  brethren."  * 

Matmurad  asked  about  my  health  and  requirements, 
and   I   told  him  what  things  I  desired,  naming  among_ 
them  some  photographs,  if  possible,  of  Khiva,  which  ■ 
knew  some  Russians  had  taken.     He  replied,  however, 
that  there  were  none  to  be  had.     I  then  invited  him  t(^ 
ask  me  questions,  whereupon  he  inquired  whence  I  camejj 
whither   going,   and  what    the  object  of  my  journey  ; 
further,  hearing  that  I   had  been  round  the  world,  he 
wished  to  know  which  country  I  liked  best.      Of  course 
I   said  England,  whereupon  he  asked  if  the  people  in 
England   were  good  and  hospitable.      I   replied  truly, 
"  Not  more  hospitable  than  here,  but  better  educated," 
and  as  to  their  being  good,  I  quoted  one  thing  in  which 
England  is  conspicuous  above  every  nation  of  the  world 
in  that  she  spends  yearly  more  than  half  a  million  of 
money  in  carrying  the  means  of  improvement  and  reli- 

*  Esther  x.  3. 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.        257 

gious  enlightenment  to  the  Ignorant  and  heathen  parts 
of  the  earth.  On  hearing  that  I  had  distributed  50,000 
books  in  Siberia,  he  asked,  ''  What  book?"  I  then  men- 
tioned the  Bible,  saying  that  I  could  give  it  in  Persian 
and  Arabic,  but  that  it  was  not  printed  in  Uzbeg. 

We  were  then  informed  that  the  Khan  would  receive 
us  in  about  four  hours,  and  after  that  we  might  go  and 
see  the  city.  I  therefore  asked  to  be  allowed  in  the 
interim  to  look  over  our  host's  premises,  which  had 
for  us  this  advantage  over  those  we  occupied  at 
Bokhara,  that  they  were  not  apartments  occupied  by 
our  noble  selves  merely,  but  by  a  great  man's  family 
and  servants.  They  told  us  there  were  in  the  estab- 
lishment the  4  wives  and  5  sons  of  the  Divan-beggi, 
and  100  men-servants  and  their  wives  ;  but  so  little 
did  the  men-servants  (the  only  ones  we  saw)  know  of 
the  women's  quarters,  that  they  could  not  tell  how 
many  daughters  their  master  had,  or  even  if  there 
were  any.  MacGahan  says  that,  at  the  time  of  the 
Russian  occupation,  Matmurad  possessed  400  slaves. 
Within  the  high  walls  surrounding  the  premises  were 
a  garden,  several  courts,  and  buildings.  The  houses 
were  new — in  fact,  not  quite  finished — and  showed 
unmistakably  that  the  owner  had  adopted  in  captivity 
many  Russian  ideas.  Matmurad's  own  chamber  was 
entered  through  an  ante-room,  devoid  of  furniture, 
and  almost  of  light,  with  a  prettily  carved  door,  said 
to  have  cost  about  £2)-  ^"^  the  chamber  was  a  bath, 
and  a  hearth,  measuring  68  inches  by  40,  wide  enough 
for  a  bonfire.  There  was  likewise  a  table,  some  books, 
or  portions  of  the  Koran,  a  harmonicon,  and  a  pair 
of  gloves  (the  only  ones  we  saw  in  the  khanate), 
whilst  on  the  wall  hung  bridles,  guns  and  pistols, 
many  of  them  presents    from    the    Russians.      There 

VOL.  II.  17 


258  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

was  also  a  bedstead  large  enough  for  two  persons, 
a  chandelier,  presented  by  the  Khan,  a  huge  glass 
lantern,  big  enough  for  a  good-sized  clock-case,  and, 
as  the  acme  of  Khivan  refinement,  coloured  glass  for 
the  windows.  In  the  butler's  room  were  birds  in 
cages,  musical  instruments,  and  a  board  for  chess,  at 
which  they  play  skilfully.  In  the  mirza's,  or  secretary's, 
room  was  a  Sart  scraipka,  or  fiddle,  a  poor-looking 
goldfinch,  and  a  hawk  in  training  for  hunting  wild 
sheep.  In  one  of  the  courts  was  a  tent,  erected 
evidently  for  a  permanency,  and  intended,  in  its 
present  position,  for  a  Bek  and  his  scribe,  though  one 
could  see  the  convenience  of  such  a  thing  in  Khiva, 
inasmuch  as  if  the  Divan-beggi's  business  called  him 
to  travel  in  the  khanate,  he  would  have  a  habitation 
to  carry  with  him. 

Thus  far  we  had  only  seen  the  winter  house,  but 
I  was  more  interested  in  the  summer  house,  noj 
yet  completed.  It  had  an  upper  story,  and  an  outl 
on  to  the  roof,  where  they  commonly  sit,  and  lounge 
and  talk.  By  mounting  the  roof  we  could  see  that 
the  outer  walls  were  tipped,  not  with  broken  glass,  but 
with  thorns,  and  the  wall  of  the  women's  apartments 
was  pointed  out,  whilst  below  us  was  the  garden  and 
a  pond,  with  adjacent  trees  of  karagatch,  whose  dense 
shade  would  make  the  spot  cool  and  agreeable  in 
summer.  The  karagatch  is  used  for  carvings,  espe- 
cially for  the  two  lofty  ornamental  pillars,  which,  in 
palaces  and  great  houses,  support  the  roof  of  what 
I  must  call  the  portico,  covering  the  wide  gallery  or 
platform  in  front  of  the  principal  dwelling-rooms. 
A  block  of  timber,  to  make  such  a  pillar,  costs  in 
Khiva  from  £1  to  ^5.  Our  host  had  given  £2  fi 
his,   and   I   measured  the  pedestal   30   inches  squar 


1 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.       259 

whilst  higher  the  greatest  circumference  was  6  feet 
7  inches.* 

Besides  the  summer  house  of  the  Divan-beggi,  we 
visited,  in  a  different  part  of  the  premises,  the  house 
or  rooms  of  his  eldest  son,  and  other  apartments 
reserved  to  another  son,  a  good-looking  boy  of  15, 
whose  education  was  not  finished,  and  who  showed  us 
one  of  his  copy-books  illuminated.  Near  at  hand,  tied 
up  in  a  court,  was  an  enormous  ram  kept  for  fighting. 
It  measured  5  feet  from  the  horns  to  the  extremity  of 
its  fat  tail,  3  feet  across  the  wool  on  the  back,  and  stood 
3  feet  high  ;  but  the  most  interesting  part,  perhaps,  of 
the  premises  was  the  stud  yards,  a  small  one  for  the 
sons'  horses,  where  they  stood  in  the  open,  covered 
with  felt  from  ears  to  tail,  and  a  larger  one  for  the 
steeds  of  the  Divan-beggi.  Here  we  saw  some  good 
Argamaks,  the  biggest  and  strongest  of  Turkoman 
horses.  One  of  them  cost  ^17,  another  ^24,  and  the 
best,  under  cover  in  a  stable,  ^45.  The  prices  of 
such  horses  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  had  been  given  us 
as  from  ^15  to  ^20,  and  of  a  cow  ^3    \os. 

After  inspecting  our  host's  premises,  we  were  sent 
for,  about  half-past  3,   to  see  the  Khan.      Preceded  by 

*  These  pillars  suggested  a  partial  elucidation  of  the  passage  in 
Judges  (xvi.  29)  concerning  Samson's  death.  Given  a  man  making 
sport  before  these  pillars,  in  a  position  to  be  seen  best  from  the  roof 
of  the  portico,  and  the  adjacent  portions  of  the  building  ;  then,  having 
been  guided  to  the  pillars  (ver.  26),  he  could,  sufficient  strength  being 
granted,  dislocate  them  quickly  one  after  the  other,  before  bringing 
down  the  structure  on  his  own  head.  This  house  of  the  Divan-beggi 
would  be  no  illustration  for  the  size  of  the  house  of  Dagon,  with  the 
3,000  men  and  women  stated  to  be  on  the  flat  roof,  but  it  is  a  question 
whether  this  Khivan  roof,  being  covered  with  people,  and  the  two 
pillars  gone,  the  whole  concern  might  not  collapse.  As  to  the  numbers 
on  the  roof,  I  may  add  that  the  Jumma  mosque,  at  Khiva,  is  said  to 
hold  from  3,000  to  4,000  people,  and  as  it  is  covered  with  a  fiat  roof,  so 
it  is  to  be  assumed  that  as  many  could  assemble  thereon. 


26o 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


the    Consul   and  another,   we  rode    outside  the  inner 
wall,  receiving  here  and  there  a  salaam,  until  we  came 


to  the  summer  palace.     The  Khan  had  not  yet  quitted^ 
this  building,  and  a  troop  of  horses  were  waiting,  theii 
riders  having  gone  within,  I  suppose,  on  business  withj 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROVSK  TO  KHIVA.       261 

the  Khan,  who,  according  to  Vambery,  holds  public 
audience  for  at  least  four  hours  daily,  and  is  expected 
to  hear  the  most  trivial  cases  his  subjects  bring  before 
him.  The  number  of  attendants  about  the  building 
appeared  greater  than  we  had  seen  about  the  Emir  of 
Bokhara.  The  Khan's  officers  were  all  in  sheepskin 
hats,  clothed  in  somewhat  dowdy  garments,  and  pre- 
sented a  poverty-stricken  appearance.  We  were  shown 
into  an  ante-room,  and  then  through  one  court  after 
another,  till  we  came  to  a  room,  only  partially  carpeted 
and  scantily  furnished,  wherein  the  most  prominent 
object  was  a  sort  of  divan  or  bedstead,  covered 
with  a  Persian  carpet.  On  this  the  Khan  was 
sitting,  with  a  sword  and  revolver  before  him,  and 
behind  wer^  three  chairs  piled  with  books.  His 
Majesty  shook  hands  with  me,  and  motioned  me 
to  a  seat  on  the   couch. 

The  Khan's  age  had  been  given  me  as  36,  but  I 
should  have  thought  him  older.  He  was  dressed  in  a 
dark-blue  cloth  khalat  and  black  sheepskin  hat,  much 
like  the  Consul  or  any  of  the  others  about  the  court, 
and  he  displayed  no  pretence  at  grandeur  of  any  sort. 
He  asked  whence  I  came,  whether  the  chief  Russian 
authorities  were  well,  and  whether  they  had  been  kind 
and  helpful  to  me  ;  all  of  which  I  could  answer  in  the 
affirmative.  Next  he  asked  who  was  the  Sovereign  of 
England,  and  whether  things  were  going  well.  I  told 
him  Queen  Victoria,  and  repeated  the  old  story  about 
the  sun  never  setting  on  her  dominions,  whereupon  he 
told  Yakoob  privately  that  he  did  not  believe  that  ; 
and  when  he  was  further  informed  that  the  earth  went 
round  the  sun,  his  Highness  inquired  whether  it  did  so 
straight  or  upside  down,  meaning,  I  suppose,  vertically 
or  horizontally.      I  asked  if  he  had  any  ancient  books 


262  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

or  antiquities,  but  he  said  that  those  he  once  had,  the 
Russians  had  taken.* 

Of  course  I  had  read  Burnaby's  "  Ride  to  Khiva," 
and  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  had  been  told  that  the 
Khivans  sent  word  of  his  arrival  to  the  Russians,  some 
of  whom  remembered  the  tall  life-guardsman  being 
brought  to  the  fortress  "a  prisoner,"  as  they  put  it,  on 
his  little  pony.  If  this  were  so,  it  would  seem  that 
the  Captain  was  treated  as  I  had  been  told  I  should 
probably  have  been  at  Bokhara,  had  I  come  without 
permission,  and  this,  I  suppose,  was  only  in  keeping 
with  the  Russo-Khivan  treaty,  which  expressly  provides 
that  no  one  is  to  be  allowed  to  enter  the  khanate  from 
Russia  without  a  passport. 

On  reaching  Khanki  I  asked  the  Consul  if  he 
remembered  the  English  Captain,  and  how  it  was 
they  gave  him  up.  He  did  not  remember  him,  an 
said  that  for  them  to  give  him  up  to  the  Russian 
could  not  be,  for  that  the  Khan  was  on  excellent  term 
with  England,  and  sent  to  Herat  two  years  before 
Khiva  was  taken,  and  that  the  letter  was  forwarded 
thence  to  the  English,  but  no  answer  was  received.  I 
asked  Matmurad  if  he  remembered  the  Englishman 
coming,  but  he  said  ''  No."     When,    however,    I   tol(^| 

*  There  were  about  300  volumes.  They  have  been  described  by  M. 
Kuhn,  the  Orientalist  of  the  Russian  expedition.  They  were  taken  to 
the  Imperial  library  at  Petersburg,  where,  I  believe,  I  saw  some  of 
them.  The  works  were  in  manuscript,  and  historical  in  character, 
chiefly  translations  from  Persian  into  Turki,  written,  for  the  most  part, 
under  the  present  Kungrad  dynasty.  There  was  also  a  native  work  on 
the  history  of  the  Khivan  khans  ;  likewise  a  history  of  the  world,  and  a 
history  of  Khiva  from  the  beginning  of  time.  Besides  the  books  were 
several  diplomatic  documents,  20  gold  and  5  silver  seals  belonging  to 
the  khans,  and  about  100  dies  for  striking  money.  There  is  a  valuable 
article  by  Khanikoff  on  the  documents  concerning  the  Khanate 
Khiva  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Geogra;phique,  p.  282,  Vol.  : 


Lb 

] 


FROM  PETRO-ALEXANDROASK  TO  KHIVA.      263 

the  Khan  that  the  EngHsh  had  been  much  interested 
in  Khiva  by  reason  of  a  book  written  by  Captain 
Burnaby,  his  Majesty,  though  not  seeming  to  recollect 
very  clearly,  yet  inquired  if  he  were  still  alive,  and  to 
what  tchin,  or  rank,  the  Captain  had  now  attained.  I 
told  him  that  of  "  Colonel." 

He  then  asked  what  was  my  tchin,  and  was  some- 
what nonplused  when  I  told  him  "Doctor  of  Divinity." 
He  appealed  to  Matmurad,  who  was  kneeling  before 
him,  the  only  courtier  present,  and  said  that  was  a 
tchin  he  had  never  heard  of  before. 

Seeing  that  Yakoob  had  decided  not  to  go  so  far  as 
Krasnovodsk,  1  mentioned  to  the  Khan  our  desire  to 
find  an  interpreter  who  could  speak  Russian  and  Turki; 
and  he  said  he  would  find  a  djiguitt  for  us  who  could 
act  in  this  capacity  and  accompany  us  to  Krasnovodsk. 
Tea  had  been  brought  during  our  conversation  for  the 
Khan,  Sevier,  and  me.  I  had  observed  that  Yakoob, 
on  approaching  the  Emir,  had  kissed  his  Majesty's 
hand,  and  so  he  had  done  with  the  Khan;  but  now  he 
received  what  in  the  East  is  considered  a  great  honour, 
for  the  Khan,  after  drinking  a  portion  of  his  tea,  gave 
to  Yakoob  the  rest.  His  Majesty  frequently  called 
during  our  interview  for  the  chilini,  that  was  brought 
by  an  attendant  at  a  moment's  notice,  and  taken  away 
again  after  one  long  whiff  had  been  drawn  by  his  royal 
master.  On  the  whole,  I  thought  the  Khan  of  Khiva 
far  more  intelligent  and  more  interesting  than  the 
Emir  of  Bokhara,  and  we  left  his  presence  with  the 
understanding  that,  according  to  Khivan  etiquette, 
we  were  to  see  him  again  before  quitting  the  capital. 


CHAPTER  LXI. 

THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY. 

My  informants. — Dimensions  of  the  khanate  :  its  soil,  geology,  and 
botany. — Khivan  melons,  and  eiforts  to  introduce  them  into  Eng- 
land.— Khivan  fauna,  inhabitants,  revenue,  and  foreign  relations. 
— Kharezm  under  the  Arabs. — Conquests  of  Jinghis  Khan  and 
Tamerlane. — The  Uzbeg  khans,  and  commencement  of  intercourse 
with  Russia. — Raids  of  Cossacks,  and  expedition  of  Cherkassky. — 
Khivan  enslavement  of  Cossacks. — Kazak  khans. — Perovsky's 
expedition  and  English  mediation. — Shakespear's  conduct  o 
Russian  slaves. — Russian  capture  of  Khiva. 


I 


n 

1 

hi 


I  WAS  greatly  favoured,  both  in  Petro-Alexandrovsk 
and  Khiva,  in  being  brought  into  contact  with 
men  such  as  the  Russian  Governor,  Captain  Mirba 
daleff,  and  the  Divan-beggi.  Both  the  Captain  an 
Divan-beggi  kindly  permitted  me  to  put  them  through! 
my  list  of  questions,  so  that,  thanks  to  Mr.  Sevier's 
usual  patience  and  theirs,  I  gained  a  good  deal  of 
information  at  first  hand  concerning  native  life  in 
Central  Asian  towns,  which,  after  all,  is  much  of  one 
pattern,  whether  at  Samarkand,  Bokhara,  or  Khiva. 

Not  that  I  placed  much  reliance  upon  Matmurad's 
judgment  in  matters  of  opinion,  or  anything  requiring 
abstract  calculation,  for  his  answer  to  my  first  question 
as  to  the  length  of  Khiva  from  north  to  south  showed! 
that  he  knew  nothing  about  figures.      He  replied   lod 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.         265 

tashes,  or  530  miles,  which  was  nearly  three  times  too 
much.  The  breadth,  including  the  desert,  he  gave  as 
from  300  to  400  miles,  which  was  nearer,  but  the 
inhabited  part  west  of  the  Amu  as  50  miles.  As  an 
illustration  how  unaccustomed  the  Khivans  are  to 
tabulating  information,  I  heard  at  Petro  that  the 
Emperor  had  desired  of  the  Khan  certain  statistics 
respecting  the  khanate,  which  the  latter  was  willing  to 
supply,  but  he  utterly  failed  in  the  attempt.  A  calcu- 
lation more  to  the  point  was  that  of  the  late  Major 
Wood,  who  estimated  the  Khivan  area,  fertilized  by  the 
waters  of  the  Oxus,  at  a  million  and  a  half  of  acres — an 
area,  that  is  to  say,  rather  less  than  that  of  the  county  of 
Lincoln,  or  about  half  the  size  of  Yorkshire.  The  soil 
of  the  oasis  is  of  loess,  or  stiff,  sandy  clay,  with  strips 
and  patches  of  sand.  Black  mould  is  seldom  seen,  but 
earth  is  frequently  found  impregnated  with  salt.  The 
oasis  is  generally  level.  The  cliffs  and  sand-hillocks, 
which  I  described  coming  down  the  left  bank  of 
the  Amu,  surround  the  valley  of  Pitniak  in  a  broad 
curve,  but  five  miles  lower,  the  sand-hills  approach  the 
river  again,  and  accompany  it  as  far  as  Sheikh-aryk, 
and  then  quit  it  finally,  to  turn  westward  and  surround 
the  Khivan  oasis. 

The  geological  formation  of  the  khanate  is  princi- 
pally red  sandstone  on  the  south,  gradually  changing 
northwards  into  a  firm  clay.  They  work  no  metals, 
but  have  salt  and  sulphur  sufficient  for  home  consump- 
tion. The  best  salt  is  found  in  the  north.  They  have 
building  stone,  but  it  is  too  expensive,  Matmurad 
said,  at  Khiva,  to  build  a  whole  house  of  it,  for  though 
sufficient  might  be  quarried  without  cost,  it  would  have 
to  be  conveyed  all  the  way  from  Pitniak,  or  I  suppose 
beyond,  since  he  spoke  of  the  distance  as  130  miles. 


266  RUSSIAAr  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Hence    stone    is    used    only    for    foundations.      Burnt 
bricks  cost  £i,  and  sun-dried  2s.,  per  thousand. 

Concerning  things  botanical,  I  had  expected  much 
in  Khivan  fruits,  especially  the  melons.  They  are  a 
most  lucrative  crop.  With  good  management,  Kostenko 
says,  an  acre  will  yield  from  10,000  to  14,000  melons, 
and  these,  at  i\d.  each,  will  bring  from  ^50  to  £jo. 
M.  Brodovski  says  that  about  Samarkand  an  acre 
yields  10,000  melons.  The  natives  hang  them  in  cool 
chambers  to  the  ceiling,  where  certain  sorts  will  keep 
from  the  time  when  they  are  ripe  till  the  following  May. 
Matmurad  gave  us  the  price  of  melons  from  12^-.  to 
2oy.  a  hundred.  There  are,  of  course,  several  varieties. 
I  heard  of  one  sort,  small  as  an  apple,  but  pronounced 
very  good  ;  some  are  a  foot  and  a  half  long.  On  their 
winter  melons  Matmurad  did  not  appear  to  set  much 
store,  but  said  that  two  varieties,  ripe  at  harvest,  were 
sweet  as  sugar,  though  they  would  not  keep.  My  host 
gave  me  seeds  of  five  kinds,  which,  as  did  Captain 
Burnaby,  I  brought  to  England,  hoping  that  I  might 
be  more  fortunate  than  he  in  raising  them.  I  must  say 
that,  after  eating  Central  Asian  melons,  I  have  tasted 
none  in  England  that  are  by  comparison  worthy  of 
mention.  Those  I  ate  in  Constantinople  came  nearest, 
and  hence,  believing  that  I  had  real  treasures  to  give, 
I  distributed  the  seeds  to  such  of  my  friends  and 
acquaintances  as  had  convenience  for  growing  them.* 

*  The  five  kinds  were  called  (i)  Kitai  [pv  Chinese) ;  (2)  Zamcha  ;  (3) 
Kukcha,  all  sown  in  Khiva  in  April,  and  ripen  in  about  two  months,  or 
say  the  beginning  of  June  ;  w^hilst  the  remaining  two  (4)  Sherin-pitchek^ 
and  (5)  Alikeh,  are  ready  a  week  or  two  later.  Mr,  J.  D.  Allcroft  sent 
me  the  first  fruit  in  1883,  less  than  a  foot  long,  somewhat  pear-shaped, 
of  green  flesh,  but  tasteless,  and  not  juicy — I  fear  not  quite  ripe.  Earl 
Stanhope  kindly  tried  some  seeds  the  same  season  at  Chevening.  Mr. 
Gray,  the  head-gardener,  informs  me  that  one  plant  was  raised  of  such 
rampant  growth  that  it  ran  on  a  trellis    over  a  space    of   nearly   200 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.  26; 

Apples  were  easily  obtained  in  Khiva,  and  cost  from 
24^".  to  30^.  per  cwt.,  grapes  45".  a  batman,  or  id.  per 
lb.,  and  peaches  in  the  season  up  to  half  that  price. 
Of  mulberries  they  take  so  little  account  as  not  to  pick 
them  for  sale.  The  Khivans  cultivate  many  flowers, 
they  said,  but  not  peas,  and  neither  Matmurad  nor  the 

square  feet,  covering  half  the  roof  of  the  glass  house,  and  then  would 
haye  spread  further  if  permitted.  It  was  planted  early  in  March  in  an 
ordinary  loam  and  leaf  soil,  with  bottom  heat.  For  a  long  time  the 
blossoms,  with  one  exception,  did  not  set,  and  that  one  produced  a 
large  ovate  melon  of  10  lbs.  weight.  Subsequently  other  blossoms  set, 
and  were  growing  fruit  weighing  3  or  4  lbs.  each,  when  unfortunately 
the  plant  gave  way  through  rot  at  the  collar,  and  died.  The  plant  took 
quite  5  months  to  grow.  The  large  melon  was  cut  a  little  too  early, 
and  was  lacking  in  the  juicy  qualities  it  probably  would  have  acquired 
had  it  been  left  longer  on  the  plant ;  but  the  gardener  considered  it 
a  good  melon.  Next  year  three  sorts  were  tried  by  Mr.  A.  F.  Barron, 
of  the  Royal  Horticultural  Society's  gardens  at  Chiswick  ;  but  he  did 
not  report  very  satisfactorily  upon  them.  Of  those  he  tried,  one  did  not 
fruit,  a  second  produced  two  long  ovate  melons,  and  the  third,  round 
fruit.  These  ripened,  the  flesh  being  tender,  very  juicy,  even  watery, 
but  not  by  any  means  rich.  Mr.  Barron  adds,  "They  were  rather 
rampant  in  growth,  and  did  not  fruit  readily,  but  the  foliage  was 
somewhat  destroyed  by  the  hot  sun,  and  this,  no  doubt,  affected  the 
fruit."  Mr.  Wildsmith,  of  Heckfield  gardens,  near  Winchfield( Viscount 
Eversley's),  spoke  of  the  "  Alikeh  "  as  best  of  the  three  kinds  he  raised, 
and  not  so  rampant  in  growth  as  the  other  two,  but,  though  speaking  of 
the  "  Zamcha  "  as  excellent,  thought  them  no  better  in  quality  than 
English  melons.  The  Zamcha  was  tried  also  at  Burghley  Gardens  (the 
Marquis  of  Exeter's),  by  Mr.  Gilbert,  who  is  famous,  I  am  told,  for 
growing  melons,  and  he  exhibited  from  my  seed  a  fruit  weighing  1 1|  lbs. 
•at  the  Royal  Horticultural  Society' s  show  on  September  9th  last.  Another 
fruit  from  the  same  plant,  weighing  9^  lbs.,  was  of  green,  deep  flesh, 
and  though  not  of  very  rich  or  aromatic  flavour,  was  liked  for  its  great 
juiciness.  The  appearance  of  the  "  Kitai  "  melon,  as  reported  on  from 
Burghley  Gardens,  was  not  flattering,  being  "precisely  like  a  large 
vegetable  marrow,  and  of  a  dark  green  colour."  I  sent  seeds  to  my 
friend  Dr.  Haughton  to  be  triei  in  the  botanical  gardens  of  Trinity 
College,  Dublin.  He  committed  them  to  Mr.  Burbidge,  who  distributed 
some  seeds  to  a  few  English  gardeners,  who  made  melons  a  speciality. 
From  the  correspondence  that  ensued  I  learn  that  Mr.  O' Donovan, 
who  penetrated  to  Merv,  thought  the  introduction  of  Central  Asian 
melons  to  Europe  so  desirable,  that  he  carried  some  of  the  seeds  in  his 


268  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Consul  seemed  to  know  what  beans  were.  They  grow 
tobacco,  and  sell  it  from  i^s.  to  245-.  per  cwt.,  but  it  is 
not  good,  and  the  well-to-do  purchase  that  imported 
from  Karshi  and  Samarkand.  The  cultivation  of 
cabbage  and  potatoes  has  commenced  since  the  arrival 

saddle-bags  four  or  five  thousand  miles,  and  spoke  of  them  as  of  marvel- 
lous excellence.  Mr.  Simpson,  ofWortle}^  grew  some  of  Mr.  O' Donovan's 
melons,  but  they  proved  insipid  and  flavourless,  or,  at  best,  just  passable. 
He  also  tried  some  of  my  seeds,  of  which  only  one,  the  Sherin-pitchek, 
grew,  and  this  he  pronounces  of  the  same  type  as  O' Donovan's. 
Mr.  Simpson  says,  "  I  gave  it  a  light  all  to  itself,  but  it  was  rather 
straggling  and  weak  from  the  first,  and  could  not  endure  the  bright 
sunshine.  It  lost  its  foliage,  and  the  single  fruit  it  bore  never  ripened 
properly. ' '  It  was  sent,  however,  to  Dr.  Haughton,  and  thought  highly  of. 
Dr.  Haughton  received,  too,  a  Zamcha melon,  grown  at  Lord  Eversley's, 
weighing  4  lbs.,  of  which  he  subsequently  told  me  that,  though  familiar 
with  American,  as  well  as  British  melons,  he  never  in  his  life  ate  any 
so  fine  as  this  from  Khiva.  Previously  to  receiving  this  information  I 
was  becoming  dispirited,  and  thinking  that  my  seeds  would  turn  out  no 
better  than  those  of  Captain  Burnaby  or  Mr.  O' Donovan.  Another 
trial,  however,  has  been  made  of  the  "  Alikeh  "  at  Chevening,  where  the 
gardener,  taught  by  experience  how  much  space  was  necessary,  planted 
the  melon  under  a  frame  with  five  lights,  expecting  it  to  cover  the  entire  fl 
area.  I  saw  the  plant  thus  growing  on  September  5th.  It  was  not  so  ^ 
strong,  I  was  told,  as  that  of  the  previous  year,  but  it  had  three  half- 
grown  fruits  of  fair  size.  One  of  these  was  sent  to  me,  not  quite  ripe, 
on  October  13th,  which,  upon  eating  ten  days  later,  I  was  delighted  to 
be  able  to  pronounce  quite  equal  to  those  I  had  eaten  in  Khiva,  and  far 
more  deHcious  than  anything  I  have  ever  tasted  in  England.  This 
opinion  was  shared  by  others  with  me  at  the  table.  This  ovate  fruit 
measured  8  inches  long,  and  was  green-fleshed,  juicy,  sweet,  and  eat- 
able to  the  skin.  Thus  I  consider  that  Mr.  Gray  and  Mr.  Wildsmith 
have  demonstrated  that  two  kinds  at  all  events  of  the  Khivan  melons 
can  be  grown  in  England.  The  former  considers  the  Alikeh  melons 
require  plenty  of  heat,  and  a  long  season,  since  English  melons  planted 
simultaneously  with  them  ripened  six  weeks  before  those  from  Khiva. 
This,  however,  will  make  the  latter  valuable  for  late  eating,  especially  as 
they  have  such  good  keeping  properties.  I  hope,  therefore,  that 
English  gardeners  will  learn  how  to  grow  these  fruits.  The  great  size 
and  robustness  of  the  plants  may  prevent  their  having  fair  play  in 
English  houses,  but  I  have  given  seeds  also  for  outdoor  growth  in 
Florida,  whence  the  iruit  could  easily  be  sent  to  the  London  market,  so 
that  if,  after  all,  I  do  not  succeed  in  getting  them  on  English  tables,  it 
will  not  be  for  lack  of  endeavour. 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  A  AW  ITS  HISTORY.  269 

of  the  Russians.  Both  Lieutenants  Shakespear  and 
Conolly  speak  of  timber  as  plentiful  in  Khiva,  which  I 
could  hardly  confirm  now.  Logs  for  rafters  cost  from 
4^".  to  8j".  each. 

The  domestic  quadrupeds  of  Khiva,  says  the 
*'  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  are  Camels,  Horses,  Asses, 
Horned  Cattle,  Sheep,  and  Goats.  Then  it  goes  on  to 
enumerate  of  wild  animals  the  Hog,  Panther,  Jackal, 
Fox,  Wolf,  and  Hare.  To  these  might  be  added,  accord- 
ing to  some,  the  Tiger  and  Wild  Ass,  but  when  the  article 
mentions  the  Giraffe,  I  think  it  is  in  error.  I  have  met 
this  statement  before,  and  it  arises,  I  think,  from  a 
mistranslation  of  the  name  of  an  animal  said  to  exist 
on  the  islands  in  the  Aral,  that  should  be  the  Saiva 
Antilope.  Again,  some  authors,  as  Vambery,  mention 
the  Lion  on  the  banks  of  the  Oxus,  and  the  Seal  in  the 
Aral,  but  I  do  not  remember  meeting  any  confirmation 
of  either.  Birds  are  represented  in  the  khanate  by 
the  Wild  Goose,  Swan,  Crane,  Pelican,  Duck,  Moorhen, 
Bustard,  Pheasant,  Quail,  Snipe,  Partridge,  Magpie, 
Crow,  Sparrow,  Nightingale,  and  Lark,  besides  the 
domestic  Fowl  and  Pigeon.  The  fishes  include  Stur- 
geon, Sterlet,  Bream,  Pike,  Carp,  and  Sandre. 

I  learnt  from  Matmurad  that  In  the  town  of  Khiva 
there  are  scarcely  any  Tajiks — only  about  15  trades- 
men— but  that  Uzbegs  predominate,  and  the  rest  are 
Turkomans  and  Sarts.  They  have  also  a  few  Jews — 
less,  I  believe,  than  half  a  dozen — and  without  a 
synagogue.  The  northern  portion  of  the  khanate  Is 
peopled  partly  by  an  Inconsiderable  tribe  called  Kara- 
kalpaks,  but  I  think  this  was  more  especially  the  case 
when  the  delta  of  the  Amu,  where  now  they  chlefiy 
live,  belonged  to  Khiva.  Two  other  races  are  mentioned 
In    the    khanate,    namely,   a    few   Arabs    living    about 


270  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Shakhavat,  and  Kizilbashes,  or  liberated  Persian  slaves, 
about  Tashauz,  whither  we  shall  presently  come.  We 
met  also  in  the  north  a  few  Kirghese,  more  especially 
of  the  Adaef  tribe,  still  subject  to  Khiva.  The  Uzbegs 
live,  for  the  most  part,  on  their  farms,  and  busy  them- 
selves in  agriculture,  gardening,  silk  culture,  hunting, 
and  fishing.  They  are  divided  into  tribes,  as  are  the 
remaining  nomad  Karakalpaks,  who  are  for  the  most 
part  stockbreeders.  The  Kirghese  engage  to  some 
extent  in  the  transport  of  goods  by  caravan.  Major 
Wood  estimated  the  population  of  the  khanate  in  1875 
at  300,000  ;  Ho  worth  says  500,000  ;  but  in  the  absence 
of  data  I  have  not  much  confidence  in  these  figures, 
though  I  have  no  alternative  to  offer.  The  watered 
portions  of  the  khanate,  according  to  the  Major,  have 
a  smaller  area  than  that  of  the  county  of  Lincoln, 
which  in  1881  had  a  population  of  470,000.  After 
passing  through  the  most  populated  portions  of  the 
khanate  (where,  by-the-bye.  Major  Wood  did  not  go), 
and  knowing  a  little  of  Lincoln,  I  should  judge  that 
the  two  areas  would  not  bear  comparison  for  a  moment 
as  to  density  of  population,  and,  consequently,  that  Mr. 
Howorth's  estimate  is  too  high  by  at  least  a  half 

The  Khan  has  no  army,  and  the  people  are  not 
sharply  divided  into  classes.  The  mullahs,  or  priests, 
and  khojas,  or  descendants  of  the  Prophet,  pay  no 
taxes,*  and  furnish  no  labourers  for  canal  work,  but 
other  subjects  have  to  do  so.f      I  imagine,   however, 

*  This  is  the  case  with  the  priesthood  in  Russia,  and  reminds  one  of 
a  law  promulgated  in  Persia,  touching  the  priests  of  the  Jews,  that 
"it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll,  tribute,  or  custom  upon  them  " 
(Ezra  vii,  24). 

t  Howorth  gives,  from  MacGahan,  the  Khan's  revenue  at  the  con- 
quest as  90,000  tillahs,  or  ;^45,ooo  (as  he  reckons  it),  being  derived 
from  customs  dues  on  foreign  merchandise,  shopkeepers'  and  traders' 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.  271 

that  the  people  must  be  very  poor,  for  I  was  told  that 
the  raising  of  the  Russian  indemnity  tries  them  sorely. 
The  Khan  was  called  upon  to  pay,  at  the  conquest, 
for  the  expenses  of  the  war  2,000,000  roubles,  or 
^200,000,  or,  in  default  of  immediate  payment,  to 
bring  ^15,000  a  year,  and  pay  interest  on  the  re- 
mainder at  the  rate  of  5  per  cent,  per  annum.  When 
I  was  there  he  had  paid  ^155,000,  so  that  he  was  still 
^45,000  in  arrears,  besides  ^20,000  interest ;  and  this 
so  distressed  him  that  I  heard  his  Highness  intended, 
on  the  ground  of  poverty,  to  ask  the  Emperor  for  a 
remission. 

The  foreign  relations  of  the  Khivans,  other  than 
with  the  Russians,  are,  I  take  it,  exceedingly  few.  As 
we  approached  the  city,  a  djiguitt  came  alongside,  and 
seemed  to  be  dividing  the  whole  of  what  was  the  outer 
world  to  him  into  three  categories.  He  wished  to 
convey  to  me  his  dislike  of  the  Russians,  which  he 
was  obliged  to  do  in  very  simple  language,  and  partly 
by  signs,  whereupon  he  said,  ''  Rom  yakshi,  Inghiliz 
yakshi,  Urus  shaitan  !''  or  something  like  it,  signifying 
that,  '*  The  Turks  of  Constantinople  are  good,  the 
English  are  good,  but  the  Russians  are  horrible,"  or 
''devils,"  as  he  had  called  them  before  ;  and  with  that  he 
placed  his  hand  on  his  sword  and  then  drew  his  fingers 
across  his  gorge,  signifying  that  he  would  willingly  cut 
their  throats.  But  we  heard  a  different  story  from  a  very 
intelligent  Kirghese,  who  said  that  the  Russians,  having 
taken  the  country,  began  by  putting  on  a  small  tax, 
and  then  increased  it.  Some  of  his  people,  not  under- 
standing this  proceeding,  had  taken  fright,  and  run 
licences,  and  land  and  house  taxes.  The  Karakalpaks  paid  one  sheep 
in  every  hundred,  a  bullock  in  every  twenty,  and  a  camel  in  every  six. 
The  Kazaks  who  visited  the  bazaar  paid  a  shilling  for  every  camel  or 
t€n  sheep,  and  there  was  besides  a  harvest  tax. 


2^2  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

away  Into  Bokhara  and  beyond.  When  I  asked  him 
why  they  did  so,  he  said,  "  Because  they  are  fools,  and 
know  no  better !  "  and  afterwards  he  said  that  he  con- 
sidered the  Russian  intercourse  with  the  Kirghese  had 
been  to  the  advantage  of  his  people.  During  my  inter- 
views with  the  Khan,  his  Majesty  betrayed  great 
ignorance  of  foreign  countries.  He  asked  which  were 
the  greatest  powers  of  the  world  ?  Without  much 
time  to  think,  I  told  him  first  England,  second 
Germany,  third  France,  fourth  Russia,  and  fifth 
America ;  but  he  thought  Russia  more  powerful,  he 
said,  than  England. 

I  said  they  had  a  larger  army,  but  we  had  money  to 
increase  ours  ;  that  Russia  owed  us  millions  already, 
and  came  to  us  when  wanting  more. 

He  said  yes,  he  had  heard  that  England  was  rich ; 
that  English  people  worked  very  hard,  and  were  so 
clever  that  our  mechanics  after  seeing  a  thing  could 
make  another  like  it. 

I  showed  him  a  map  of  the  world,  with  the  English 
possessions  coloured  red,  which  seemed  to  surprise 
him  ;  and,  as  if  he  thought  it  our  sole  vocation  in  life 
to  annex  territory,  he  inquired  what  country  we 
should  take  next,  and  whether  we  thought  of  con- 
quering China.  He  seemed  also  to  think  the  Russians 
were  bitten  with  the  same  mania,  adding  that  they  were 
never  satisfied,  but  took  more  and  more  territory. 

Spitzbergen  on  the  map  happened  to  catch  his  eye, 
and  he  asked  about  that,  whereupon  I  am  afraid  I 
puzzled  his  royal  wits,  and  tested  his  credulity  by 
telling  him  that  it  was  dark  and  light  there  con- 
tinuously for  periods  of  eight  weeks  every  year. 

Turning  from  this  feeble  ruler  of  the  khanate  to 
speak  briefly  of  its   history,    I   may  observe  that  the 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.  2-]^ 

appellation  of  Khorasm,  or  Kharezm,  has  been  for 
long  centuries  applied  to  the  country  south  and  south- 
west of  the  Aral,  Quarasniiah,  written  in  cuneiform 
characters,  being  found  on  the  ancient  monuments  of 
Persepolis.  Herodotus,  in  the  fifth  century  before 
Christ,  terms  the  same  country  Chorasmia,  it  being 
then  one  of  the  Persian  provinces  over  which  Darius 
placed  satraps,  but  nothing  material  concerning  it 
occurs,  says  Pinkerton,  till  it  was  possessed  by  the 
Arabs  in  680  a.d.  The  Chinese  knew  it  as  Hua-la- 
tze-mu.  On  the  declension  of  the  power  of  the  khalifs 
the  province  was  probably  seized  by  its  governor 
under  them ;  but  we  meet  with  no  king  of  the  country 
before  Mamun  -  ibn  -  Mohammad,  in  995.  Later 
Kharezm  fell  under  the  dominion  of  Sultan  Mahmud 
Ghazni,  King  of  Khorassan,  who,  in  1016,  made  it  a 
province  of  his  empire. 

Kharezm  continued  in  this  condition  under  the 
families  of  Ghazni  and  Seljuk  successively,  till  upon  the 
death  of  Malek  Shah,  or  Jelal-ud-din,  in  1092,  Kuthb- 
ud-din,  then  governor,  assumed  the  title  of  king. 
Takash,  the  sixth  sultan  of  this  dynasty,  firmly 
established  the  empire  of  the  Kharezmians  by  de- 
stroying the  power  of  the  Seljuks  in  Persia,  whose 
dominions  he  added  to  his  own  about  1196.  His  son, 
Kuthb-ud-din-Mohammad,  extended  the  empire  by  the 
conquest  of  all  Persia  and  Maverunahr,  and  was  the 
.greatest  prince  in  Central  Asia  when  Jinghiz  Khan 
appeared  on  the  scene  in  1 2 1 9. 

At  this  time  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  was  Urgenj, 
which  was  overpowered  by  Juchi,  to  whose  share  of 
his  father's  dominions  Kharezm  fell.  Later  we  find  it 
possessed  by  Hussein  Sofi,  of  the  horde  of  Kungrat, 
in  whose  family  it  continued  till  conquered  by  Timur 

VOL.  11.  18 


274  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

in  1379.  Kharezm  continued  under  the  descendants 
ot  Timur,  a  dependency  on  Khorassan,  till  that  pro- 
vince was  subdued  by  Sultan  Shakbakt,  commonly 
called  Sheibani  Khan.  Soon  after,  Shakbakt  was 
slain  by  Shah  Ismail  Sofi,  in  15 10,*  and  Kharezm 
once  more  came  under  the  dominion  of  Persia.  Two 
years  later,  however,  the  inhabitants,  revolting  against 
their  governors,  set  up  Sultan  Ilbars,  who,  coming 
with  his  Uzbegs  out  of  Turkistan,  was  proclaimed 
Khan,  in  1512,  at  Vezir,  or  Sellizure  (i.e.,  Shehr- 
vezir),  and  it  is  his  descendants  who  now  have  pos- 
session of  the  country. 

The  history  of  the  Uzbeg  Khans  of  Kharezm  has 
been  written  by  Abul  Ghazi,  and  translated,  so  that 
it  is  quite  unnecessary  for  me  to  mention  all  their 
names,  but  only  the  most  notable,  and  those  to  whom 
reference  may  be  made  hereafter.  During  the  latter 
half  of  the  sixteenth  century  reigned  Hajim  Muhammad, 
at  the  time  that  the  first  Englishman,  in  1558,  entered 
the  kingdom  in  the  person  of  Anthony  Jenkinson, 
who  calls  him  Azim,  and  says  that  all  the  land  between 
Urgenj  and  the  Caspian  was  called  the  land  of  Turk- 
man, and  was  subject  to  Azim  Khan  and  his  five 
brothers.  When  Jenkinson  returned,  he  took  with 
him  four  envoys  from  Hajim  Khan  to  the  Tsar,  and 
subsequently,  in  1595,  fresh  envoys  were  sent  from 
Kharezm  to  solicit  the  friendship  of  the  Tsar  Feodor. 

Hajim  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Arab  Muhammad, 
in  whose  reign,  about  1603,  1,000  Cossacks  of  the 
Ural,  or  Yaik,  made  a  descent  upon  Urgenj,  and 
killed  more  than  1,000  inhabitants,  but  were  them- 
selves ultimately  destroyed.  After  Arab  Muhammad 
came  Izfendiar  Khan,  and  later  still,  Abulghazi  Behadur 

*  For  Sheibani's  reign,  see  Howorth's  "Mongols,"  ii.,  691 — 713. 


I 


THE  KHIFAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.  275 

Khan,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  history.  He 
succeeded  to  the  Kharezmian  throne  in  1642,  reigned 
lawlessly  till  1663,  and  then  resigned  his  throne  to  his 
son,  Anusha,  with  the  design  of  spending  the  rest  of 
his  days  religiously,  but  he  soon  died.  Anusha  was 
followed  by  his  son  Erenk,  who  was  poisoned  in  1687, 
and  the  conspirators  set  up  in  his  place  Shah  Niaz 
Khan,  who,  in  1 700,  sent  an  envoy  to  Peter  the  Great, 
asking  him  to  take  Kharezm  under  his  protection. 
Peter  complied  by  letter,  and  confirmed  his  friendly 
message  three  years  later  to  Arab  Muhammad,  the 
next  Khan,  who  was  then  pressed  by  Bokhara.  Arab 
appears  to  have  been  followed  by  Haji  Muham- 
mad Behadur  Khan,  who,  in  17 14,  sent  an  envoy  to 
Petersburg,  offering  in  grand  language  to  help  the  Tsar 
at  any  time  with  50,000  horses,  and  to  allow  Russian 
caravans  to  pass  through  his  country,  a  four  months' 
journey  to  China.  The  envoy  said  his  master's 
residence  was  Khiva,  which  consisted  only  of  tents 
and  huts,  and  not  fixed,  in  summer,  to  one  place. 
This  Khan  was  soon  displaced,  and  succeeded  by 
Yadighar,  who  had  a  very  short  reign,  ending  in 
a  revolution,  the  outcome  of  which  was  to  place  on 
the  throne,  according  to  Howorth,  an  imported  Khan, 
Arank,  or  Evrenk,  a  Karakalpak  from  the  old  royal 
house  subsisting  among  the  Kunkurats  in  the  delta 
of  the  Oxus.  Next  followed  Shirgazi  Khan,  in  whose 
reign  the  Khivans  came  into  full  contact  with  the 
Russians,  to  the  dire  loss  at  first  of  the  latter. 

The  attack  upon  Urgenj  of  the  Cossack  freebooters 
jast  referred  to  was  followed  by  two  subsequent  attacks 
of  a  similar  character,  and  equally  disastrous  to  the 
Cossacks.  In  171 7,  however,  Peter  the  Great  having 
heard  of  gold   in  the  bed   of  the  Oxus,  and  wishing 


276  .  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

to  Open  trade  relations  with  India  through  Turan, 
as  well  as  to  release  some  Russian  subjects  in  slavery, 
sent  Prince  Bekovitch  Tcherkassky  to  examine  into 
the  alleged  ancient  course  of  the  Oxus  into  the 
Caspian,  and  to  proceed  to  Khiva,  the  Khans  of 
which  had  already  offered  him  allegiance.  Bekovitch 
surveyed  the  east  of  the  Caspian,  built  forts,  and 
marched  upon  Khiva  with  3,000  men.  The  Khivans 
feigned  submission,  induced  Bekovitch  to  break  up 
his  force  in  small  detachments,  to  facilitate  their  being 
provisioned,  and  then  slew  them  nearly  all. 

During  the  next  120  years  the  tables  were  turned  as 
between  the  Cossacks  and  Khivans,  the  latter  of  whom 
now  attacked  and  plundered  their  former  invaders, 
seizing  caravans,  and  carrying  off  Cossacks  and  other 
Russian  subjects  into  slavery.  Kharezm,  during  this 
time,  became  the  great  slave  market  of  Central  Asia, 
and  as  many  as  10,000  Russians  and  Persians  were 
held  in  captivity  there.  This  led  to  several  Russian 
envoys  being  sent.  Thus,  in  1725,  Florio  Benevini, 
an  employe  in  the  Russian  Foreign  Office,  visited 
Khiva,  proceeding  thither  through  Persia  and  Bokhara, 
and  was  well  received,  Shirgazi  being  then  troubled 
with  the  condition  of  things  in  Bokhara.  Other 
Russian  envoys  visited  the  country  during  the  rest 
of  the  century,  but  none  of  them  were  able  to  bring 
the  Khan  to  terms,  to  induce  them  to  stop  pillaging  and 
enslaving  Russians,  or  to  emancipate  those  already  in 
bondage.  During  this  period  we  find  Shirgazi  suc- 
ceeded by  Ilbars,  who,  threatened  by  Nadir  Shah, 
called  to  his  assistance  Abulkhair  of  the  Little  Horde, 
and  so  brought  a  Kazak  monarch  to  the  throne,  who 
initiated  a  line  of  Kirghese  or  Kazak  Khans.  Abul- 
khair came,  and  occupied  Khiva,   submitted  to   Nadir 


THE  KHIVA N  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY  2-]^ 

Shah,  and  retired  to  the  Steppes.  Several  insignificant 
Khans  followed  :  Tagir,  Abul  Muhammad,  Abul- 
ghazi  II.,  and  Kaip. 

Khiva  next  took  to  "playing  with  a  Khan,"  having 
a  sovereign  as  a  toy,  but  the  real  power  being  in  the 
hands  of  an  hereditary  Inak,  or  I  nag,  who  was 
governor  of  Hazarasp.  It  was  in  the  reign  of 
Abulghazi  III.,  son  of  Kaip,  and  under  the  rule  of 
Ivaz  Inak,  Dr.  Blankennagel,  a  Russian  oculist,  visited 
Khiva,  in  1793,  with  a  view  to  treating  the  eyes  of 
the  Inak's  brother,  and  when  he  could  not  cure  him, 
had  to  escape  for  his  life.  Ivaz  Inak  died  in  1804, 
and  was  succeeded  by  his  second  son,  Iltazar,  who, 
sending  the  Kazak  Khan  back  to  the  Steppes,  pro- 
claimed himself  an  Uzbeg  Khan.  He  was  succeeded, 
in  1806,  by  his  brother,  Muhammad  Rahim  Khan, 
a  veritable  scourge  to  the  regions  around.  It  was  in 
this  reign  that  Muravieff,  in  1819,  landed  at  Krasno- 
vodsk,  to  enter  into  relations  with  the  Turkomans 
east  of  the  Caspian,  and  having  so  done,  crossed  the 
desert  to  Khiva.  Muravieff  gave  a  terrible  picture 
of  the  savagery  of  the  people,  declaring  that  his 
predecessor,  Bekovitch,  had  been  flayed  alive,  and  his 
skin  stretched  over  a  drum. 

In  1826,  Muhammad  Rahim  was  succeeded  by  his 
son  Allah  Kuli  Khan,  who  reigned  till  1841,  and 
narrowly  escaped  invasion  by  the  Russians,  for,  the 
Khivan  plundering  of  caravans,  and  stealing  of 
Russians  for  slaves  still  continuing,  the  Tsar  deter- 
mined to  strike  a  blow  at  the  khanate.  In  the  winter 
of  1839-40,  General  Perovsky  started  for  Khiva  with 
a  force  of  6,000  men,  10,000  camels,  and  2,000 
Kirghese  attendants.  The  snow  of  winter,  it  was 
thought,  would  remedy  the  want  of  water  in  crossing 


278  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  desert  in  summer,  but  cold  and  exposure  killed 
9,000  of  the  camels,  and  two-thirds  of  the  men,  and 
the  expedition  completely  failed. 

This  untoward  event  was  not  altogether  adverse  to 
the  English  diplomacy  of  that  day,  and  Major  Todd, 
then  at  Herat  as  political  agent,  sent  a  Kazi  to  Khiva 
to  draw  closer  the  bonds  between  that  country  and 
England — in  other  words,  to  countermanoeuvre  the 
supposed  Russian  advance.  The  Kazi  having  reported 
the  success  of  his  mission.  Major  Todd  despatched 
Captain  (now  General)  Abbott  to  Khiva.  He  was 
instructed  to  obtain  the  liberation  of  the  Russian 
prisoners,  and  then  to  go  to  Astrakhan,  and,  if  possible, 
secure  the  liberation  of  the  Khivan  merchants  detained 
by  the  Tsar  pending  the  Khan's  refusal  to  release 
Russian  slaves.  Abbott  obtained  permission  for  a 
Russian  official  to  visit  Khiva,  to  take  back  to  Russia 
all  the  captives  he  could  find  who  wished  to  return,  on 
condition  that  the  Khivan  traders  were  released. 
Abbott  then  crossed  the  Steppe  to  the  Caspian,  but, 
betrayed  by  his  guide,  was  robbed,  treated  with  great 
cruelty,  and  with  difficulty  made  his  way  to  Astrakhan. 

Meanwhile,  Major  Todd  having  heard  a  false  report 
that  Abbott  was  dead,  sent  Lieutenant  (afterwards  Sir 
Richmond)  Shakespear,  whose  mission  writers  have 
hardly  made  sufficient  of,  to  complete  negotiations. 
"Lest  the  Khivans,"  says  Dr.  Schuyler,  "  might  take 
heart  by  the  failure  of  Perovsky's  expedition,  it  was  re- 
solved at  once  to  send  another.  Before,  however,  the 
arrangements  for  it  had  been  completed,  the  Khivans 
saw  their  danger,  and  in  the  summer  of  1840  sent  an 
envoy  to  Russia  with  418  Russian  captives,  and  the  Khan 
issued  an  order  forbidding  the  capture  and  purchase  of 
Russians."     The  envoy  mentioned  thus  anonymously 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.  279 

and  ambiguously  was  none  other,  it  would  appear,  than 
Lieutenant  Shakespear,  who,  according  to  Blackwood's 
Edinburgh  Magazine  (for  June,  1842,  containing  Shake- 
spear's  journal),  was  charged  with  the  difficult  task  of 
removing,  if  possible,  the  causes  of  hostility  by  inducing 
the  Russians  to  withdraw  their  army,  and  the  Khivans 
to  restore  all  their  Russian  slaves.  To  this  latter  end 
the  Khan  handed  over  to  him  the  Russians,  to  each 
of  whom,  Shakespear  says,  he  gave  a  ducat,  hired  a 
camel  for  every  two,  besides  giving  the  Khan  a  bill  of 
exchange,  endorsed  by  the  Kazi  of  Herat,  which  was 
to  be  paid  him  if  the  long-delayed  caravan  were  not 
released.  Then,  taking  charge  of  416  men,  women, 
and  children,  he  in  person  marched  with  them  across 
the  desert  to  the  Caspian,  and  took  them  to  Orenburg, 
where,  on  his  arrival,  640  natives  of  Khiva  were  re- 
leased by  Russian  authority,  thus  making  1,056 
persons  liberated,  Shakespear  claims,  through  English 
mediation.  The  English  lieutenant  then  went  on  to 
Petersburg,  where  he  received  the  public  thanks  of  the 
Emperor  Nicholas,  and  on  reaching  England  was 
knighted,  as  he  richly  deserved,  for  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  actions  of  his  day.  No  doubt  his  so-called 
mediation  was  unasked  for,  and  was  liable  to  be  looked 
upon  as  interference  by  the  belligerents.  But  it  seems 
hardly  a  gracious  remark  I  have  met  with  in  a  Russian 
account  of  Perovsky's  expedition,  that  "  Shakespear 
wished  to  take  credit  for  the  release  of  the  Russian 
prisoners  ;  these,  however,  prior  to  his  arrival  at  Khiva, 
had  been  collected  and  registered  by  the  Russian 
cornet  Aitof"  The  Russian  account  adds  that  the 
Khan  gave  each  Russian  a  tillah,  a  bag  of  flour,  and 
a  camel  for  every  two  men,  that  "  Cornet  Aitof  returned 
to  Orenburg,  and  the   liberated  Russians,   numbering 


28o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

416  men,  followed  him  on  the  30th  October."  But  if 
this  Cornet  (who  by-the-bye  was  not  an  envoy,  but  an 
officer  taken  prisoner  while  foraging)  had  done  all  the 
negotiations  and  work,  why  were  not  the  prisoners 
committed  to  his  care  ?  and  if  Shakespear  were 
merely  travelling  with  the  prisoners,  and  striving  to 
take  an  active  part  in  the  Russian  affairs  with  Khiva, 
as  the  Russian  account  puts  it,  why  should  he  have 
received  the  Emperor's  thanks  ?* 

However  this  may  be,  English  influence  at  Khiva 
was  only  short-lived.  The  Shah  next  pressed  for  the 
liberation  of  his  Persian  slaves,  and  Captain  Conolly 
was  sent  to  Khiva  to  try  and  settle  differences.  The 
Khan  received  him  well,  but  refused  to  release  the 
prisoners,  whereupon  Conolly  sent  to  Cabul,  proposing 
that  the  slaves  should  be  purchased  ;  and  it  was  whilst 
his  messenger  was  gone  that  Conolly,  finding  himself 

*  After  writing  the  above,  and  whilst  the  sheets  are  going  through 
the  press,  I  have  received  from  the  Rev.  Percy  Waller,  son-in-law  of 
the  late  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear,  a  printed  "memorandum  of  the 
services  of  Brigadier-General  Sir  R.  Shakespear,"  in  which  I  find  No.  2., 
"Translation  of  a  Russian  Letter  from  the  Officer  commanding  the 
fortress  of  Nova  Alexandroff,  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  to  the  Envoy  of  the 
Khan  Akhun,  and  to  the  Englishman  Shakespear : 

"  Commandant  at  Nova  Alexandroffski  Fortress,  5th  Sept.,  1840, 
No.  1,097. 

"On  the  30th  August  inst.  you  delivered  here  from  Khyva  Russian 
prisoners,  in  number  according  to  a  detailed  list,  males,  females,  and 
children  under  age,  four  hundred  and  sixteen.  When  you  collected 
them  from  amongst  the  Khyvan  Turcomans,  and  others,  you  gave  to 
each  one  a  ducat,  and  fifty  pounds'  weight  of  flour.  On  their  arrival  at 
this  fortress,  in  answer  to  my  inquiry,  they  expressed  themselves 
unanimously  grateful  to  you  as  father  and  benefactor  from  the  time  of 
their  being  taken  out  of  bondage,  and  during  the  journey  from  Khyva 
to  this  fortress,  of  which  I  shall  make  a  report  to  the  Governor-General 
of  Orenbourg,  Adjutant-General  Peroffsky. 

"  {Slgfied)  LiKHOSHSOSTOFF, 

"  Commandant  of  Nova  Alexandroffski, 
"  Colonel  of  Artillery." 


282  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

not  SO  welcome  at  Khiva  as  at  first,  went  to  Khokand, 
and  then  to  Bokhara,  where  he  was  put  to  death. 

Meanwhile  the  intercourse  with  Russia  and  Khiva 
continued  intermittently.  With  the  returning  Cornet 
Aitof  was  sent  a  Khivan  envoy,  and  three  others 
followed,  though  not  so  far  as  the  capital.  With  one  of 
them  Nikiforof  came  back  to  Khiva,  but  it  was  not  till 
1842  that  Colonel  Danilevski  succeeded  in  making  the 
first  treaty  between  the  two  countries,  and  whilst  he  was 
at  Khiva,  Allah-Kuli-Khan  died.  He  was  succeeded 
by  his  son  Rahim  Kuli  for  three  years,  and  Rahim  Kuli 
by  Muhammad  Amin,  who  was  killed  in  1855.  This 
sovereign  was  followed  by  Abdullah  Khan  for  a  year ; 
then  came  Kutlug  Murad  Khan  for  three  months,  and 
next  his  grand-uncle,  Seid  Muhammad  Khan,  who  was 
reigning  when  Vambery  visited  Khiva  in  1863.  This 
monarch  was  succeeded  in  1865  by  his  son  Seid 
Muhammad  Rahim  Khan,  who  is  now  on  the  throne, 
and  whose  reign  has  been  a  disastrous  one  for  the 
khanate.* 

The  Russians  had  pushed  down  to  the  edge  of  the 
Khivan  territory  by  1848,  and,  in  building  their  forts 
on  the  Jaxartes,  had  deprived  the  Khivans,  if  not  of 
territory,  yet  of  tax-paying  Kirghese.  Moreover,  the 
kidnapping  and  enslaving  of  Russian  subjects  had  not 
ceased,  and  the  Khivans  fomented  disturbances  among 
the  Russian  Kirghese.  The  Russians  determined, 
therefore,  to  avenge  their  past  disasters,  and  to 
effectually  humble  the  khanate.  In  1869,  Kras- 
novodsk  was  founded,  and  in  1871-72,  the  country  lead- 
ing to  Khiva  from  Russian  Turkistan  was  thoroughlj 
surveyed,  as  also  the  Aralo-Caspian  desert,  and,  in  187; 

*  For  a  genealogy  of  the  Khans  of  Kharezm,  see  "  Howorth  ' 
977- 


THE  KHIVAN  OASIS  AND  ITS  HISTORY.         283 

an  expedition  was  organized  on  a  large  scale,  under 
the  command  of  General  Kaufmann. 

The  plan  of  the  campaign  was  to  start  the  force  of 
10,000  men  from  three  different  bases  of  operations, 
namely,  from  Tashkend,  Orenburg,  and  Krasnovodsk, 
which  were  distant  600,  930,  and  500  miles  respectively 
from  Khiva.  The  campaign  has  been  amply  described 
by  Dr.  Schuyler ;  also  by  MacGahan,  who  was  on  the 
field,  entered  the  city  with  the  troops,  and  with  them 
took  up  his  quarters  in  the  Khan's  winter  palace.  It 
suffices,  therefore,  for  me  to  say  that  Khiva  was  occupied 
by  the  Russians  almost  without  opposition,  and  the 
Khivan  territory  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Oxus 
ceded  to  Russia.  The  Khan  fled,  whereupon  his 
brother  Ata  Jan  was  temporarily  put  in  his  place,  but 
on  Kaufmann  inviting  Seid  Muhammad  Rahim  to 
return,  he  did  so,  and  was  reinstated. 

I  am  under  the  impression  that  Ata  Jan  was  given 
some  sort  of  ornamental  military  commission  at  Peters- 
burg, until,  his  office  being  abolished,  he  returned  to 
Khiva,  and  was  there  at  the  time  of  my  visit,  though 
I  did  not  see  him.  Having  now  made  these  general 
remarks  upon  the  oasis,  and  briefly  sketched  its  history, 
I  shall  proceed  with  the  description  of  what  I  saw  and 
heard  and  did  at  the  capital. 


CHAPTER  LXII. 

THE  KHIVAN  CAPITAL  AND  ITS  COLLEGES. 

The  sights  of  the  town,  including  the  bazaar. — Central  Asian  weights, 
measures,  and  trade. — Cloisonne  turquoise  jewellery. — Khivar 
industries. — The  medresses  of  Allah  Kuli  and  Madrahim  Khan.— 
College  life. — Classification  of  students. —  Character  of  Muhamma 
dan  studies. — The  Uzbeg language  and  kindred  dialects. — Russia's: 
responsibility  towards  Muhammadans. — Pehlivan-Ata  mosque  and 
its  royal  tombs. — Moslem  pilgrimages. 

ON  the  morning  of  our  third  day  in  Khiva  wt 
were  taken  by  the  Consul  to  the  sights  of  the 
town,  and  first  to  the  bazaar,  the  one  they  seemed 
proudest  of  being  the  Tim,  or  bazaar  proper,  where  i^ 
transacted  most  of  the  retail  business.*  As  it  wa5 
not  Monday  or  Thursday,  which  are  market  days, 
when  we  were  in  the  Khiva  bazaar,  I  did  not  see  the 
place  to  advantage.  I  searched  for  a  long  time  ir 
vain  for  a  pair  of  warm  socks,  and  at  last  managed  tc 
purchase  for  a  rouble  two  pairs  of  coarse  worsted  foci 
envelopes,  like  a  pair  of  night  socks,  and  coming  uf 
only  to  the  ankles,  and  with  these  I  was  forced  to  bt 
content.     Dreading,  too,  the  cold  we  had  been  warnec 

*  Vambery  gives  the  number  of  shops  in  the  bazaar  at  about  I20 
MacGahan  says  300,  and  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  "  380,  in  th< 
town  of  Khiva.  Yani-Urgenj,  or  New  Urgenj,  would  appear  to  be  tht 
town  where  most  of  the  Khivan  trade  is  concentrated— the  riches 
merchants,  who  trade  with  Russia,  Bokhara,  and  Persia,  living  there. 


THE  KHIVAN   CAPITAL  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.     285 

3f,  I  inquired  for  a  sheepskin  shub,  but  could  not  find 
Dne  to  my  taste  in  the  bazaar,  so  poor  was  the  choice. 

From  the  bazaar  we  were  conducted  to  the  caravan- 
sary built  in  1823  by  Muhammad  Rahim  Khan,  like 
those  I  had  seen  at  Bokhara.* 

The  only  statistics  of  trade  I  have  are  those  of 
M.  Petrovsky  for  1868-9,  when  there  were  exported 
from  Russia  to  Khiva,  through  Kazalinsk,  13  sorts  of 
merchandise,  to  the  value  of  ^11,204,  and  imported 
by  Russia  from  Khiva  19  kinds  ;  value  ;^29,488. 

Their  weights  and  measures  in  Khiva  appear  to  be 
as  vague  as  elsewhere  in  Central  Asia,  and  to  have 
their  own  peculiarities,  for,  whilst  the  batman  in 
Bokhara  equals  320,  in  Khiva  it  is  only  40,  Russian 
pounds. t  I  came  to  the  conclusion  there  could  not 
be  much  coinage  in  Khiva,  for  when  I  found  that 
Russian  silver  money  would  circulate  in  the  khanate 
as  easily  as  native  coin,  I  thought  it  better  to  get  rid 
of  the  remainder  of  my  Bokhara  tengas,  of  which  I 
had  550.  The  equivalent  I  was  to  receive  was  121 
roubles,  or  ^12  2s.  (though  they  had  cost  me  ^13  i8i".), 
but  it  was  quite  a  business  to  effect  the  exchange,  and 
when  I  inquired  I  found  that  Yakoob  had  to  go  to 
several  merchants,  changing  a  few  here  and  a  few 
there,  because  no  one  tradesman  had  sufficient  Russian 
coin  to  do  the  whole  transaction. 

*  Most  of  the  business  is  in  the  hands  of  Sarts.  The  principal  trade 
of  the  khanate  is  with  Russia.  Caravans  go  to  Orenburg  in  the 
spring,  and  to  Astrakhan  in  the  autumn.  During  the  year  of  my  visit 
800  camels  had  gone  also  to  Krasnovodsk.  With  Persia  the  trade  is 
inconsiderable,  but  it  is  larger  with  Bokhara. 

t  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  word  "batman"  is  used  from  the 
Caspian  to  Kashgaria,  though  representing  a  differing  capacity  in 
various  places.  It  possibly  has  some  connection  with  the  Hebrew 
na  (Bath),  ^oTo^  (Luke  xvi.  10),  which  was  a  measure  for  oil 
(Luke  xvi.  6),  and  equivalent  to  the  ephah  as  a  measure  for  com 
(Ezek.  xlv.  10,  II,  14). 


286  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

This  put  the  finishing  touch  to  the  low  estimate  I 
had  formed  of  the  extent  of  native  Central  Asian  trade. 
In  the  Tashkend  bazaar  one  saw  here  and  there  a 
fair  stock  of  goods,  but  as  we  travelled  on,  it  was  rare 
to  see  a  native  shop  in  which  the  stock  might  not 
have  been  bought,  one  would  think  down  to  the  very 
last  stick,  for  a  few  hundred  pounds.  I  cannot  think 
we  saw  a  single  native  building  throughout  Central 
Asia  in  which  the  contents  exceeded  in  value  ^2,000. 
I  do  not  remember  one  that  struck  me  as  containing 
half  that  value,  and  we  certainly  saw  no  silversmiths'  or 
jewellers'  shops  that  displayed  half  the  stock  of  an 
English  shop  in  a  small  town.  I  am  stating  impres- 
sions rather  than  facts,  received,  it  must  be  remembered, 
sometimes  on  other  than  market-days  ;  but  when  the 
stock  of  three  or  four  dealers  had  sometimes  to  be 
brought  to  enable  us  to  purchase  a  few  representative 
specimens  of  jewellery,  one  soon  found  that  there  was 
little  made  ready  to   hand. 

I  did  purchase  certainly  one  set  of  jewellery  in 
Central  Asia  that  has  been  much  admired,  consisting 
of  an  Albert  chain,  locket,  and  studs  of  cloisonne  tur- 
quoise enamel  work.  I  have  shown  it  to  Mr.  Augustus 
Franks,  at  the  British  Museum,  and  to  the  leading  art 
jewellers  of  Regent  Street,  and  they  all  called  it  new 
to  them,  and  said  the  like  could  not  be  made  in  London. 
These  things,  however,  if  not  ordered,  had  been  made 
with  an  eye  to  Russian  demand,  and  the  man  told 
me  he  was  the  only  maker  of  them.  In  fact,  the  old 
Biblical  custom  seemed  still  to  rule,  that  one  takes 
silver  and  gold  to  a  smith,  as  we  take  cloth  to  a  tailor. 
whose  business  it  is  to  make  it  up.* 

*  "  His  mother  took  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  gave  them 
to  the  founder,  who  made  thereof  a  graven  image  and  a  molten  image" 


THE  KHIVAN  CAPITAL  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.     287 

We  asked  in  Khiva  to  be  taken  to  a  silversmith's, 
and  so  we  were  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  for 
there  was  a  workshop  with  two  crucibles  of  stone  to 
be  heated  by  charcoal  fires,  two  small  anvils,  and, 
if  I  remember  rightly,  silver  in  the  bar  as  we  had  seen 
at  Kuldja,  whilst  the  work  the  man  had  in  hand  was 
the  silvering  the  handle  of  a  battle-axe,  by  order  of 
the  Khan,  to  be  carried  by  some  new  place-man  as  an 
insignia  of  office  ;  but  as  for  getting  a  collection  of 
Khivan  jewellery,  it  was  not  apparently  there  to  be  had, 
and  I  could  spend  only  a  shilling  for  three  ear-rings,  for 
the  sake  of  buying  something  as  a  souvenir. 

I  was  anxious  to  form  some  idea,  if  possible,  of  the 
manufactures  of  Khiva,  and  asked  to  be  taken  to  some 
of  their  workshops  ;  but  things  were  at  so  low  an  ebb, 
that  in  the  coppersmiths'  row  I  could  not  get  a  kurgan, 
or  ewer,  that  was  worth  bringing  away.  The  Divan- 
beggi  subsequently  gave  me  one  for  his  present,  which 
I  was  well  pleased  to  have  as  a  souvenir  of  Khiva. 
It  is  small,  but  prettily  graven,  though  not  so  finely  as 
some  of  those  we  saw  at  Khokand.  They  took  us 
likewise  to  what  might  by  compliment  be  called  a  silk 
factory,  where,  after  crawling  through  a  door  3  feet 
high,  we  found  a  few  looms  of  the  roughest  description. 
The  Khivan  silks,  when  woven,  do  not  compare  well 
with  those  of  Bokhara  and  Khokand.  I  saw^  them, 
however,  making  a  thick,  red  silk,  that  is  sent  to 
Bokhara  to  be  used  chiefly  for  head-dresses  of  rich 
Kirghese  women.      It  sells  for  £\  per  Russian  pound. 

From  the  caravansary  we  were  taken  to  see  some 
of  the  medresses  and  mosques.      MacGahan  says  there 

(Judges  xvii.  4) ;  and,  once  more,  "  They  lavish  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and 
weigh  silver  in  the  balance,  and  hire  a  goldsmith ;  and  he  maketh  it 
a  god"  (Isa.  xlvi.  6). 


288  RUSSIAN   CENTRAL  ASIA. 

are  22  of  the  former  and   17  of  the  latter.     My  notes 
say    **  4    large    medresses    and    many    small."     The 
medresse  of  Allah- Kuli  was  built  by  the  present  Khan's 
father,  about  40  years  ago.      It  is  of  2  stories,  and  has 
100  students,  they  said.     That  of  Kutlug  Murad  I  nag 
has  about   100  students.     On  the   square,   before  the 
Khan's  winter  palace,  is  the  Medresse  Madrahim,  built 
by  the  present  Khan,  with  from  60  to  70  students  only. 
Not    far  distant    is   the   most   important    medresse    in 
Khiva — that    of     Muhammad     Emin    (contracted    to 
Madamin)   Khan,  which   they  said   was   30  years  old. 
Taken  in  all,  this  was  about  the  most  complete  we  had 
seen,   and  gave  us   a  fair  idea  of  what   many  of  the 
medresses  in  Central  Asia  must  have  looked  like  before 
they  began  to  fall  into  ruin.     And  that  is   not  saying 
very  much  ;  for,  to  a  European  eye,  they  have  a  dull, 
unfinished,  unfaced  look  about  them  that  is  disappoint- 
ing.    Their  photographs  flatter  them.     Several  of  the 
Khivan  mosques  are  ornamented  with  blue  and  white 
tiles,  interesting,  because  locally  manufactured,  but  they 
did  not  advantageously  compare  for  beauty  with  those 
we  had  seen  at  Samarkand.     This  medresse,  with  130 
cells,  has  a  large  quadrangular  court,  with  a  well,  and 
is  surrounded  by  cells  fitted  with  hearths,  where  each 
student  does  his  cooking — when  he  has  anything,  thai 
is,  to  cook.      In  one  of  them  I   saw  a  samovar,  chins 
teapots,   and   felts,   but  for  the   most  part  everything 
looked  poverty-stricken.       More  interesting  than  thij 
medresse,  however,  I  thought  the  immense  tower  with 
out  base  or  capital,  which,  owing  to   the  death   of  the 
builder,    Vambery   says,  but  to   the  lack  of    funds,  ai 
the  people  told  me,  remains  incomplete,  like  the  Caltot 
at  Edinburgh — memorials  of  men  who  *'  began  to  builc 
and  were  not  able  to  finish."     The  Khivan   tower  waj 


VOL.  II. 


19 


290  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

intended  for  a  minaret,  at  least  twice  as  high  as 
at  present,  but  even  now  it  is  the  most  prominent 
architectural  object  in  the  town,  by  reason  of  its  prettily- 
built  texts  from  the  Koran  and  lo  zones  of  light  and 
dark  blue,  green,  and  brown  bricks.  I  had  a  great 
business  to  measure  with  my  tape  its  circumference, 
and  found  it  to  be  146  feet,  and  I  also  estimated  its 
height  to  be  about  the  same,  and  its  diameter  at  the  top 
about  15  feet.  This  tower  and  medresse  are  built  of 
particularly  good  burnt  bricks,  which  the  natives  said 
cost  ^d.  each,  meaning  thereby,  I  presume,  those 
coloured. 

Having  referred  to  so  many  Central  Asian  medresses, 
I  must  not  omit  to  say  something  about  the  kind  of 
life  the  students  lead  in  them.* 

The  course  of  instruction  is  not  limited  as  to  time. 
Some  of  the  students  stay  30  and  40  years,  affirming 
that  if  a  bird  could  fly  for  30,000  years  in  a  straight 
line,  the  distance  it  traversed  would  scarcely  give  an 
idea  of  the  depth  of  Muhammadan  learning.  The 
prose  of  that  Oriental  calculation  is  that  some  of  the 
students  like  so  well  their  cell,  in  which  somehow  or 
other  they  can  generally  get  a  piece  of  bread — from  the 
foundation,  by  begging,  or  a  little  work — that  they  do 
not  care  to  leave,  t     Of  sciences  based  on  facts,  of  the 

♦  The  composition  of  a  college  consists  of  the  direction,  the  teachers 
and  the  students.  The  inutawalzXook  after  the  property  of  the  college 
The  teachers  are  called  mudarises,  meaning  readers  or  teachers,  am 
the  students  shagirds,  or  disciples.  The  last  may  be  of  any  age  fron 
15  upwards.  No  special  forms,  and  no  standard  of  knowledge,  an 
necessary  for  admission. 

t  Students  are  grouped,  though  not  sharply,  in  three  courses.  Ii 
the  lower  course  they  are  taught  grammar  and  rhetoric  ;  in  the  middle 
dialectics  and  metaphysics  ;  and  in  the  upper,  jurisprudence,  which  alsi 
comprises  the  adoration  of  God.  The  student  is  free  to  choose,  an< 
the  majority  take  jurisprudence,  few  going  through  the  complete  curri 
culum  of  study.     The  method  of  instruction  is  to  commit  to  memory 


292  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

methods  of  working  induction,  of  physics,  chemistry, 
history,  geography,  the  Muhammadan  student  hears 
not  the  name,  nor  of  modern  languages,  unless  it  be 
Uzbeg  and  Tajik."^ 

All  roads  leading  out  of  the  circle  of  knowledge 
bounded  by  religion  are  cut  off  from  the  Muhammadan 
student.  He  must  know,  Kostenko  says,  only  that  which 
the  authors  of  the  works  he  studies  knew  from  500 
to  1,000  years  ago.  He  is  taught  to  disbelieve  in 
ascertained  science,  the  rotation  of  the  planets,  the 
laws  which  govern  physical  phenomena,  in  the  forces 
of  nature,  in  historical  facts,  in  a  criticism  which  would 

and  then  receive  comments  thereon.  A  man  who  can  say  the  Koran 
from  end  to  end,  or,  beginning  at  any  part,  can  go  on  repeating  it,  is 
deemed  a  scholar,  though  he  may  be  utterly  unable  to  translate  a 
•chapter,  and  know  nothing  of  Arabic.  Many,  indeed,  study  nothing 
but  the  Koran  for  8  or  9  years. 

*  I  could  not  hear  of  such  a  thing  in  Bokhara  or  Khiva  as  an  Uzbeg 
grammar  or  dictionary,  though   they  have  various  books— religious, 
poetical,  historical — printed  in  this  language,  and  in   Tajik,   Arabic, 
and  Jagatai   Tatar.     Professor    Vambery    published    an    interesting 
article  "  On  the  Uzbeg  Epos  "  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  for  July,   1880.     I  was  told  in  Bokhara  that  a  Kazan  Tatai 
grammar  would  do  for  Uzbeg,  and  I  have  seen  or  heard  of  "  A  Sketch  0: 
the  Turki  Language,"  by  Robert  B.  Shaw,  Lahore,  1877,  and  Calcutta 
1880.     There  is  also  the  "  Chagataische  Sprachstudien  "  of  Professoi 
Vambery,  and  the  standard  work  of  Callim  Beg,  who  was  an  Indiai 
official,    taught  at   Kazan,   but  who  wrote  his  grammar  in  English 
Captain  Mirbadaleff  spoke  to   me  of  Uzbeg  as  a  branch   of  Tatar 
differing  from   Jagatai   in  local  expressions   and  pronunciation,   anc 
said  there  was   not   so   much   diversity  between  Jagatai  and  Uzbe^ 
as  between  Sclavonic  and  Russ.     The  chief  difference,  he  said,  betweei 
Kirghese  and  Tatar  is  in  pronunciation.    According  to  Mr.  Howorth,  th( 
Turkish  dialects  are  divided  into  the  two  great  divisions  of  Easten 
and  Western.     The  Uighur  and  Jagatai  are  types  of  the  Eastern,  an( 
Uzbeg,  Kazak,  Turkoman,  and   the  so-called  Tatar  dialects,  of  th( 
Western.     Uzbeg  and  the  dialect  of  Kazan  are  deemed  very  pure  form 
of  Western  Turkish.     The  main  shibboleth,  distinguishing  the  Easten 
and  Western  Turkish,  is  the  change  of  j  into  r.    In  Tashkend  a  gazett" 
is  printed  in  Russ  and  translated  into  Uzbeg,  not  purely,  but  somewha 
mixed  with  Tatar. 


THE  KHIVAN  CAPITAL  AND  ITS  COLLEGES.      293 

wipe  out  all  elements  of  fancy.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
must  recognize  that  there  are  seven  heavenly  spheres, 
that  all  the  earth  is  divided  into  seven  climes,  and  that 
Mussulmans  are  destined  to  rule  over  all  men! 

An  understanding,  bound  by  the  chains  of  such  a 
slavery  as  this,  says  Kostenko,  of  itself  cannot  emerge 
from  the  mist,  nor  can  it  make  the  existence  of  man 
smoother  and  more  reasonable.  And  then  he  adds, 
"  To  Russian  influence  in  the  East  is  presented  a 
problem  important  and  exalted.  It  must  break  the 
intellectual  fetters  of  Muhammadanism,  and  turn  the 
people  to  the  wider  development  of  humanity." 

This  is  good,  and  it  is  gratifying  to  see  so  intelligent 
a  writer  as  Colonel  Kostenko  recognizing  the  respon- 
sibility of  Russia  towards  her  conquered  Moslem 
subjects,  so  far  as  their  intellectual  needs  are  concerned. 
But  I  hope  they  will  not  stop  there  ;  for  as  we  pass 
from  the  medresse  to  the  mosque,  we  shall  see,  I  think, 
that  an  intellectual  reformation  alone,  even  if  it  could 
be  accomplished,  would  be  utterly  insufficient  properly 
to  elevate  the  Muhammadan  mind. 

The  one  mosque  in  Khiva  that  is  worthy  of  notice 
is  the  Hazreti  Pehlivan-Ata.  It  has  one  large  dome 
about  60  feet  high,  surmounted  by  a  gilt  ball,  and 
covered  with  green  tiles,  like  some  of  those  in  the 
great  tower.  There  are  also  two  small  domes.  The 
building  is  of  kiln-burnt  brick,  and  contains  the  tomb 
of  the  Pehlivan  Ahmed  Zemchi,  patron  saint  of  the 
Khivans.  We  approached  the  interior  through  a 
darkened  passage,  where  was  shown  the  tomb  of 
Allah  Kuli  Khan,  and  though  only  about  35  years  old, 
it  is  already  decaying.  From  beneath  the  cupola  we 
had  rather  a  pretty  view  of  the  tiles  with  which  it  is 
lined,  adorned  with  blue  tracerv,  and  interwoven  with 


294  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

verses  from  the  Koran.  This  dome,  owing  to  its  con- 
struction, is  said  to  have  peculiar  acoustic  properties, 
to  which  the  Khivans  attach  superstitious  importance. 
There  were  pointed  out  to  us  the  tombs  of  Abul-ghazi 
Khan  and  Anusha.  MacGahan  alludes  to  the  tombs 
of  Muhammad- Rahim,  which  may  agree  with  one  they 
told  me  was  the  present  Khan's  "  grandfather,"  and 
another  of  Shir-Ghazi,  the  Khan  who  outwitted 
Bekovitch.  Adjoining  the  apartment  under  the  dome 
were  two  side  chapels.  In  one  of  them  is  the  tomb, 
says  MacGahan,  of  Allah-Kuli  Khan,  who  received 
Abbott,  Shakespear,  and  Conolly,  and  in  the  other 
the  tomb   of  Palvan  himself. 

I  am  under  the  impression  that  this  latter  is  regarded 
as  particularly  sacred  and  kept  locked,  but  when  the 
door  was  unfastened,  Yakoob,  delighted  no  doubt  with 
the  opportunity,  went  within,  and  I  followed  through  a 
cloth-covered  door.  Within  the  inner  and  almost 
dark  chamber  was  the  saint's  tomb,  but  the  whole 
affair  looked  shabby  and  dirty  ;  and  by  the  time  I  had 
seen  this,  the  information  had  reached  me  through  my 
two  interpreters  that  persons  were  not  allowed  to  go  in. 
Neither  at  the  Shah  Zindeh  at  Samarkand,  nor  in 
Khiva,  did  we  come  in  contact  with  anything  like  the 
crowds  that  are  to  be  witnessed  flocking  in  Russia  to 
the  monasteries  of  Moscow  and  Kieff,  or  in  Italy  to 
the  holy  places  of  Rome.  I  am  not  sure  how  far  this 
is  any  indication  of  the  falling-off  of  Muhammadan 
zeal,  or  that  it  much  assists  in  forming  an  opinion  on 
the  vitalitv  of  the  Moslem  faith  in  Central  Asia  ;  but  to 
this  end  I  shall  put  together  such  facts  as  I  have 
ascertained  by  inquiry  or  observation,  from  which  the 
reader  may  judge  the  matter  for  himself. 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 

KHIVAN  MOSQ^UES  AND  THEIR   WORSHIPPERS, 

Muhammadan  religious  orders. — Ceremonies  of  the  Jahria  Brotherhood. 
— Superstitious  practices. — Dancing  dervishes. — Religious  condi- 
tion of  Central  Asiatics. — Morals  of  the  people. — Fanaticism  and 
indifference. — Their  attitude  towards  the  Bible  and  Christianity. 
— Importance  of  missions  to  Muhammadans. — Efforts  of  "Ortho- 
dox "  missionaries. — Labours  of  the  Bible  Society. — Khiva  seen 
from  a  minaret. — The  winter  palace  and  Jumjna  mosque. — The 
prison  and  gallows. — Home  entertainment. — Farewell  visit  to  the 
Khan. — Hazarasp  and  its  legendary  origin. 

1HAVE  already  spoken  of  our  attendance  at  the 
Friday  mosque  at  Bokhara,  where  I  thought  we 
saw  Muhammadanism,  so  to  speak,  at  its  best.  We 
saw  something  of  another  reHgious  service  in  the  Shah 
Zindeh,  at  Samarkand,  that  was  less  pleasing,  namely, 
the  excited  frenzied  worship  of  the  Jahria  Brotherhood, 
as  Dr.  Schuyler  calls  them,  though  the  word  I  have 
in  my  notes  is  the  sect  Nadamat.  The  proceedings 
reminded  me  of  the  service  of  the  so-called  ''  howling  " 
dervishes  I  had  witnessed  at  Constantinople.  Neither 
there  nor  at  Samarkand  did  I  see  the  service 
begin,  and  in  both  cases  we  came  away  before  the 
end.  Dr.  Schuyler  has  described  their  worship  with 
his  usual  thoroughness,  which  enables  me  better  to 
recount  what  I  saw.  At  Samarkand  the  mosque  was 
well    filled    with    an    audience    seated     on    the    floor, 


296  RUSSIAAr  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

whilst  opposite  the  entrance,  near  the  kibleh,  were  1 1 
men,  ejaculating  prayers  with  loud  cries  and  violent 
movements  of  the  body.  They  recite  texts,  such  as 
Hasbi  rabi  jal  Allah  I  (''My  defence  is  the  Lord, 
may  Allah  be  magnified !  ") ;  Mo  fi  kalbi  hir  Allah 
("There  is  nothing  but  God  in  my  heart!");  Nu7'i 
Muhammad  sail  Allah  ("  My  light,  Muhammad,  God 
bless  him!")  ;  La  iloha  ill  Allah  (''  There  is  no  God 
but  Allah!").  These  words,  or  some  of  them,  are 
chanted  to  various  semi-musical  tones,  first  in  a  low 
voice,  and  accompanied  by  a  movement  of  the  head 
over  the  left  shoulder  towards  the  heart  ;  then  back; 
then  to  the  right  shoulder  ;  and  then  down,  as  if 
directing  all  the  movements  to  the  heart.  Sometimes 
I  observed  a  man,  more  excited  than  the  rest,  shout 
a  sentence,  throw  out  his  arms,  dance,  jump,  and 
then  slap  his  left  breast  with  such  force  as  to  make  the 
place  ring.  These  texts  are  repeated  several  hundreds 
of  times,  till  the  devotees  get  so  exhausted,  and  so 
hoarse,  that  their  repetitions  sound  like  a  succession 
of  groans,  and  we  could  see  the  perspiration  running 
through  their  clothes.  Some  were  obliged  to  give 
up  and  rest,  whilst  others  were  pushed  out  by  the 
Ishan,  who  was  conducting,  and  who  called  someone 
else  to  fill  up  gaps  in  the  ranks.  When  their  voices 
have  become  entirely  hoarse  with  one  cry,  another  is 
begun.  They  sit  at  first  in  a  row,  but  later  on,  as  the 
movement  quickens,  each  puts  his  hand  on  his  neigh- 
bour's shoulders,  and  they  form  in  a  group,  as  Dr. 
Schuyler  says,  "  in  several  concentric  rings,"  but 
which  could  remind  a  native  of  Blackheath  of  nothing 
but  a  group  of  players  during  a  "  scrimmage  "  in 
Rugby  football,  as  they  sway  from  side  to  side  of  the 
mosque,    leaping    about,  jumping    up  and  down,   and 


KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS,  ic^j 

crying,  Hat!  Allah  Hai  !  like  a  pack  of  madmen,  till 
the  Ishan  gives  them  a  rest  by  reciting  a  prayer,  or 
a  hafiz  recites  poetry  ;  or  again,  as  at  Samarkand, 
we  heard  a  dervish  sing  a  solo  in  a  fervid,  trilling  voice. 

One  curious  part  of  the  service,  as  I  saw  it  at  Con- 
stantinople, was  that  persons  apparently  sick  were 
brought  to  the  minister,  to  be  stretched  on  the  floor, 
whilst  he  set  his  foot  on  their  shoulders,  breast,  etc.  In 
one  case,  eight  men,  women,  and  children,  being  laid  in 
a  row,  side  by  side,  he  deliberately  planted  his  elephan- 
tine foot  on  the  first,  and  walked  over  them  all,  one 
woman,  I  observed,  making  a  terrible  grimace  as  she 
received  his  whole  weight.  After  this  ordeal  they 
all  went  up  and  kissed  their  benefactor's  hand  !  Besides 
this,  various  garments,  and  vessels,  bottles,  etc.,  were 
brought  to  him  to  breathe  his  holy  breath  upon,  and 
thus  impart  his  blessing." 

I  saw  also  at  Constantinople  the  worship  of  another 
order,  popularly  called  by  foreigners  the  "dancing" 
dervishes.t 

We  did  not  meet  in  Central  Asia  with  any  such 
"  orderly "  dancing,   but  in  the    bazaar   of   Khiva    we 

*  Can  the  former  of  these  practices  be  in  any  way  illustrative  of  an 
Oriental  procedure,  as  in  Isa.  li.  2t^,  "I  will  put  it  into  the  hand  of 
them  which  have  said  to  thy  soul,  Bow  down  that  we  may  go  over : 
and  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  ground,  and  as  the  street,  to  them 
that  went  over  ' '  ? 

t  The  square  mosque  had  galleries  around,  supported  by  wooden 
pillars,  the  centre  of  the  floor  being  partitioned  off  for  the  dancers,  15 
in  number,  of  all  ages,  from  boys  to  "greybeards."  They  commenced 
by  walking  round  in  single  file,  and  solemnly  and  sedately  saluting 
their  chief  and  one  another.  Having  completed  a  triple  circumambula- 
tion,  they  stripped  themselves  of  their  upper  garments,  and  began  to 
whirl  round  in  their  respective  orbits  with  sufficient  velocity  to  cause 
their  kilts,  or  petticoats,  to  fly  out  at  right  angles  to  their  bodies, 
therein  resembling  a  troupe  of  stage  dancers,  their  faces  the  while  being 
turned  upwards,  and  eyes  closed  in  apparent  meditation.  They  kept 
this  up  for  a  long  time,  music  and  singing  going  on  meanwhile  with  4 


298  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

suddenly  came  upon  a  company  of  dervishes,  or 
Kalendar,  from  Kashgar,  who  were  prancing  about 
the  street.  These  dervishes,  Hke  the  Nazarites  and 
the  Russian  priests,  suffer  no  razor  to  come  upon  their 
head.  They  wear  an  extinguisher-shaped  cap,  a 
sample  of  which  I  would  gladly  have  purchased  new, 
but  found  they  were  not  to  be  had,  for  that  each  made 
his  own  ;  and  to  take  one  second-hand  was  more  than 
I  dared  do  !  When  they  saw  us  strangers  they  broke 
up  their  dance,  and  were  for  making  off,  but  I  called 
them  back  to  see  their  performance.  They  are 
dressed  in  rags,  and  each  carries  a  wallet,  and  a 
drinking  vessel  shaped  out  of  a  gourd.  They  sing 
sacred  songs  in  Persian  and  Turki,  shouting  as  loudly 
as  possible,  accompanying  the  singing  with  boundings, 
prostrations,  and  whirling  about.*  I  noticed  that  one 
dervish  had  in  his  hand  two  wooden  rods  about  i6| 
inches  long.  To  these  were  attached  a  ring  4  inches  ■ 
in  diameter,  and  on  this  ring  were  12  smaller  rings. 
This  was  carried  in  the  hand  when  dancing,  and  a 
jingling  made  therewith.  I  bought  it,  and  was  glad 
thus  to  secure  a  souvenir  of  these  wild-looking 
devotees.t 

Having   heard  so    much    of   the    fanaticism  of    the 
Muhammadans  in  Central  Asia,  I   made  inquiries,  so 

flutes,  3  kettledrums,  a  tambourine,  and  7  singers,  the  last  making 
strange  grimaces  in  straining  their  voices  in  Eastern  fashion  to  the 
loudest. 

*  Does  this  possibly  afford  some  illustration  of  David's  'Meaping 
and  dancing  before  the  Lord,"  on  account  of  which  Michal,  the 
daughter  of  Saul,  despised  him  in  her  heart  ?  (2  Sam.  vi.  16  ;  i  Chron. 
XV.  29). 

t  Both  Vambery  and  Schuyler  speak  of  their  smoking  of  nasha,  or 
hemp.  They  are  supposed  to  be  great  fanatics,  and  preached  hatred 
and  hostility  to  the  infidel  till  the  Russians  stopped  their  preaching  in 
Turkistan  altogether.  In  appearance  they  looked  about  the  most 
depraved  specimens  of  humanity  we  saw  in  Central  Asia. 


KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS,  zqg 

as  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  their  religious  condition 
and  development.  Kostenko  says  that  as  a  people 
the  Sarts  cannot  be  called  religious.  Even  the 
mullahs  and  the  kazis  know  but  imperfectly  the 
Koran  and  the  Shariat.  The  simple  folk  do  not 
know  the  most  ordinary  prayers.  On  the  ordinances 
of  religion,  such  as  the  five  periods  of  prayer,  ablutions, 
and  the  like,  the  Sarts  look  as  a  weary  form.  Where 
the  officer  has  been  abolished  whose  duty  it  was, 
and  in  Bokhara  still  is,  to  compel  the  people  with 
sticks  to  say  their  prayers  and  be  religious,  there  the 
attendance  at  the  mosques  is  less  than  one  half  what 
it  used  to  be,  and  Kostenko  does  not  hesitate  to  say 
that  hypocrisy  alone  and  hope  of  gain  arouse  the 
Sarts  to  the  outward  forms  of  religion.  In  a  paper 
by  M.  Ostroumoff  on  the  characteristics  of  the 
Mussulmans  in  Central  Asia,  he  makes  many  deduc- 
tions against  them  upon  too  slender  premises,  I 
think.  His  facts,  however,  if  true,  are  noteworthy, 
for  he  represents  them  as  not  despising  a  murderer, 
and  given  to  gambling,  which  causes  many  to  rob.* 

One  man,  of  whom  I  asked  the  character  of  the 
natives,  said  :  ''  They  are  revengeful  ;  give  good  words 
for  a  favour  shown  them,  but  nothing  more ;  very 
untruthful,  utterly  untrustworthy  in  dealing  with 
Russians,  and  not  much  better  among  themselves  ; 
very  dishonest,  and  trying  t<3  cheat  wherever  they 
can."t     To   this   it    is  only  fair  to   add  an  extract   I 

*  He  adds  that  the  houses  of  ill-fame  in  Russian  Turkistan  are 
mostly  supplied  with  native  women,  fathers  bringing  their  maiden 
daughters  to  sell.  I  myself  heard  of  one  man  leaving  in  such  a  house 
for  a  time,  and  for  the  sake  of  a  trifling  sum,  his  own  wife.  Of  course,  the 
natives  might  retort  that  it  was  their  conquerors  who  opened  such  houses 
among  them,  but  I  am  adducing  these  alleged  facts  not  for  the  purpose 
of  instituting  comparisons,  but  rather  to  describe  things  as  they  are. 
'^m^    +  This,  from  a  man  living  among  them,  only  confirms  what  Kostenko 


300  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

have  received  within  the  past  day  or  two  from  a  letter 
by  Dr.  Vanorden,  an  American  medical  missionary,  dated 
Khiva,  Dec.  15th,  1884.  He  says  : — ''  In  my  frequent 
walks  through  the  city  I  meet  with  no  rudeness,  and 
not  unfrequently  I  receive  the  salutation  '  Salaam 
aleikttm'  from  all  ages.  No  weapons  are  carried. 
There  are  no  soldiers.  If  one  deviates  from  the  fair 
way,  he  is  at  once  reminded  that  he  is  a  Mussulman 
and  a  Turkoman,  and  not  a  Kafir,  and  that  it  becomes 
him  to  be  consistent." 

As  to  the  fanaticism  of  the  Central  Asiatics,  I  asked 
the  question  more  than  once,  "Is  Muhammadanism 
progressing  or  going  back  in  Central  Asia  ?  "  Looking 
at  the  tumble-down  condition  of  the  medresses  and 
mosques,  I  should  have  been  rather  inclined  to  think 
the  latter  ;  but  I  was  reminded  that  if  their  temples 
were  not  grand,  neither  were  the  people's  houses. 
Common  opinion  went  to  say  that  there  is  now  less 
fanaticism  than  formerly.  One  man  at  Bokhara 
deemed  it  stationary.  He  thought  they  made  converts 
only  occasionally,  when  a  Hindu  or  Jew  condemned 
to  death  turned  Muhammadan  to  save  his  life.  At 
Petro-Alexandrovsk  I  was  told  the  mullahs  have  little 
influence  among  the  people,  who  there  are  not 
fanatical,  but  rather  indifferent  to  religion.  Where 
four  houses  are  near,  they  elect  one  of  themselves  for 
mullah,  and  many  do  not  trouble  to  come  in  to  the 
town  mosques  at  all. 

writes.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  he  affirms  certain  of  the 
moral  sides  of  their  character  to  produce  a  favourable  impression.  The 
absence  of  drunkenness  preserves  them  from  many  vices  and  crimes, 
and  likewise  preserves  their  strength  and  health.  The  Sart  discon- 
tinues work  from  Thursday  noon  till  Friday  evening.  Again,  they  are 
kind-hearted,  hospitable,  and  readily  help  the  poor.  In  every  town, 
he  says,  there  is  a  society  that  undertakes  the  care  of  the  poor  and  ; 
orphans.     Consequently  there  are  few  beggars  among  them. 


KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  301 

I  certainly  observed  one  marked  difference  between 
Constantinople  and  Samarkand.  At  the  former  I  had 
to  take  off  my  shoes,  and  be  on  my  best  behaviour. 
In  Samarkand  we  were  not  asked  for  a  moment  to  be 
unshod,  and  they  made  no  objection  to  the  Russian 
officer,  who  was  with  me,  smoking  in  the  precincts  just 
outside  the  doorway.  We  had  been  told  by  our  Jewish 
interpreter  that  if  we  had  seen  enough  of  one  part  of 
the  ceremony  they  would  go  on  with  the  next,  and, 
surely  enough,  upon  the  Russian  officer  intimating  that 
we  must  be  moving,  the  Ishan  did  change  the  form  of  the 
service !  Dr.  Schuyler  met  with  a  similar  experience 
in  Turkistan,  whence  he  infers  that  this  willingness  of 
Muhammadans  to  show  Christians  their  rites  is  not  so 
much  a  sign  of  growing  liberalism  as  of  indifference. 

In  passing  through  the  Steppe  I  sold,  as  I  have  said, 
many  New  Testaments  to  the  Kirghese,  and  going 
through  Bokhara  I  gave  an  Arabic  New  Testament,  a 
Persian  Bible,  or  a  Turkish  Gospel  to,  I  think,  every 
bek  whom  I  met,  as  well  as  to  the  Emir.  I  asked  an 
intelligent  Muhammadan  what  he  thought  the  natives 
would  do  with  the  books.  The  Kirghese,  he  supposed, 
would  simply  neglect  them,  but  not  destroy  them,  as 
he  thought  would  be  the  case  with  the  mullahs  of 
Khokand  and  Samarkand.  Further,  that  if  the  mullahs 
had  known  I  was  coming  with  such  books,  though 
they  would  have  been  afraid  to  offer  personal  violence, 
they  would  most  likely  have  taken  measures,  he  thought, 
to  prevent  their  distribution.  Captain  Mirbadaleff 
said  that  when,  as  a  boy,  he  was  instructed  at  Orenburg, 
and  there  was  a  Tatar  copy  of  the  Scriptures  placed 
within  reach  of  the  Muhammadan  scholars,  but  it  was 
hardly  read  at  all. 

*  Perhaps  it  is  not  to  be  expected,  since  I  am  told  by  Mr.  Hyde 


302  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  asked  the  Khan  of  Khiva  to  accept  a  Persian  Bible 
and  Arabic  New  Testament,  whereupon  he  inquired 
what  reHgion  they  had  in  England,  and  whether,  like 
the  Russians,  they  cross  themselves  in  prayer.  I 
replied  that  we  had  no  pictures  or  images  for  religious 
use  in  worship,  that  we  did  not  cross  ourselves,  and 
that  our  religion  was  in  the  Bible  I  had  given  him. 
Did  we  believe,  he  asked,  that  Jesus  Christ  was  a 
prophet  or  God's  Son  ?  I  said  ''  Both,"  whereupon  he 
said  to  Yakoob,  privately,  ''That  is  not  true";  but  when 
Yakoob  asked  whether  he  should  translate  that  reply, 
his  Highness  said  "No,"  and  ended  by  observing  that 
each  one  had  his  own  religion. 

I  was  keenly  interested,  of  course,  as  to  how  the 
Muhammadans  would  receive  any  attempts  to  convert 
them  to  Christianity.  I  say  "  of  course,"  because  I 
find  it  extremely  hard  to  understand  the  position  of 
those  who  say,  "  Leave  the  Muhammadans  alone. 
Their  religion  is  suitable  for  them.  A  good  Muham- 
madan  compares  fairly  well  with  an  average  Christian. 
Converts  can  hardly  be  made,  and,  when  made,  do  but 
follow  the  example  of  their  Christian  masters  in  eating 
pork  and  getting  drunk."  Now,  if  this  string  of  objec- 
tions were  true  (which  it  is  not),  even  then  I  fail  to  see 
that  a  Christian  would  be  released  from  obedience  to 
the  standing  orders  of  his  Master  to  "  make  disciples 
of  all  nations,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea- 
ture "  (Matt,  xxviii.  19;  Mark  xvi.  15).  If  one  thing 
be  manifest  about  Christianity,  surely  it  is  that  it  is  a 
proselytizing  religion.  Its  Master  was  a  proselytizer 
and  all  His  first  followers,  and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  see  how 

Clarke  that  the  New  Testament  is  of  no  authority  to  Muhammadans, 
being  held  to  be  corrupt,  whilst  the  genuine  teachings  of  the  prophet 
Jesus  are  in  the  last  revelation  of  the  Apostle  Muhammad. 


KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  303 

any  who  profess  to  follow  Him  can  free  themselves  from 
so  plain  a  duty. 

Russia  has  no  doubt  dealt  tenderly  with  the  natives 
of  Central  Asia  in  keeping  back  even  her  own  mis- 
sionaries, lest  to  the  natives  the  adoption  of  the  con- 
querors' religion  should  seem  a  matter  of  compulsion, 
but  this  state  of  things  ought  not  to  go  on.  It  is  a 
most  hopeful  sign  in  the  Russian  Church  that  they  are 
awaking  to  the  duty  of  sending  missionaries  to  their 
heathen  fellow-subjects  ;  and  I  was  gratified  to  be  asked 
by  one  Russian  in  Tashkend,  how  the  English  managed 
to  get  a  missionary  hold  of  Asiatics,  as  he  would  like 
to  do.  Another,  a  German  Russian  and  a  Lutheran, 
was  far  from  satisfied  with  the  little  that  is  being  done 
for  the  spiritual  good  of  the  Muhammadans.  He 
doubted,  however,  whether  the  orthodox  missionaries 
were  likely  to  make  much  headway  among  the  Mos- 
lems, if  for  no  other  reason  than  that  their  use  of 
pictures  in  worship  is  to  a  Muhammadan  an  abomina- 
tion and  idolatry. 

I  was  pleased  to  see,  however,  from  a  short  notice 
of  Russian  missionary  work  in  the  Times  for  4th 
September,  1884,  that  at  one  place  a  chapel  had  been 
built,  at  the  cost  of  the  heathen  Kirghese,  in  which 
1 20  persons  had  been  baptized  ;  and  in  the  govern- 
ment of  Tomsk  more  than  400  Kirghese,  chiefly 
Muhammadans,  are  reported  to  have  embraced  Chris- 
tianity. Here,  then,  is  a  beginning  on  the  part  of  the 
Russians,  which  I  pray  God  may  go  on  and  prosper. 

Meanwhile  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society 
has  not  been  idle,  as  will  be  seen  from  its  reports  for 
1883-4.  The  brothers  Bartsch  from  the  Tashkend 
depot,  on  their  way  to  Khokand,  sold  to  the  Kirghese 
349  copies  of  the  New   Testament  in  8  days,  and    I 


304  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

observe  that  since  my  visit  two  colporteurs  have  made 
an  interesting  journey  from  the  Caspian  to  Khiva, 
Bokhara,  and  Charjui.  In  Khiva  they  stayed  a  week, 
and  left  it  under  the  impression  that  the  town  offers  great 
opportunities  for  Bible  work.  Of  Bokhara  they  say, 
"In  this  thickly-peopled  town  even  a  timid  colporteur 
need  not  be  afraid  to  work."*  In  the  six  months  they 
were  aw^ay,  they  sold  to  the  Turkomans,  Khivans, 
Russians,  and  Bokhariots,  319  copies  of  the  Scriptures, 
or  portions,  for  118  roubles.  This  for  a  first  journey 
by  two  unprotected  colporteurs  into  parts  where  even 
I,  with  the  Russians  at  my  back,  was  w^arned  of  danger, 
I  think  highly  creditable  to  the  agents  of  the  Society, 
and  still  more  so  as  their  travelling  expenses,  including 
the  hire  of  camels,  amounted  to  only  £2^  ! 

Thus  Bokhara  and  Khiva  have  been  approached 
from  the  west  by  these  colporteurs ;  by  myself  from  the 
south,  and  on  the  east  the  brothers  Bartsch  went  to 
Samarkand,  and  wished  to  go  on  to  Bokhara ;  but 
General  Ivanoff,  though  authorizing  them  to  colport 
among  the  Russian  troops  (to  whom  they  sold  330 
copies  in  5  days),  hesitated  to  let  them  go  on  to 
Bokhara,  without  telegraphing  first  to  Petersburg,  and 
finally  thought  it  would  be  safer  for  them  not  to  go. 
It  is  from  this  side,  however,  the  khanates  will  be 
most  conveniently  worked.t     The  opinion  of  the  men 

*  I  am  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society,  that  Dr.  Vanorden,  writing  from  Khiva,  says  : —  "  The  report  of 
your  colporteurs  as  to  the  quiet  of  this  land  I  find  fully  confirmed  by  my 
own  experiences.  It  extends  even  to  the  animals  ;  for  though  there  are 
many  dogs  here,  not  one  barks  at  the  stranger.  ...  I  am  much  pleased 
with  the  people.  It  would  seem  as  if  they  could  hardly  be  Mussulmans, 
so  different  are  they  from  others  I  have  met  with." 

t  From  the  latest  information,  I  learn  that  the  brothers  Bartsch  went 
on  a  tour  in  the  summer  of  1884  to  the  North-East  (T  presume  through 
Viemy),  and  met  with  tolerably  good  success.     "But  in  the  neigh- 


KHIVAN  MOSqUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  305 

from  the  Caucasus  is,  that  It  is  very  desirable  that 
Bible  work  should  be  taken  up  by  colporteurs  from 
the  three  centres,  Khiva,  Charjui,  and  Bokhara  ;  for, 
say  they,  a  very  large  proportion  of  both  sexes,  young 
and  old,  can  read,  and  there  is  nothing  to  hinder 
work  among  them.* 

But  to  return  whence  this  excursus  began.  I  found 
it  not  so  difficult  to  ascend  a  minaret  in  Khiva  as  in 
Bokhara.  On  approaching  the  Jumma  mosque,  and 
seeing  its  elegant  minaret,  I  expressed  a  wish  at  once 
to  go  up.  They  replied  at  first  that  the  man  with  the 
key  was  absent,  which  temporary  difficulty  was  over- 
come by  my  saying  that  we  would  wait  till  he  brought 
it.  We  then  mounted  90  steps,  each  about  a  foot  high, 
and  had  a  capital  view  of  the  city.  The  configuration 
of  the  outer  wall  is  that  of  an  oyster-shell  with  the 
narrow  end  elongated  and  squared.! 

bourhood  of  Tashkend  the  fanaticism  of  the  Muhammadan  population, 
which  is  easily  awakened,  has,  after  the  first  success,  tended  greatly  to 
decrease  their  sales."  At  Tashkend  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  in 
Kazan  Tatar  is  finding  acceptance,  and  an  agent  of  the  Society,  one 
Jacob  Starkel,  is  stationed  near  Petro-Alexandrovsk, 

*  I  am  glad  to  notice  here  the  kindness  of  General  Grotenhielm  at 
Petro-Alexandrovsk  to  the  men  ;  also  of  the  Governor-General  at  Aska- 
bad,  who  gave  the  colporteurs  a  recommendation  to  authorities  they 
might  possibly  meet.  His  Excellency  charged  the  leader  of  the 
caravan  to  take  due  care  of  them,  and  made  him  promise  to  take 
them  safely  to  Khiva.  So,  too,  in  Askabad,  a  Russian  doctor  attended 
gratis  one  of  the  men  who  was  ill,  wishing,  as  he  said,  to  befriend  a 
colporteur  of  the  Bible  Society. 

t  Its  largest  diameter  is  a  mile  and  a  half,  its  shortest  a  mile.  The 
wall  measures  3,100  fathoms,  or  4  miles,  in  length  according  to 
Basiner's  map  (but  they  told  me  8  miles),  is  about  25  feet  high,  the  same 
in  thickness  at  the  bottom,  but  only  two  or  three  feet  at  the  top.  The  wall 
is  pierced  by  12  gates,  and  the  whole  is  girdled  by  a  wide  ditch.  This 
wall  was  built  by  Allah  Kuli  in  1842.  Within  are  visible  many  fields 
and  gardens,  the  summer  palace  of  the  Khan,  with  other  great  build- 
ings, and  fortress-like  farmhouses.  There  is  besides  an  inner  wall,  in 
the  shape  of  a  parallelogram,  700  yards  long  on  the  eastern  and  western 
sides,  and  540  yards  broad. 

VOL.  II.  20 


3o6 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Below  US  we  could  see  plainly  the  winter  palace  of 
the  Khan  near  the  western  gate  of  the  citadel;  a  large, 
rambling  structure  with  crenelated  mud  walls,  and  having 
chambers  rising  above  them.  On  either  side  of  the 
entrance  gateway  is  a  tower,  whose  top  is  embellished 
by  coloured  bricks,  whilst  along  the  cornice  of  th^fagade 
is  a  row  of  loopholes.  In  front  of  the  palace  is  a  square, 
in  which    we    found  some  brass  cannons  mounted  on 


I 


MINAKET    OF   THE    MOSQUE    SEID    BAI. 


carriages  with  wooden  axles,  also  a  mortar,  but  all  of 
them  exceedingly  clumsy,  whereupon  I  asked  the 
Consul  how,  with  artillery  such  as  this,  they  could  not 
manage  to  keep  off  the  Russians  ?  Later  on  we  asked 
the  Khan  to  be  allowed  to  see  his  palace.  He  said 
that,  had  we  asked  before,  we  should  have  done  so,  but 
that  he  was  on  the  point  of  quitting  that  very  afternooi 
his  summer  for  his    winter  palace,   and   consequent!] 


KHIVAN  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  307 

we  could  not  go  inside.  The  view  of  Khiva  was  no 
exception  to  the  usual  ugliness  of  an  Eastern  city  as 
seen  from  an  eminence.  We  could  detect  the  existence 
of  mosques  and  ^medresses  by  the  mud  cupolas  over 
them,  and  we  could  see  well  another  minaret  belong- 
ing, I  think,  to  the  mosque  Seid  Bai,  almost  a  facsimile 
of  the  one  on  which  we  were  standing.  The  big 
minaret  also  stood  out  well,  but  there  were  few  other 
buildings  sufficiently  conspicuous  to  be  worthy  of 
mention.  Immediately  below  us  was  the  flat  roof,  with 
two  octagonal  holes,  of  the  Jumma  mosque,  where  the 
Khan  attends  on  Fridays,  and  into  which  we  descended. 
Anything  more  bare  and  ugly  as  a  place  of  worship  it 
would  be  hard  to  conceive,  and  this  was  intensified  by 
a  forest  of  upwards  of  200  columns  or  poles,  by  which 
the  roof  was  supported. 

Dr.  Wolff  said  the  population  of  Khiva  was  600,000 
at  least,  including  40,000  slaves.  Captain  Burnaby 
guessed  it  at  35,000.  From  the  top  of  the  minaret  I 
put  it  down  at  5,000  less  ;  but  Reclus  mentions  from 
4,000  to  5,000,  which  must,  I  think,  be  a  mistake. 

I  had  somewhat  of  a  tussle  about  seeing  the  prison, 
for  when  I  asked  the  Consul  to  conduct  me  there,  he 
at  first  declined,  whereupon  I  spoke  loudly,  insisted, 
and  asked  him  to  send  at  once  to  the  Khan  for  per- 
mission. At  length  they  brought  us  round  to  one  of 
the  city  gates,  beneath  which  was  an  arched  room, 
wholly  without  light,  and  with  a  door  hardly  large 
enough  for  Sevier  and  me  to  crawl  through.  We  found 
the  prison  to  be  16  feet  long,  by  8 J  feet  wide,  and  6 
feet  high.  It  had  no  flooring  and  no  beam  for  stocks 
as  at  Charjui.  There  were  two  Kirghese  and  two 
other  men,  prisoners,  all  secured  to  one  another  at  the 
neck  by  a  long  chain,  and   for  the  moment  they  were 


308  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

sitting  outside  before  a  fire.  This  was  the  only  prison, 
they  said,  in  Khiva  ;  further,  that  they  made  short  work 
with  malefactors,  and  decided  their  cases  quickly. 
The  men  appeared  to  be  fed  truly  ''with  bread  of 
affliction  and  with  water  of  affliction,"*  and  after  giving 
them  a  trifle  we  continued  our  round,  passing  in  the 
course  of  the  day  the  gallows. 

Having  thus  spent  some  hours  in  looking  about  the 
town  we  returned  late  to  lunch  upon  the  inevitable 
pilau.  On  the  previous  day  we  had  heard  a  story  from 
the  cook's  dominions  anent  this  dish  that  was  flattering 
to  our  nationality.  Among  the  condiments  in  the 
niches  in  our  room  was  some  Russian  essence  or  extract 
of  vinegar,  and  the  cooks  thinking,  I  suppose,  to  give  us 
something  recherche,  2ind  not  knowing  the  strength  of  the 
essence,  mixed  it  freely  in  the  rice,  and  then  discovered 
that  they  had  spoilt  it,  whereupon  they  made  some 
more,  but  declared  that  the  vinegar  must  be  English, 
for  that  the  Russians  had  nothing  so  strong  as  that ! 

We  were  not  called  upon  for  much  medical  assist- 
ance in  Khiva.  Their  chief  diseases  are  fevers  and 
ophthalmia,  but  they  have  no  leprosy  or  rishta.  Sevier 
prescribed  only  for  the  Divan-beggi,  and  I  think  a  few 
of  his  household,  who  seemed  anxious  in  every  way  to 
make  us  comfortable. 

On  our  second  evening  four  musicians  came  to 
entertain  us,  one  playing  a  tambour,  two  others 
flageolets,  and  another  a  tambourine.  We  had  been 
told  by  Captain  Mirbadaleff  to  ask  Polvan,  the  son  of 
Matmurad,  for  a  Khivan  flute  and  for  written  music  for 
the  tambourine.  The  notes  he  gave  me  were  written  on 
ruled  paper,  with  lines  numbered  in  Arabic  up  to  19, 
though  the  notes  extend  only  between  lines  6  and  10.     I 

*  2  Chron.  xviii.  26. 


lO 


KHIVAN  MOSqUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  309 

heard,  too,  of  a  stringed  in- 
strument called  kizhak,  a  kind 
of  fiddle.  Besides  the  musicians 
were  provided  three  batchas, 
who  began  their  dances  with 
clappers  or  castanets,  but  they 
were  not  so  clever  as  the  boys 
in  Bokhara.  They  had  their 
hair  cut  short,  and  appeared  to 
be  from  15  to  17  years  old.  As 
usual,  a  small  crowd  pressed 
into  the  room,  and  squatted 
against  the  wall,  Tailly  among 
them,  to  participate  in  the  fun  ; 
but  when  the  Divan-beggi 
appeared  he  speedily  turned 
out  the  majority  and  sat  down 
with  us.  I  had  intimated  to 
him  that  I  should  be  thankful 
for  an  opportunity  to  ask  him 
questions  about  the  khanate, 
so  that  when  they  had  made  a 
noise  for  a  while,  and  then 
asked  if  I  wished  for  more,  I 
was  glad  to  excuse  myself  on 
the  ground  that  I  desired  con- 
versation with  our  host.  Ugh  ! 
said  one  of  the  musicians,  as  if 
disgusted  with  our  want  of 
appreciation  of  their  talents. 
After  this  they  speedily  left 
the  room,  and  we  fell  to — the 
Consul,  Matmurad,  Yakoob, 
Sevier,  and  I — at  such  a  cross- 


<^ 

• 

• 

• 
• 

00 

Ci 

0 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

(Xl 

• 

• 
• 

^ 
^ 

• 

• 
• 

: 

• 

• 
• 

: 

*o: 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

B 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

^: 

• 

< 
• 

• 
• 

• 

II 

• 
• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

•. 

: 

• 
• 

• 

310  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

questioning    as    I    think    the    natives    had    not   often 
experienced  before. 

On  our  last  afternoon  in  Khiva  we  went  to  pay  the 
customary  farewell  visit  to  the  Khan.  He  received 
us  as  before,  and  seemed  rather  inclined  to  talk  politics, 
which,  however,  is  not  my  forte.  He  had  heard  of 
our  war  going  on  in  Egypt,  and  asked  whether  the 
affair  were  cleared  up.  I  had  supposed  that  this  war 
with  Muhammadans  might  have  rendered  it  unsafe  for 
us  to  travel  in  Central  Asia,  but  the  people  seemed  to 
know  next  to  nothing  about  it,  and  to  care  as  little.  I 
had  heard  no  news  since  leaving  Samarkand,  and  not 
much  there,  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  explain  the  situa- 
tion as  best  I  could.  His  Highness  asked  my  name 
and  (following  in  the  same  interrogative  groove  as  the 
Bek  in  Bokhara)  my  age,  and  inquired  if  we  had  been 
well  entertained  in  Khiva.  This  we  were  able  to 
answer  truly  in  the  affirmative,  thanks  to  the  hospitality 
of  his  Divan-beggi.  Before  bidding  us  farewell,  he 
said  that  he  had  directed  Matmurad  to  give  us  men 
to  take  our  baggage,  and  that  he  had  also  sent  to 
seek  for  a  Russian-speaking  djiguitt  to  accompany  us 
to  Krasnovodsk. 

Yakoob,  who  took  up  his  habitation  with  the  servants, 
and  who  had  not  told  them  that  he  spoke  Tajik  as 
well  as  Turki,  rather  amused  us  that  evening  by  telling 
us  that  there  had  been  a  discussion  going  on  outside 
as  to  whether  it  would  be  proper  to  give  us  presents 
from  the  Khan.  It  was  at  length  decided  in  the  affir- 
mative, and  there  came  a  horse  and  cloth  khalat  for  me, 
a  similar  khalat  for  Sevier,  and  a  cotton  one  for  Yakoob. 
Captain  Burnaby  was  informed,  he  says,  that  ''  a  khalat 
or  dressing-gown  from  the  Khan  is  looked  upon  at 
Khiva  much  as  the  Order  of  the  Garter  would  be  in 


KHIVAN  MOSQ^UES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS,  311 

England,"  at  which  rate  I  suppose  that  I,  who  had 
received  them  in  Bokhara  by  dozens,  ought  to  consider 
myself  "very  much  knighted." 

This  honour  Tailly  seemed  anxious  also  to  share,  for 
he  cunningly  left  with  Yakoob  a  limited  number  of 
roubles  to  be  offered  for  the  two  cloth  khalats,  telling 
Yakoob  that  he  wished  to  take  them  back  to  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk,   and    there  to  cut  a  dash,   representing 


THE   HAZARASP    GATE   AT    KHIVA. 


that  he  had  received  them  as  a  present  for  the  efficiency 
with  which  he  had  served  us.  Meanwhile  he  was 
cheating  us  to  his  heart's  content.  I  had  given  him  at 
Petro-Alexandrovsk  60  roubles,  the  very  top  price  he 
thought  he  should  require  to  hire  the  best  camels. 
Now,  in  Khiva,  he  came  to  say  that  he  needed  6  roubles 
more,  and  put  on  the  most  injured  expression  when  I 
ventured  to  doubt  his  veracity,  though  his  story,  as  will 
afterwards  be  seen,  was  a  concoction. 


312  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

I  did  not  hear  much  of  the  character  and  manner  of 
the  life  of  the  Khivan  Khan,  so  I  can  write  no  scandal 
about  him.  Messrs.  Capus  and  Bonvalot  refer  to  him 
as  a  debauchee,  but  no  reports  reached  me  of  a 
fabulous  number  of  royal  wives  as  at  Bokhara.  The 
Consul  could  not  tell  me  how  many  wives  his  Majesty 
had.  He  had  6  or  7  sons,  he  said,  but  of  the  daughters 
he  knew  nothing.  General  von  Grotenhielm  told  me 
he  had  expressed  to  the  Khan  a  wish  to  have  photo- 
graphs taken  of  his  wives,  and  had  offered  to  provide 
a  female  operator,  but  the  Khan  would  not  consent. 
Neither  would  he  agree  that  one  of  his  sons  should  be 
sent  to  Petersburg  to  be  educated,  saying  that  he  loved 
his  children  too  much  to  part  from  them.  I  think  I 
have  read  that  he  has  since  compromised  matters  by 
receiving  at  Khiva  a  Russian  tutor  for  his  sons. 

Whilst  talking  of  Khivan  affairs  to  the  Consul,  he 
said  he  had  three  wives.  I  asked  if  he  did  not  find  it 
exceedingly  difficult  to  manage  so  many  ?  He  looked 
at  the  matter,  however,  in  a  very  practical  light. 
'*  You  see,"  he  said,  ''  I  have  two  houses,  one  here  at 
Khiva,  and  the  other  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  and  con- 
sequently I  have  a  wife  in  each,  without  the  trouble  of 
moving  her!  " 

Thus  I  have  described  with  what  fulness  I  can  the* 
city  of  Khiva,  but  I  must  not  start  northwards  with- 
out mention  of  another  town  in  the  south,  callec 
Hazarasp,  approached  from  Khiva  through  the  gate 
way  of  that  name — a  heavy  covered  portal  10  feet 
wide  by  20  deep,  arched  over  with  brick,  and  flanked 
by  heavy  towers  with  loopholes.  The  town  to  which 
I  refer  was  considered  one  of  the  strongest  in  the 
khanate,  and  has  an  origin  lost  in  legend. 

Khiva  has  been  the  capital  of  the  khanate  apparently 


KHIVA N  MOSQUES  AND  THEIR  WORSHIPPERS.  313 

only  since  the  accession  of  the  Kungrad — that  is,  the 
present — dynasty,  though  it  is  mentioned  by  older 
writers,  Ishtakhri,  Mokadessi,  and  Yakut,  the  last  of 
whom  says  the  natives  called  it  Khivak.  The  fact 
that  the  ambassador  told  Peter  the  Great  that  Khiva 
consisted  only  of  tents  and  huts,  points  to  the  com- 
paratively modern  erection  of  its  buildings.  With 
regard  to  Hazarasp,  however,  Khanikoff  thinks  it 
was  to  this  place,  then  called  Zariaspe,  that  Alexander 
retired  for  the  winter  from  Samarkand,  and  Arab 
geographers  of  the  loth  century,  to  whom  I  have 
referred,  speak  of  it  as  a  strongly  fortified  place  in 
their  day.* 

The  original  fortress  is  said  to  have  been  replaced 
by  the  present  one,  about  100  years  ago.  A  part 
of  the  wall  of  the  old  fortress  is  said  to  exist  still, 
and  underneath  it  a  Tchile-Kkanek,  or  hermit's  cave, 
wherein  those  who  have  entered  have  been  struck 
dead  or  dumb ;  the  last  man  who  did  so  having  seen 
several  figures,  and  received  a  box  on  the  ears !  The 
entrance  to  the  cell  was  then  blocked  up. 

*  Popular  tradition,  says  M.  Kuhn,  records  that  in  olden  time  there 
lived  four  kings — two  of  them  "  infidels,"  and  two  Mussulmans  ;  the 
latter,  Iskander  and  Suleiman.  Suleiman  conquered  all  the  world,  tamed 
ever}'-  living  thing,  and  subjected  to  his  rule  even  the  inhabitants  of  the 
spirit  world.  On  one  occasion  Suleiman  ascended  his  throne,  which  by 
the  spirits  was  lifted  in  the  air,  so  that  he  might  inspect  the  entire 
earth  ;  and  then  he  alighted  where  now  stands  Hazarasp.  At  that 
period  the  locality  was  covered  with  beautiful  meadows  and  dense 
forests,  through  which  ran  a  stream  of  sparkling  water.  At  the 
moment  of  Suleiman's  descent  a  thousand  graceful  steeds  had  come 
to  drink.  The  king  ordered  the  spirits  to  catch  the  horses,  and  when 
they  could  not  do  so,  he  directed  an  intoxicating  liquor  to  be  put  in  the 
stream,  which  enabled  the  spirits  to  fulfil  his  command,  and  cut  their 
wings,  ever  since  which  time  the  horse  has  been  the  friend  of  man. 
Having  possessed  himself  of  the  steeds,  Suleiman  caused  a  fortress  to 
be  erected  on  the  spot,  and  called  it  "Hazarasp,"  or  a  "thousand 
horses." 


314  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

The  governorship  of  Hazarasp  formerly  belonged 
to  the  Inak,  or  oldest  member  of  the  Khan's  family, 
and  who  came  next  in  dignity  to  the  sovereign.* 

This  governor  has  his  court  officials,  and  the  palace 
of  the  Inak  still  stands  in  the  citadel.  The  Khivan 
governors  of  provinces  have  full  judicial  authority 
over  everything,  the  life  of  criminals  excepted,  in 
which  case  the  Khan  is  appealed  to.  MacGahan 
entered  Hazarasp  with  the  Russian  invaders,  and 
describes  the  town  as  he  saw  it.  He  speaks  of  5,000 
inhabitants  in  the  place.  It  is  13  miles  from  Pitniak, 
7  from  the  Oxus,  and  40  from  Khiva ;  and  now 
having  mentioned  Hanki,  Khiva,  and  Hazarasp, 
which  were  regarded  as  three,  we  shall  now  proceed 
northwards  in  the  direction  of  Tashauz,  which  was 
considered  the  fourth,  of  the  strongest  fortresses  in 
the  Khanate  of  Khiva. 

*  The  office  has  now  somewhat  lost  its  importance,  and  at  the 
present  time  there  are  more  Inaks  than  one ;  and  the  ruler  of 
Hazarasp  bears  a  new  title,  Emir-ul-umer,  or  "Ruler  of  rulers." 
The  district  has  15  villages,  and  the  town  400  shops.  Pitniak  and 
Shura-Khaneh  were  until  recently  governed  by  Inaks  during  the 
Kungrad  dynasty. 


CHAPTER   LXIV. 

FROM  KHIVA  TO  TASHAUZ. 

Departure  from  Khiva  with  Khassan  the  Batchman. — Luggage  arbas. — 
Kosh-ku-pryk  and  its  melons. — Aryk  and  town  of  Gazavat. — 
Russian  reconnaissance  of  Khivan  oasis, — Our  stay  at  Shavat. — 
Amusements  of  the  natives. — Havlis  and  their  supposed  resem- 
blance to  Scripture  "strongholds." — Visit  to  /^^aiz'// at  Manak. — 
Oil  and  corn  mills. — Hawks  for  falconry. — Mud  walls  of  the  havli. 
—Invitation  to  stay. — Route  to  Tashauz. 

ON  Thursday  morning,  November  2nd,  at  9.45, 
we  said  Aman  I  to  Matmurad,  our  Khivan 
host,  and  began  our  ride  to  Kunia  Urgenj,  where 
Tailly,  having  left  us  on  the  road,  was  to  meet  us 
again  with  camels,  and  start  us  across  the  desert.  By 
this  means  we  should  pass  from  the  new  Kharezmian 
capital  to  the  old  one,  and  so  have  seen  the  principal 
inhabited  points  of  the  khanate.  The  Consul  was 
setting  out  to  return  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  and  I 
confided  to  him  a  letter  to  be  forwarded  to  General 
Abramoff,  informing  him  that  I  had  now  delivered  to 
the  Khan  the  last  of  his  Excellency's  letters  ;  also 
thanking  him  for  the  exceedingly  kind  reception  every- 
where afforded  me,  and  assuring  him  that  I  should 
take  away  with  me  a  most  agreeable  recollection  of  my 
tour  through  his  general  government.  We  were  now 
a  party  of  7  '*  regulars,"  besides  ''  volunteers  "  includ- 


3i6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

ing  the  Consul  and  his  attendants,  who,  on  leaving  the 
town,  were  to  turn  off  to  the  east,  whilst  our  course 
was  to  the  north. 

We  were  placed  under  the  charge  of  Khassan,  the 
old  assistant  Bek,  or  more  accurately,  I  think,  the 
batchman,  or  tax-gatherer,  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  and  two 
djiguitts,  our  luggage  having  been  sent  forward  by  the 
Khan  in  3  arbas.  There  was  more  reason  now,  as 
will  presently  appear,  than  when  leaving  Samarkand, 
to  be  afraid  of  losing  our  goods,  but  I  had  no  means  of 
sealing  them  up  ;  so,  to  inspire  the  arba-kesh  with 
some  little  sense  of  responsibility,  I  wrote  in  my  note- 
book "27  packages,"  as  sent  from  Khiva,  and  called 
upon  him  to  affix  thereto  his  sign  manual,  which  he 
did,  "  his  mark  "  consisting  of  a  perpendicular  stroke, 
that  would,  I  should  think,  puzzle  any  expert  in  cali- 
graphy  to  swear  to. 

I  have  several  times  referred  to,  without  describing, 
the  Central  Asian  vehicle  prevailing  from  Kuldja  to 
Khiva,  and  called  an  araba,  or  arba.  Imagine,  then, 
a  thick  wooden  axle,  10  feet  long,  with  2  wheels 
attached,  not  quite  so  high  as  the  big  wheel  of  the 
**  Flying  Dutchman  "  engine — that  is  to  say,  about  7 
feet  in  diameter.  On  the  axle  a  platform  is  fixed,  of 
two  long  beams,  the  hinder  parts  being  interlaced 
with  willow,  whilst  the  front  parts  serve  as  shafts. 
The  axle  is  somewhat  curved  below,  and  owing  thereto 
the  position  of  the  wheels  is  slanting,  so  that  the 
distance  between  the  lower  felloes  is  greater  than 
between  the  upper,  the  breadth  of  the  track  of  the 
arba  being  9  feet.  These  carts  are  the  only  wheeled 
vehicles  used  by  the  natives,  and  are  exceedingly 
clumsy,  but  they  cannot  easily  be  upset,  and  can  go 
through  water  4  feet  deep  without  wetting  the  load. 


FROM  KHIVA    TO   TASHAUZ. 


■h-^l 


Our  road  lay  for  the  first  8  miles  through  cultivated 
land,  then  crossed  2  miles  of  steppe  with  a  spur  of 
sand-hills  on  our  right.  Of  the  two  Englishmen 
(Captain  Abbott  and  Lieutenant  Shakespear)  who 
passed  this  way  before  me,  the  latter  mentions  a 
village,  about  9  miles  north-west  of  Khiva,  called 
Zaca,  where  he  stayed  for  a  night,  previous  to  receiv- 
ing into  his  charge  the  Russian  prisoners  on  the 
morrow.  This,  I  suppose,  is  the  place  on  the  map 
marked  Zeikesh,  through  which  we  must  have  passed. 


A    KHIVAN    AI 


but  without  noticing  it,  as  also  the  village  Kanabash,  on 
the  canal  of  that  name,  a  short  distance  beyond. 

At  I  o'clock  we  reached  Kosh-ku-pryk,  1 1  miles 
from  Khiva,  a  place  marked  on  the  maps  as  a  town, 
but  only  a  hamlet  of  less  than  20  houses.  Here  we  sat 
on  a  platform  in  the  street,  in  front  of  a  shop,  drank 
tea,  and  ate  bread  and  melons,  taking  notice  of  the 
dexterous  fashion  in  which  the  natives  cut  them  up.* 

*  Drawing  his  knife  from  the  girdle,  the  man  first  cuts  off  a  morsel  at 
each  end,  slices  out  a  quarter  of  the  fruit  lengthwise,  and  clears  away 
the  seeds.  Then  he  deftly  passes  his  knife  along  lengthwise,  just 
inside  the  skin,  cutting  under  the  pulp  about  half  way  across ;  after 


3i8  RUSSJAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

After  the  feast,  Yakoob  asked  me  for  money  to  pay 
for  it,  which,  of  course,  I  gave  him,  though  I  was  still 
guest  of  the  Khan,  as  before  I  had  been  of  the  Emir, 
when  everything  was  found  for  me.  Yakoob  told  me, 
however,  that  had  we  not  paid  it  was  very  doubtful 
whether  the  refreshment  would  not  have  been  exacted 
by  the  batchman  as  fruit  furnished  for  the  Khan's 
service.  Whilst  our  horses  rested  I  looked  about  the 
village,  and  in  the  farmyards,  wherein  the  buildings 
were  commodious,  but  very  rude,  the  walls  being  of 
mud,  with  timber  thrown  across  for  the  roof. 

Kosh-ku-pryk  is  watered  by  the  aryk  Khazavat,  or 
Gazavat,  30  feet  wide  and  10  deep,  according  to 
MacGahan,  with  a  current  of  5  miles  an  hour.  It  con- 
tinues 10  miles  westward  to  the  town  of  its  own  name, 
where  a  market  is  held  twice  a  week.*  I  should 
observe  that  during  the  occupation  of  Khiva  by  the 
Russians,  in    1873,  the  Orenburg  detachment  was  de- 

this  he  draws  his  knife  across  the  pulp  in  skin-deep  cuts,  half  an  inch 
apart,  and  finally  passes  the  knife  along,  as  before,  on  the  other  side, 
and  so  releases  a  number  of  slices,  breaking  up  the  quarter  melon, 
which  is  not  thought  too  much  to  give  to  one  person. 

*  On  approaching  Gazavat,  fields  are  fewer,  and  a  mile  beyond  the 
canal,  named  Hair-abad,  the  road  leads  across  a  sandy  plain,  in  tht 
vicinity  of  the  Zaikesh,  a  reedy  marsh  or  lake,  2  miles  long  and  a 
mile  wide,  that  is  formed  by  the  superfluous  waters  of  the  Gazavat 
aryk.  This  lake  is  2  miles  distant  from  the  town,  under  whose  walls 
flows  the  aryk.  On  its  left  bank  stands  the  small  fort  of  Gazavat, 
erected  to  defend  the  place  against  the  Turkomans,  about  the  time, 
M.  Kuhn  thinks,  of  the  expulsion  of  the  Golden  Horde  from  the  banks 
of  the  Volga.  He  supposes  the  place  to  have  been  first  inhabited 
under  Shir-ghazi  Khan,  or  one  of  the  Abul-ghazi  Khans,  and  would 
derive  the  name  from  Ghazi-abad — that  is,  "pacified — quieted."  Uzbegs 
constitute  the  chief  population,  and  trace  their  descent  from  4  Kalmuks 
who  settled  at  Gazavat.  Tradition  says  that  the  Kalmuks  had  been  of 
service  to  the  Khan  of  that  day,  who  gave  them  hereditary  rights  in 
his  territory,  and  placed  them  over  his  horses  and  trappings.  On  this 
account  they  have  retained  their  name  of  "  Altm-djtlayou,''  and  they 
alone  have  the  right  to  live  in  the  fortress.     The  remaining  inhabitants 


FROM  KHIVA    TO   TASHAUZ.  319 

spatched  to  collect  information  about  the  Turkomans, 
to  Kunia  Urgenj,  whence  they  marched  to  Hojeili.^' 

This  detachment  passed  through  Gazavat.  So  did 
Shakespear,  and,  I  suppose,  Abbott ;  but,  for  some 
reason  unknown  to  me,  instead  of  our  turning  west 
from  Kosh-ku-pryk,  we  proceeded  north-west  to 
Shakh-abad,  or,  as  it  is  abbreviated,  Shavat.  The 
greater  part  of  our  way  lay  through  the  sandy  desert, 
Chukur-kum,  and  after  proceeding  about  3  miles  we 
crossed  an  old   bed  of  the  Oxus,  called   ''Daudan."t 

By  half-past  3  we  had  ridden  12  miles  more,  and 
reached  Shavat,  our  stopping-place  for  the  night,  being 
now,  according  to  my  reckoning,  34  versts,  or  23 
miles,  from  Khiva,  whereas  our  conductors  wanted  to 
make  out  that  we  had  travelled  6  parsangs,  or  48 
versts.  No  one  appeared  to  be  expecting  us,  and  the 
Bek  of  the  place  living  at  a  distance,  we  were  lodged 
in  quarters  that  were  a  great  "come-down  "  from  the 
mansion  of  the  Divan-beggi.  Our  dwelling  partook  of 
the  features  of  a  farm-house  and  shop  combined,  and 
into  our  miserable  room,  with  black  walls,  the  light 
entered  only  through  a  hole  in  the  roof,  which  served 
also  as   an    outlet    for    smoke.      It  struck   me   that   it 

are  Persians,  Karakalpaks,  and  Tajiks,  There  are  altogether  in  the 
town  about  300  houses,  many  being  in  ruins,  and  showing  traces  of  the 
last  invasion  of  the  Turkomans  in  their  war  with  the  present  Khan. 
Some  Turkomans  of  the  Ushak  tribe  are  settled  a  short  distance  from 
Gazavat,  to  whose  land  former  Khans  extended  the  aryk,  hoping  to 
subjugate  them  by  inducing  them  to  settle  to  agricultural  pursuits. 
But  they  became  more  dangerous  than  ever,  and  in  all  the  Khivan 
revolts  the  Turkomans  of  Gazavat  were  among  the  most  active. 

*  With  them  was  M.  Kuhn,  the  OrientaUst  of  the  expedition,  to 
whom  I  am  indebted  for  much  information  of  this  part  of  the  khanate. 

t  The  Orenburg  division,  on  their  way  from  Gazavat  to  Tashauz, 
had  also  to  cross  the  Daudan,  and  whilst  the  baggage  was  being  con- 
veyed over  the  bridge,  Colonel  Glukhovsky  was  despatched  to  survey 
another  old  channel  of  the  Oxus,  called  the  Urun-daria. 


320  RUSSIAJV  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

might  usually  serve  for  an  apartment — or,  better  said, 
a  prison — for  the  women.  There  were  two  doors,  one 
leading  into  a  cowshed,  and  the  other  on  to  a  shop- 
platform  open  to  the  street,  where  we  drank  tea. 

As  it  was  fully  early,  I  looked  round  the  town,  in 
this  case  again  consisting  of  about  12  houses,  some 
with  shops,  wherein  the  chief  articles  of  merchandise 
appeared  to  be  Russian  sweetmeats,  native  tobacco, 
apples,  and  melons.  One  remarkable  thing  about  the 
place  was  that  the  dozen  houses  had  between  them  at 
least  6  rams,  kept,  I  presume,  for  fighting.*  This 
development  of  the  "animal"  in  the  natives,  and  their 
readiness  to  see  a  fight,  came  out  after  dark,  when  our 
lamp  was  suddenly  run  off  with,  as  I  supposed  the 
better  to  part  two  dogs  that  were  snarling,  whereas  I 
found  that  the  object  of  the  depredators  was  to  incite 
the  animals  to  fight. 

In  the  course  of  a  few  hours  the  Bek  of  the  district 
appeared,  and  an  evening  meal  was  prepared,  of  which 
the  grim  and  public  participation  in  the  open  street 
was  not  particularly  agreeable.  Here  also  Russian 
candles,  such  as  had  hitherto  been  provided  by  our 
native  hosts,  failed  us,  and  there  were  furnished  the 
ordinary  lamps  of  the  country,  not  "  warranted  to  burn 
twelve  hours,"  but  that  needed  frequent  replenishing.! 

We  left  Shavat  next  morning  at  7.45,  and  travelled 

*  Setting  animals,  especially  rams,  to  fight  appears  to  be  one  of 
the  chief  sports  of  the  natives  of  Central  Asia.  In  the  rutting  season, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  camels  can  be  made  to  fight,  and 
wagers  are  laid  also  on  the  struggles  of  cocks,  partridges,  and  quails. 
With  these  low  sports  must  be  coupled  that  of  horse-racing,  but  the 
goat-chase  does  not  obtain,  I  was  told,  among  the  Khivans. 

t  Thus  reminding  one  of  the  folly  of  the  virgins  who  carried  their  lamps, 
but  took  no  oil  with  them  (Matt.  xxv.  3).  Again,  though  oui"  blazing 
fire  (for  it  was  cold)  and  the  light  and  brightness  of  our  feast  were  little 
in  themselves  considered,  yet,  compared  with  the  blackness  of  the  street 


FROM  KHIVA    TO   TASHAUZ.  321 

all  day  through  a  strip  of  cultivated  land,  about  4 
miles  wide,  the  soil  beyond,  on  the  right,  being  un- 
cultivated, and,  on  the  left,  sandy.  We  came  within 
sight  of  very  little  steppe,  but  passed  numerous  walled 
farm-houses,  some,  however,  being  in  ruins.  After 
riding  4  miles  we  passed  the  village  Djagatai.  The 
most  striking  feature  of  this  part  of  the  country  is  the 
manner  in  which  the  houses  are  built.  The  Daudan, 
which  lay  about  2  miles  on  our  left,  separates  the 
Uzbegs  of  the  Djagatai  and  Kipchak  tribes  to  the 
east  from  the  Yomud  Turkomans  on  the  west.  As  it 
is  impossible  for  the  Uzbegs  to  depend  upon  the 
lengthened  quiet  behaviour  of  the  Turkomans,  the 
Uzbegs  have  constructed  a  line  of  small  fortified  build- 
ings, stretching  between  town  and  town,  wherein  the 
inhabitants  can  take  refuge  in  case  of  an  attack. 
Numerous  single  dwellings  are  also  met  with  in  the 
fields,  and  these  are  provided  with  towers  as  well,  that 
are  guarded.  They  are  called  ''  gullah!'  Abbott  says, 
and  Vambery  calls  the  farm-houses  ''  havUr 

I  have  alluded  before  to  these  miniature  fortresses 
met  with  all  the  way  from  Bokhara,  and  I  was  parti- 
cularly interested  in  them  as  illustrating  a  stage  of 
civilization,  such  as  I  should  not  know  where  else  to 
find  in  the  present  day,  but  which  is  brought  before  us 
in  the  early  years  of  the  Jewish  polity.* 

beyond,  like  the  streets  of  Khokaiid  and  Bokhara,  they  helped  one  to 
realize  the  dire  simile  of  being  expelled  from  the  brilliancy  of  a  feast, 
and  "  cast  into  outer  darkness  "  (Matt.  xxii.  13). 

*  I  have  said  that  the  Kirghese  Steppe  took  me  back  to  the  days  of 
Abraham,  the  city  of  Bokhara  to  the  times  of  Jewish  kings,  and  now 
this  border  land  of  the  Uzbegs  reminded  one  of  the  days  of  the  Judges, 
and  even  earlier;  for  what  the  Sabaeans  were  to  Job's  sons  in  falling 
upon  their  oxen  and  asses  (Job  i.  15),  and  what  the  Midianites  were  to 
the  children  of  Israel  when  they  entered  into  the  land  to  destroy  it 
(Judges  vi.  5),  or  the  Philistines  when  they  robbed  the  threshing-floors 

VOL.  II.  2  1 


2,22  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Thus  far  an  opportunity  had  not  offered  for  me  to 
have  a  good  look  at  the  interior  of  one  of  these  havH, 
but  at  half-past  9  we  arrived  before  an  excellent 
specimen,  the  residence  of  a  rich  bek,  with  whom  we 
were  to  rest,  and  our  horses  be  baited.  We  had  made 
fair  speed  in  coming,  thanks  to  my  having  had  re- 
course to  a  new  method  of  interpreting  my  desires.  I 
had  given  the  batchman  to  understand  that  I  wished 
to  get  on  at  a  good  speed,  but  he  seemed  sorely 
oppressed  with  dignity,  and  ambled  along  at  a  poor 
pace,  whilst  I  dared  not  go  ahead,  not  knowing  the 
way.  My  importunity  seemed  to  lose  all  its  fervour 
in  passing  through  the  brains  of  two  interpreters  ;  so, 
finding  one  of  the  djiguitts  near  me,  I  bawled  out  in 
English,  ''Go  on!"  and  at  the  same  time  laid  my  whip 
lustily  across  his  horse's  fianks.  The  djiguitt  did  not 
understand  my  language,  but  his  horse  did,  and  I  then 
kept  him  trotting  before  me  at  an  improved  pace,  to 
show  the  way,  and  abundantly  soothed  his  feelings  by 

(i  Sam.  xxiii.  i),  that,  I  take  it,  the  Turkomans  have  been  to  the 
Uzbegs.  Hence  the  children  of  Israel  "made  them  the  dens  which 
are  in  the  mountains,  and  caves,  and  strofigholds^'  (Judges  vi.  2). 
David,  the  wanderer,  would,  of  course,  be  familiar  with  such  places, 
for  "  he  abode  in  the  wilderness  in  strongholds  "  (i  Sam.  xxiii.  14),  and 
hence  the  comparison  he  makes  after  deliverance  from  Saul,  "The 
Lord  is  my  rock  and  my  fortress  .  .  .  my  high  tower  and  my  refuge  " 
{2  Sam.  xxii.  1-3).  These  similes  would  appeal  more  forcibly  to  an 
Uzbeg  than  to  an  Englishman,  whilst,  as  for  "the  high  tower,"  the 
best  illustration,  perhaps,  that  I  know  is  in  the  Caucasus,  where  ruins 
still  show  that  a  family  used  to  build  not  merely  a  high  tower,  but  also 
provide  themselves  with  a  movable  ladder,  which  one  having  ascended 
quickly  on  account  of  robbers,  for  instance,  could  pull  up  after  him 
and  so  be  safe  from  his  enemy.  On  the  south-west  frontier  of  Turk 
menia,  the  Persians  have  been  living  in  such  dread  of  the  Mervis,  tha 
one  sees  constantly  in  the  fields  and  gardens  small  towers  entered  by 
hole  just  large  enough  to  admit  one  person  at  a  time.  The  owner  take 
refuge  there  till  the  departure  of  the  marauders,  who  do  not  dare  enter, 
lest  the  intruder's  brains  should  be  battered  by  a  stone.  Again,  if  th^ 
word  "cities,"  in   i  Chron.  ii.  22,  may  be  understood  to  mean  these 


FROM  KHIVA    TO  TASHAUZ.  2>'^2> 

a  gratuity  when  we  reached  Manak,  as  they  called  the 
house  of  the  Bek.  They  affirmed  the  distance  we  had 
ridden  that  morning  to  be  2\  parsangs,  but  I  can 
make  it  by  the  map  only  about  half  that  distance, 
namely,  7  miles. 

I  regarded  the  visit  to  Manak  as  an  introduction  to 
another  grade  of  Uzbeg  society.  At  Bokhara  we 
lived  as  princes,  at  Khiva  with  nobles,  in  some  of  the 
travelling  stations  with  the  poor ;  but  now  we  were 
guests  of  one  of  the  "  landed  aristocracy,"  who  had 
wives  and  men-servants,  and  horses  and  camels,  and 
oxen  and  asses ;  who  possessed  1 50  acres  of  land 
here,  and  350  more  elsewhere,  with  a  yearly  harvest 
of  3,000  batmans,  or  50  tons,  of  corn.  I  was  so  inte- 
rested in  the  man's  castle,  with  its  four  clay  walls 
20  feet  high,  and  round  bastions  at  the  corners,  re- 
minding me  forcibly  of  so  many  Oriental  expressions, 
that  I  proceeded  to  look  over  the  place  thoroughly, 
and  afterwards  made  a  rough  sketch  of  its  ground 
plan.  Immediately  on  the  left,  at  the  main  entrance, 
was  a  platform  such  as  we  often  saw  under  a  city 
gate,  and  adjoining  this  was  a  sleeping-room  for  work- 
men, whilst  a  passage  between  led  into  a  chamber 
with   an   oil-mill   of   severely   primitive    construction.* 

fortified  farm-houses  or  the  like  (and  D''"!^,  according  to  Gesenius, 
will  perfectly  well  bear  this  rendering),  it  reduces  Jair's  possessions  in 
the  land  of  Gilead  to  more  reasonable  proportions,  and  renders  more 
intelligible  the  large  number  of  "cities"  referred  to  in  the  books  of 
Deuteronomy,  Joshua,  and  Judges.  Also  these  havli  illustrate, 
perhaps,  words  in  Gen.  xxv.  16.  These  are  the  sons  of  Ishmael  .  .  . 
(whose  hand,  be  it  remembered,  was  to  be  against  every  man,  and 
every  man's  hand  against  him),  by  their  towns,  and  by  their  castles. 
Again,  of  the  Midianites,  ''they  burnt  ...  all  their  goodly  castles'' 
(Numb.  xxxi.  10);  and  the  same  idea  re-appears  in  the  New  Testament, 
*'When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in 
peace  "  (Luke  xi.  21). 

*  Reminding  one  of  Job's  expression,  "  which  make  oil  within  their 
walls"  (Job  xxiv.  11). 


324 


RUSSIA Ar  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


The  mill  was  made  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree  stood  on 
end,  and  in  the  centre  a  hole,  1 2  inches  across  at  the 
top,  diminishing  below.  In  this  hole  was  placed  a 
heavy  beam  made  to  incline  and  pound  against  the 
side  the  seed  of  a  plant  resembling  cotton,  called  bang, 
with  a  mixture  of  flax-seed,  for  making  "  kunjut  "  oil. 


O 


c 


WOMEN'S 
PREMISES. 


[      [1 


.JJ 


o 


GARDEN 


1^ 


YARD 


VISITORS 

2        ROOM 

GARI 

KITCHEN 

"platform 

Servants' 

jRooms 

]W.C 

PLOUR 

o 

MILLSO 


o 


^ 


< 


HAWK 
ROOM 


The  machine  was  turned  by  a  horse  blindfolded,  and 
padded  here  and  there,  so  that,  in  going  round  the 
confined  space  in  which  it  moved,  the  animal  might 
not  rub  or  bruise  itself  against  the  walls.  The  traces 
were  made  of  a  bent  branch  of  a  tree.  The  oil 
sold,  they  said,  for  32  tengas,  which  they  called 
12^.  lOrt^.  a  batman  (say  ^.d.  per  lb.),  and  is  used  aliki 


FROM  KHIVA    TO   TASHAUZ. 


325 

Oil-cake 


for  burning,  cooking,  and  in  making  pilau 
sells  from  3^-.  to  4^-.  per  cwt. 

Adjoining  the  oil-mill  was  a  chamber  with  two  flour- 
mills,  the  larger,  in  the  centre,  to  be  turned  by  horse 
or  ass,  or,  if  they  were  in  use,  the  smaller  could  be 
turned  by  a  woman.*  In  Russian  Turkistan,  wheat 
grinding    is  usually    effected  by   water   power  on  the 


A   CENTRAL   ASIAN    CORN-MILL. 


banks  of  the  aryks,  though  there  are  16  windmills  set 
up  at  Kazalinsk  by  Russians.  Our  host's  mill,  kept 
going  all  day  with  a  horse,  would  grind  6  cwt. 

From    the    flour-mill    we   went    to  a    stable,   which 

*  Thus  illustrating  admirably  the  /xvXos  oi/t/cds-,  or  ass  mill-stone,  "to 
be  hanged  about  a  man's  neck  "  (Matt,  xviii.  6  ;  Mark  ix.  42),  and  the 
hand  mill-stone  at  which  two  wofnen  shall  be  grinding  (Matt.  xxiv.  41). 
Grinding  the  mill  was  a  menial  occupation  for  a  man,  and  was  reserved 
for  slaves  and  captives.  Hence  the  Philistines  made  blind  Samson  do 
it  (Judges  xvi.  21).  One  of  Jeremiah's  lamentations  (v.  13)  was,  "  They 
took  the  young  men  to  grind,"  and  Isaiah  (xlvii.  2)  bids  the  tender  and 


326  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

appeared  to  run  along  the  whole  side  of  the  havli,  and 
then  to  another  building,  wherein  were  only  a  few 
horses,  donkeys,  cows,  and  a  camel  ;  but  there  was 
said  to  be  accommodation  in  the  two  stables,  or  sheds, 
for  a  hundred  cattle.  More  novel  than  these  last 
buildings,  however,  was  a  room  on  the  right  at  our 
entrance,  where  our  host  kept  some  half-dozen  hawks. 
Hunting  by  means  of  the  falcon,  goshawk,  and 
common  eagle,  is  the  favourite  sport  of  the  natives.* 
Within  the  walls  of  the  fortress  at  Manak  was  an 
excellent  garden,  with  rose-bushes,  peach  and  other 
fruit  trees,  and  standard  vines.  These,  in  the  absence 
of  leaves,  and  not  looking  at  them  closely,  led  me 
to  remark  to  Sevier,  ''  Here  at  last  are  filbert-trees," 
of  which,  however,  we  saw  none  in  Central  Asia. 
They  told  me  they  make  of  grapes  an  intoxicating 
drink  called  zaip,  but  that  it  keeps  only  six  months. 
Walking  round  the  garden,  I  looked  carefully  at  the 
walls.  At  a  height  of  3  feet  from  the  ground  these 
measured    3    feet    8  inches  in   thickness,   and    in    the 

delicate  daughter  of  Babylon  return  to  her  work  :  "  Take  the  mill- 
stones and  grind  meal."  I  found  the  custom  obtaining  in  1879  as  far 
east  as  the  Ussuri,  where  turning  the  hand-mill  in  a  Cossack's  housf 
was  the  recognized  work  of  the  wife. 

*  The  birds  of  prey  themselves  are  caught  simply  by  stretching  a 
net  on  short  stakes  and  tying  small  birds  underneath.     The  hawk,  01^ 
swooping  down,  entangles  its  talons  in  the  net,  whereupon  the  huntei 
brings  him  into  his  tent,  feeds  him  with  his  own  hands  on  meat  for  j 
twelvemonth,  and  then  takes  him  out  to  catch  other  birds.     Whilsi 
engaged  in  the  chase  the  trained  bird  rests  on  the  left  arm  of  th« 
master,  its  eyes  being  covered  with  a  leathern  hood.     The  game  is 
started  with  a  drum,  fastened  to  the  master's  saddle-bow,  the  bird 
hood  is  snatched  off,  and  the  hawk  darts  after  the  quarry.     When  this  \i 
caught,  the  hunter  comes  up  and  releases  it,  but  gives  the  captor  onl 
the  head  and  brains.     Should  the  bird  fail  in  overtaking  the  game,  ii 
is  enticed  back  to  the  arm  of  the  falconer  with  meat,  which  he  alwayi 
carries  with  him  for  such  an  emergency.     The  hawk  I  saw  in  the  housi 
of  the  Divan-beggi,  at  Khiva,  was  being  trained  by  means  of  pieces  01 
cotton-wool  thrown  on  the  ground. 


FROM  KHIVA    TO  TASHAUZ.  327 

circular  towers,  or  bastions,  at  the  corners,  were  little 
chambers,  into  which  I  should  imagine  it  would  be 
easier  to  dig  than  penetrate  through  the  other  parts  of 
the  fortress.*  We  have  not,  however,  as  yet  entered 
the  owner's  residence,  which  was  a  house  with  rooms 
on  either  side  of  a  passage,  and,  adjoining,  two  rooms 
for  servants.  On  either  side  of  the  passage,  at  the 
entrance,  was  a  raised  dais  or  platform,  like  that  at 
the  gateway,  only  larger,  and  where  I  suppose  in  hot 
weather  much  time  would  be  spent.  Further  in,  on 
the  left,  was  the  door  of  the  master's  room,  and 
opposite,  the  door  of  the  kitchen,  whilst  beyond  the 
kitchen  was  a  room  reserved  for  strangers,  called  the 
"guest  chamber."  Here  we  were  treated  to  a  meal, 
and  the  rich  bek  told  us  that  his  fortress  cost  ^120 
to  build.  He  invited  us  to  stay  for  a  night ;  but  this 
I  declined  for  lack  of  time,  and  at  half-past  1 1  started 
again. 

Within  about  a  mile  of  Manak  are  the  ruins  of  the 
fortress  Uiangen,  and  two  miles  further  is  Ambar, — a 
mere  row  of  empty  stalls,  where,  as  we  passed  through, 
they  told  us  a  bazaar  is  held.  Other  places  on  the 
road,  beyond  Manak,  are  Kannai,  Govozali,  Beurak, 
and  Kiatly.  Beyond  this  is  Tashauz,  where  we 
arrived  at  half-past  three,  having  accomplished  since 
the  morning  23  miles. 

*  The  walls  were  simply  of  rammed  mud,  such  as  "thieves  would 
dig  through  {hiopv(T(Tov(Ti)  and  steal"  (Matt.  vi.  19).  Ezekiel  (viii.  8) 
was  directed  to  '*  Dig  now  in  the  wall,"  and  Job  (xxiv.  16),  referring 
to  the  lawless  and  murderer,  says,  "  In  the  dark  they  dig  through 
houses,  which  they  have  marked  for  themselves  in  the  day  time,"  a 
practice  no  doubt  common  enough  in  the  wild  country  through  which  we 
were  passing. 


CHAPTER    LXV. 

FROM  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA    URGENJ. 

Stay  in  the  Khan's  palace. — Former  condition  of  Russian  slaves  in 
Khiva. — The  town  of  Tashauz. — View  from  the  palace  roof. — The 
Khivan  climate. — Arrival  at  Iliali. — Shakhavat  aryk  to  Zmukshir. 
— The  town  of  Iliali. — A  starting-place  for  the  Caspian. — Khivan 
irrigation. —  )ur  luggage  attacked  by  robbers. — Stay  at  Ak-tepe. — 
The  Turkoman  region. — Accident  near  Kunia  Urgenj. 

ON  arriving  at  Tashauz  we  found  that  the  miser- 
able quarters  we  had  left  in  the  morning  were 
to  be  exchanged  for  nothing  less  than  a  palace  at 
night.  The  said  palace,  built  in  part  of  brick,  was 
erected  by  Allah- Kuli  Khan,  near  a  pond  surrounded 
with  stones,  whence  the  name  of  the  town  "  Tash- 
hauz,"  or  "  stone  pond."  Let  me  hasten  to  say,  how- 
ever, that  we  were  not  cradled  in  luxury,  for  the 
palace,  though  repaired  for  a  stopping-place  by  the 
present  Khan  when  he  happens  to  be  passing,  is  in 
a  ruinous  condition.  When  Allah-Kuli  erected  the 
fortress,  he  peopled  it  and  the  surrounding  neighbour- 
hood with  Persian  prisoners  of  war  from  Khorasan, 
and  with  Tajiks  from  Khiva. 

It  is  rather  remarkable  that  ''  the  first  who  brought 
the  news  that  Russian  slaves*  were  to  be  found  in  the 

*  I  quote  from  an  article  on  "  Russian  Slaves  in  the  Khanates  of 
Central  Asia,"  in  the  Oriental  Chtirch  Magazine  for  September,  1880. 


FROM  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA    URGENJ.  329 

Central  Asian  khanates  was  the  EngHsh  merchant 
Anthony  Jenkinson,  who,  in  1558,  ransomed  from 
Khiva  25  captives."  Florio  Beneveni  reported  to 
Peter  the  Great  that  there  were  2,000  Russian  slaves 
throughout  the  khanate.  When,  however,  Nadir 
Shah  conquered  Khiva,  he  gracefully  released  the 
Russians  detained  there,  and  gave  them  horses  and 
money  to  go  home.  Later  on,  Russian  deserters  and 
criminals,  who  feared  slavery  less  than  Siberia,  fled  to 
the  Khivans,  and  the  Kirghese  kidnapped  others.* 

The  Russian  Government  made  many  attempts  to 
get  the  slaves  released,  the  most  successful  being  the 
otherwise  abortive  expedition  of  Perovsky.  The  fear 
this  inspired,  combined  with  Shakespear's  diplomacy, 
enabled  another  Englishman  to  bring  away  the  largest 
and  last  numerous  batch  of  slaves  that  ever  returned 
to  Russia.  When  Kaufmann's  army  was  approaching 
Khiva  in  1873,  the  Khan  released  21  captives;  but 
when  the  Russians  entered  the  khanate  they  repaid 
the  gracious  act  of  Nadir  Shah,  and  released  15,000 
Persians,  or,  as  MacGahan  says,   27,000,   and  Reclus 

*  The  price  of  a  Russian  male  slave  was  twice  that  of  a  Persian,  but 
in  the  case  of  women  slaves  Persians  were  preferred.  Many  of  the 
deserter  slaves  held  posts  in  the  Khan's  army,  and  had  a  tolerably  easy 
time  of  it;  but  in  18 16,  on  the  advice  of  a  fanatical  Khoja,  the  Khan 
determined  not  to  feed  the  "  Kafirs  "  so  well,  and  gave  them  monthly 
40  lbs.  of  wheat  mixed  with  earth.  Also  they  were  poorly  clad., 
especially  the  agricultural  slaves.  "One  day,"  says  Sinowjew,  "the 
Khan's  old  wife  came  into  the  garden.  I  said  to  her,  '  You  must 
be  ashamed  to  look  at  us,  gracious  lady  :  we  are  almost  the  same  as 
naked  ;  why  does  not  the  Khan  give  us  some  clothes  ? '  What  was 
her  answer!  'Why  should  I  be  ashamed?  Is  it  not  all  the  same 
whether  I  look  at  you  or  at  a  dog,  which  also  runs  about  unclad?'  " 
Of  course,  there  were  also  instances  of  cruelty.  Jegor  Schtich,  sus- 
pected of  exchanging  letters  with  his  family  in  Orenburg,  was  forced 
to  dig  his  own  grave,  and  was  then  buried  in  it — some  say  dead,  but 
others,  alive  !  For  a  third  attempt  to  escape,  the  wretched  slave  was 
left  alive  for  some  days  skewered  on  a  stake  stuck  in  the  ground. 


330  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

37,000.  Some  of  them  were  sent  home,  but  those 
who  chose  might  stay  ;  and  many  of  the  well-culti- 
vated lands  we  had  passed  in  approaching  Tashauz 
were  farmed  by  Persians,  their  greater  development 
in  civilization  being  manifest  not  only  in  their  farms, 
but  in  their  houses. 

The  town  of  Tashauz  has  three  gates :  the  west, 
south,  and  palace  gate.  We  were  lodged  near  the 
last,  and  the  platform  at  the  entrance,  for  a  guard,  or 
for  judicial  purposes  or  public  business,  was  very 
ample.  We  went  out  before  dinner  to  see  the  town. 
It  has  300  shops  and  workshops,  and  one  caravansary, 
admirably  suited  to  persons  in  search  of  "cheap 
lodgings,"  the  rent  for  a  room  and  shop  being  '^d.  a 
day,  or  2od.  per  month.  This  w^as  much  cheaper  than 
at  Aulie-Ata,  where,  for  a  place  to  sleep  and  accom- 
modation for  horses,  was  charged  2j<^.  per  diem.  We 
inquired  the  price  of  black  Turkoman  sheepskin  hats, 
seen  elevated  on  poles  above  the  roof  of  a  house,  and 
were  told  ^s.  each.  I  had  already  provided  myself 
with  a  white  one  and  a  sheepskin  coat  in  Khiva, 
thinking  I  should  find  them  useful  when  crossing  the 
desert  and  spending  the  night  in  the  open.  Tashauz 
has  in  all  400  houses,  6  mosques,  and  a  medresse,  and 
besides  the  Iranian  population  there  are  also  some 
Uzbegs  of  the  Antort-Yuruk  tribe.  The  chief  trade 
of  the  place  is  in  corn.* 

*  As  time  hung  upon  our  hands,  before  dark  I  mounted  the  roof  of 
the  palace,  and  was  reminded  again  of  the  early  days  of  the  Israelites 
in  Canaan,  where  the  cities  they  took  were  "  fenced  with  high  walls, 
gates,  and  bars;  besides  unwalled  towns  a  great  many  "  (the  two  cate- 
gories into  which  Central  Asian  towns  may  still  be  divided).  ( Deut.  iii.  5. ) 
The  spies  accustomed  to  nomad  life  might  well  have  said  of  towns 
such  as  Tashauz  that  they  were  "great  and  walled  up  to  heaven" 
(Deut.  i.  28;  Num.  xiii.  28);  and  as  I  looked  down  from  the  palace  I 
could  see  on  numbers  of  the  roofs,  if  not  actually  stalks  of  flax  (which 


FROM  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA    URGENJ.  331 

We  left  Tashauz  next  morning  at  8,  the  road  turning 
off  to  the  west,  and  leading  still,  for  the  most  part, 
through  cultivated  land,  steppe  appearing  only  here 
and  there.  We  began  to  see  also  ruined  houses.  The 
weather  had  been  gradually  improving  since  we  left 
Khiva,  where  the  night  before  our  departure  the 
temperature  fell  to  ^i^,  the  maximum  of  the  previous 
day  being  60°.  At  Tashauz  during  the  night  the 
minimum  was  35°,  and  I  had  not  ridden  far  from  the 
town  before  I  found  my  Ulster  too  hot,  and,  after 
throwing  it  off,  was  hardly  cool  enough.  This  was 
pleasanter  than  the  blustering  weather  we  had  at 
Petro-Alexandrovsk,  where  they  had  told  us  that 
sometimes,  on  the  approach  of  winter,  there  comes  a 
day  or  two  of  cold  as  a  warning,  but  passes  away,  to  be 
succeeded  by  a  sort  of  "  St.  Luke's  little  summer."* 

Our  road  from  Tashauz  was  enlivened  by  numbers 

there  may  have  been),  yet  oi  jicgara,  under  which  Rahab,  as  easily  as 
possible,  could  have  hidden  the  spies.  There  was  not  a  single  building 
outside  the  walls  of  Tashauz,  and  "  the  time  of  shutting  of  the  gate 
when  it  was  dark  "  would  still  be  a  favourable  time  for  escape,  since  all 
the  population  would  be  shut  within.  One  had  only,  therefore,  to 
picture  Rahab's  house  adjoining  the  wall,  and  letting  her  visitors  down, 
to  escape  over  the  Oxus  some  20  miles  distant,  to  recall  to  the  mind 
some  of  the  acts  in  a  drama  with  which  we  had  been  familiar  from 
childhood  (Josh.  ii.  5,  6,  15).  Again,  the  height  of  such  a  roof  as  that 
of  the  palace  at  Tashauz,  commanding  a  view  of  all  the  other  buildings 
and  gardens  near,  whilst  recalling  David's  walking  upon  the  roof  of 
the  king's  house  in  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.  xi,  2),  might  also  throw  light 
upon  the  Bokhariot  objection  to  my  mounting  the  minaret,  and  their 
declaring  that  it  was  contrary  to  Muhammadan  law  to  mount  a  high 
place  overlooking  other  houses. 

*  Concerning  the  climate  of  Khiva  generally,  I  may  add  that  winter 
begins  in  November,  as  we  have  seen,  and  lasts  till  February.  At  this 
season  the  thermometer  sinks  to  20°,  and  the  Oxus  freezes  from  6  to  12 
inches.  At  the  end  of  March  the  pomegranate,  vine,  and  fig  sprout, 
and  early  in  April  are  green.  Wheat  harvest  begins  early  in  July, 
when  apricots  and  plums  ripen.  The  leaves  were  nearly  all  fallen  as 
we  passed  through  the  khanate.     The  west  wind  rages  in  spring,  and 


Zi2  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

of  Uzbeg  and  Turkoman  farmers,  going  to  market  to 
the  town  we  had  left.  We  passed  on  the  road  another 
place  called  Manak,  and  Uigur,  the  ruins  of  Goklen- 
kala,  or  fort,  and  Karamazy,  and  after  riding  19  miles 
we  came  at  noon  to  Iliali. 

Iliali,  or,  as  the  Turkomans  call  it,  "  Dschilandy," 
or  ''  Djingildi,"  is  so  named  from  Hazret  Biliali,  who 
is  buried  here.  The  Turkomans  claim  him  as  their 
patron  saint,  and  ascribe  to  his  protection  sundry  of 
their  victories  over  the  Khivans.  When  the  Russians, 
in  1873,  bivouacked  near  his  tomb,  the  Turkomans 
took  it  for  a  good  omen,  and  attacked  the  invaders.- 

The  town  of  Iliali  numbers  about  160  houses,  and  a 
bazaar  with  100  shops  and  workshops.     The  population 

the  north  wind  also  at  times  blows  strongly.  Then  dews  are  abundant, 
but  generally  there  is  little  rain,  snow,  or  hail,  and  violent  storms  are 
rare. 

*  During  the  occupation  of  Khiva  by  the  Russians  it  was  thought 
desirable  that  the  Turkomans,  especially  the  Yomuds,  should  be  chas- 
tised, and  made  to  pay  a  part  of  the  war  indemnity.  Accordingly, 
Kaufmann  demanded  of  them  300,000  roubles  in  money,  to  be  paid 
within  15  days.  If  not  forthcoming,  their  settlements  and  families 
were  to  be  given  over  to  destruction,  and  their  property  to  confiscation. 
Immediately  General  Golovtcheff  was  directed  to  encamp  near  Gazavat, 
and  the  commander  of  the  Orenburg  detachment  to  watch  the  Turko- 
mans from  Kyzyl  Takir,  north  of  Iliali.  MacGahan  accompanied  the 
forces  of  Golovtcheff  to  Iliali,  and  has  described  the  carnage.  The 
houses  and  stacks  of  corn  were  given  over  to  the  flames,  and  the  inha- 
bitants to  the  sword,  after  which  the  Russians  camped  near  the  ruined 
four-acre  fortress  of  Zmukshir.  MacGahan  describes  the  fortress  walls 
30  feet  high,  as  built  of  burnt  bricks,  probably  Persian,  of  a  pale-red 
colour,  6  inches  square,  and  an  inch  and  a  half  thick.  It  was  at  this 
part  of  the  khanate  that  the  column  from  Tchikishlar,  under  Marcozoff, 
expected  to  arrive.  They  failed,  however,  in  crossing  the  desert  to  get 
beyond  Ortakuya,  but  the  remainder  of  the  way  was  investigated  by 
Skobeleff,  before  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops.  He  left  Zmukshir  on 
August  i6th,  went  as  far  as  Nefes-guli,  6  miles  from  Ortakuya,  and 
returned  on  August  23rd  to  Khiva.  It  was  from  Zmukshir  also  that 
Messrs.  Capus  and  Bonvalot  hired  their  camels,  and  started  to  cross  to 
the  Caspian  some  months  before  me. 


FROM  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA    URGENJ.  ^^y^ 

is  of  Sarts,  Turkomans,  and  Persians.  Mondays  and 
Thursdays  are  the  market  days,  and  Turkoman  corn 
is  the  principal  merchandise.  The  fortress,  built  in  its 
present  form  about  1865,  is  in  a  tumble-down  condition, 
similar  to  that  of  many  of  the  houses  in  the  town.  It 
would  have  been  possible  for  us,  and  perhaps  pleasanter 
in  summer,  to  have  reached  our  present  stage  from  the 
Amu  by  boat  on  the  canals.  The  Russian  doctor  and 
engineer,  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  did  so,  taking  two 
days  from  Khanki  to  Iliali.* 

We  were  taken  to  a  large  garden  in  Iliali,  having  in 
the  middle  a  good-sized  building,  kept,  I  believe,  as  a 
summer  house  for  the  Khan  when  there  ;  the  same,  I 
suppose,  as  that  of  which  Basiner  gives  an  illustration 
in  the  excellent  account  of  his  journey  in  1842,  though 
doubtless  in  40  years  the  chateau  has  very  much 
deteriorated.  The  house  could  hardly  be  said  to  be 
''  furnished  "  in  1882,  for  we  had  no  table,  and  our  food 
was  served  so  primitively  that  soup  was  brought  with- 
out spoons,  and  meat  without  knives  and  forks.  To 
make  matters  worse,  our  own  table  requisites  and 
baggage  had  not  arrived.  There  was  nothing  to  be 
done,  therefore,  but  to  drink  the  soup  from  the  basins. 
This  I  remedied  for  the  future  by  providing  myself 
with  a  folding-knife,  etc.,  in  my  saddle-bag. 

Our  slow-going  conductors  would  have  been  well 
content  that  we  should  have  stopped  here  for  the  night, 
but  they  had   rather  alarmed   me   by  saying  that  the 

*  They  describe  their  way  as  lying  through  gardens,  meadows,  and 
trees,  past  New  Urgenj  to  Tashauz,  beyond  which  to  Iliali  they  found 
the  country  less  fertile.  At  Iliali  they  hired  camels,  took  suppHes  of 
flour,  potatoes,  and  corn  for  the  horses,  and  started  for  Krasnovodsk. 
Thus  the  two  Frenchmen  and  two  Russians  crossed  the  desert  from 
points  further  south  than  ours.  The  two  colporteurs  I  have  alluded  to 
from  the  Caucasus,  crossing  from  Askabad  to  visit  Khiva  a  year  after 
me,  struck  the  khanate  at  Iliali,  and  returned  thence  to  Krasnovodsk. 


334  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

next  day's  journey  to  Kunia  Urgenj  was  to  be  a  long 
one,  and  as  the  day  was  only  half  gone  I  thought  it 
much  better  to  push  on  as  far  as  possible  before  night, 
and  so  shorten  the  morrow's  ride.  They  said  some- 
thing about  the  danger  of  travelling  in  these  parts 
after  dark  ;  but  I  gave  less  heed  hereto  than  was  wise, 
thinking  perhaps  it  might  be  merely  an  excuse.  After 
waiting,  therefore,  till  our  luggage  arbas  arrived,  w^e  set 
out  again  at  2.30,  leaving  them  to  follow. 

For  about  10  miles  we  passed  through  gardens  ; 
cultivation  then  diminished,  and  the  road  traversed 
clayey,  and  in  some  parts  slightly  saline,  soil,  trees 
being  seen  only  here  and  there  on  the  banks  of  the 
large  aryks.  We  crossed  several  canals,  one  being  the 
Murat  Bai,  and  another  the  Kasym.  This  was  im- 
pressed upon  my  mind,  because  we  passed  one  spot 
where  the  aryk  had  overflowed."^  We  had  been 
turned  from  our  path  by  another  such  flooded  place, 
like  a  large  lake,  on  the  day  we  left  Khiva,  and  had  to 
go  round  its  edge.  I  suppose,  in  the  preceding  season, 
water  had  been  unusually  abundant,  for  we  saw  houses 
flooded,  in  some  cases  to  their  destruction,  in  others 
not,  though  the  inhabitants  were  driven  out.f 

As  darkness  came  on  we   were  still  on   the  steppe, 

*  The  irrigation  of  Khiva  is  accomplished  by  water-courses,  varying 
from  20  to  150  feet  wide,  from  10  to  20  feet  deep,  with  a  current  of 
about  2  miles  an  hour.  They  are  of  two  kinds — the  larger,  called  Arna, 
which  are  natural  streams  from  the  Oxus,  widened  and  deepened ;  and 
Yaj),  which  are  canals  dug,  up  to  a  dozen  feet  wide,  from  the  A?'na, 
and  wherewith  the  whole  of  the  land  under  cultivation  is  covered  as 
with  a  net. 

t  Bearing  in  mind  that  this  laborious  watering  by  irrigation  was  what 
the  Israelites  had  been  accustomed  to  in  Egypt,  where  they  seldom 
saw  rain,  they  would  the  more  highly  appreciate  the  description  set 
before  them  of  the  promised  "  good  land,  a  land  of  brooks  of  water, 
of  fountains  and  depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills,"  "not  as 
the  land  .  .  .  where  thou  sowedst  thy  seed,  and  wateredst  it  with  thy 


FROM  TASHAUZ   TO  KUNIA    UNGENJ.  335 

and  met  several  wild-looking  men,  which  brought  to 
my  mind  what  they  had  said  about  danger  from  robbers. 
Our  little  all  was  entrusted  to  three  men,  of  whom  I 
knew  nothing,  who,  supposing  they  were  honest,  pos- 
sessed no  arms,  and,  perhaps,  not  courage  enough  to 
defend  themselves  if  they  had.  These  fears  were  not  by 
any  means  allayed  by  the  savage  aspect  of  the  country 
we  were  now  traversing,  and  I  was  very  glad  for  our 
personal  safety  when,  at  5.45,  we  arrived  at  a  group 
of  houses,  where  we  determined  to  lodge  for  the 
night — not  that  we  were  expected,  however,  so  that 
lodgings  had  to  be  sought.  When  found,  we  were 
conducted  into  a  Turkoman's  shop,  where  a  bright  fire 
was  burning,  the  smoke  getting  out  as  best  it  could 
through  the  roof,  which  had  consisted  of  leafy  boughs 
now  blackened,  whilst  a  confined  space  was  cleared  for 
our  accommodation,  amid  sacks  of  rice,  tobacco,  fire- 
wood, oil,  melons,  green  tea,  and  butcher's  meat. 

They  called  the  place  Ak-tepe,  and  wished  to  make 
out  that  we  had  covered  since  the  morning  72  versts, 
or  nearly  50  miles.  There  is  no  such  place  on  the 
map  as  Ak-tepe,  but  according  to  them  we  had  ridden 

foot  "  [that  is,  by  removing  the  irrigation  ridges  and  allowing  the  water 
to  flow  in],  "  but  the  land  .  .  .  drinketh  water  of  the  rain  of  heaven  " 
(Deut.  viii.  7  ;  xi.  10,  11). 

So,  again,  the  floods  we  passed,  and  ruined  houses  suggested,  of 
course,  another  Scripture  resemblance.  Judged  by  the  wise  and  foolish 
men  in  the  parable  (Luke  xi.  48),  who  built  their  houses  upon  the  rock 
and  earth  respectively,  the  Khivans,  with  few  exceptions,  would  belong  to 
the  latter  class,  for  not  only  did  they  seem  to  me  in  most  cases  to  build 
their  houses  without  foundation  on  the  surface,  but  in  a  great  many 
cases  they  placed  first  a  layer  of  brushwood,  and  on  that  they  built 
the  wall.  I  asked  the  meaning  of  this  feature  in  Khivan  building, 
and,  so  far  as  I  could  understand,  it  seemed  to  be  as  a  remedy  against 
dampness  rising  in  the  walls  in  the  time  of  rain.  I  perceived,  too,  in 
Bokhara  waterspouts  projecting  from  the  roofs  to  throw  the  water  clear 
''f  the  bottom  of  the  walls. 


336         .  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

32  versts  from  Iliali,  which  would  give  for  the  day  60 
versts,  or  40  miles,  and  this  was  the  most  we  had  yet 
accomplished  between  morning  and  evening.  For 
some  hours  I  was  anything  but  comfortable  on  account 
of  the  non-arrival  of  our  luggage,  especially  as  I  had 
therein  my  papers,  note-books,  diary,  journal,  etc., 
which  I  was  anxious  above  all  things  to  save,  so  that 
I  half  determined  to  carry  them  in  future  in  my 
saddle-bags.  When  at  length  they  did  arrive,  I  found 
that  my  fears  had  not  been  groundless,  for,  as  the 
carriers  came  along,  two  men,  also  in  arbas,  met  them 
and  asked,  "  Where  do  you  come  from  ?" 

''  From  Khiva,"  they  replied  ;    "  whence  come  you  ? " 

''Don't  know,"  said  the  spokesman.  ''Where  are 
you  going  ?  " 

"  To  Kunia  Urgenj,"  said  my  man.      "  And  you  ? " 

"  I  don't  know,"  again  he  said,  and  let  off  his  gun. 

"  What  are  you  shooting  at?"  said  my  men.  "If 
you  want  these  goods,  you  had  better  come  and  take 
them,  only  remember — they  belong  to  the  Russians  !  " 

Whereupon  the  fellows  made  off,  and  my  men 
caught  us  up  at  Ak-tepe.  I  was  delighted  to  hear  of 
their  safe  arrival,  and  so  thankful  that  I  promised  the 
men  an  extra  present,  and  determined  not  to  be  so 
venturesome  again  in  pushing  on  at  night. 

Noth withstanding  our  curious  lodging,  we  were  tcK 
tired  not  to  sleep  well,  and  next  morning,  at  8.45,  w< 
resumed  our  journey,  through  a  country  wilder  thar 
anything  we  had  yet  seen  in  Khiva,  where  even  th< 
green  of  the  tamarisk  was  of  a  bluish  hue,  looking  ax 
if  covered  with  dust.* 

*  This  part  of  the  khanate  is  occupied  by  Yomud  Turkomans 
Imralis,  Kara-dashli,  Goklans,  and  other  semi-nomad  tribes.  We  haa 
passed  Kish-dagli,  3  miles  after  leaving  Iliali,  and  after  crossing  the 


FROAi  TASHAUZ  TO  KUNIA    URGENJ.  2>1>1 

The  general  characteristic  of  this  part  of  our 
journey  was  flatness  and  desolation,  with  scarce  any 
water,  though  there  were  visible  numerous  traces  of 
old  aryks,  showing  that  the  land  had  formerly  been 
cultivated.  The  Yomuds,  we  afterwards  learnt,  were 
the  inhabitants,  amongst  whom,  a  quarter  of  a  century 
ago,  agriculture  is  said  to  have  been  highly  developed. 
They  used  to  get  their  water  from  a  branch  of  the 
Oxus  called  the  Darialyk,  which  then  reached  as  far  as 
Sary  Kamish  ;  but  during  the  war  of  the  Turkomans 
with  Muhammad  Amin  Khan,  the  Khivans  turned  the 
course  of  the  Darialyk  by  means  of  dykes,  in  order  to 
starve  out  their  turbulent  Turkoman  neighbours,  who 
were  thus  compelled  to  move  their  settlement,  and 
went  off  to  the  Balkan  mountains,  near  the  Caspian. 

Thus  we  rode  along  till  we  saw,  a  long  way  ahead, 
two  lofty  minarets  and  other  ruins,  which  I  knew  to  be 
those  of  Kunia  (or  Old)  Urgenj,  so  called  to  distinguish 
it    from    Yengi    (or    New)    Urgenj,    near    Khiva.       I 

canal  Yarmysh  came  to  Kizil  Takir,  which  appears  to  be  the  name  of 
a  district,  and  also  of  a  spot  on  the  road,  9  miles  from  Kish-dagli, 
called  Kish  Kizil  Takir,  about  2  miles  south  of  a  garden  of  the  Divan- 
beggi.  Near  this  place  a  bazaar  is  held  on  Mondays  and  Thursdays, 
where  come  Turkomans,  some  singly  to  buy,  but  sometimes  in  bands 
to  rob  the  tradesmen  on  the  way.  Four  miles  beyond  the  garden  is 
Goklan-kala,  the  district  being  inhabited  by  Turkomans  of  the  Goklan 
tribe.  Just  beyond  is  Kish-alaly.  We  had  passed  several  ruined 
houses  and  fortresses,  or  rather  fortified  camps.  Such  a  fortification 
consists  merely  of  a  walled  quadrangle,  without  barbettes,  and  only 
tents  within,  which,  I  suppose,  Khiva  was  like  when  the  ambassador 
told  Peter  the  Great  that  it  consisted  only  of  tents  and  huts.  Leaving 
Goklan-kala,  Kish-alaly  is  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  on  the  opposide 
side  Kish-tash-kent.  Ten  miles  beyond  the  garden  of  the  Divan-beggi 
is  the  canal  Shakh-murat.  Among  the  many  ruins  I  may  mention,  in 
the  order  we  came  to  them  beyond  Shakh-murat,  Kochev-Mashrik, 
Allah- Kul-Yakyl  to  the  left,  and,  opposite,  Kurgan  Yakyl ;  again,  on 
the  right,  a  fortified  place,  Kara  Amym,  and  beyond,  Khanavat.  There 
were  also  beyond  Shamrut  two  gardens,  Bogan  and  Tajik. 
VOL.  IL  22 


33^  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

hurried  on  to  get  a  good  look  at  them,  and  was  much 
deceived  by  finding  them  so  distant.  I  reached  them, 
however,  about  noon,  and  will  describe  what  I  saw  in 
the  next  chapter.  Meanwhile,  after  spending  two 
hours  at  the  ruins,  we  rode  forward  a  mile  or  two 
towards  the  present  town  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  the  high 
road  passing  through  a  cemetery,  where  Diotrephes, 
having  got  behind,  and  being  as  anxious  as  usual  to 
go  ahead,  I  was  letting  him  trot,  when  he  so  com- 
pletely misbehaved  himself  as  to  stumble  and  roll.  I 
was  pitched  several  feet  over  his  head,  my  boots 
coming  easily  out  of  the  stirrups,  so  that  providentially 
I  was  not  in  the  least  hurt,  and,  before  I  quite  knew 
what  had  happened,  was  on  my  legs  helping  up 
Diotrephes,  who  looked  ashamed  of  himself.  This 
was  something,  but  Yakoob  imported  a  new  sentiment 
into  the  affair  by  observing  that  it  was  a  judgment  on 
us  for  galloping  on  holy  ground,  where  the  saints  were 
sleeping.  He  added  that  some  Muhammadans  would 
have  got  off  their  horses  and  walked,  but  Yakoob 
himself  did  not  set  the  example. 

On  reaching  Kunia  Urgenj  we  were  supposed  to  b( 
about  80  miles  from  the  capital,   according  to   Kuhn, 
but  our  conductors  had  told  us  107  miles,  and  this,  b] 
measurement  of  my  map,  is  about  right.     A  very  well 
mounted    messenger   can    do    it  in   48   hours,    but  ai 
ordinary    estaphette    takes    3    days.      We    had    beei 
occupied  three  days  and  a  half.     Our  arbas  came  soon' 
after  our  arrival,  so  that  we  had  simply   to  wait  for 
Tailly  to  bring  the  camels,  and  pack  our  goods  for  the 
journey  across  the  desert. 


CHAPTER   LXVI. 

KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA. 

Antiquity  of  Kunia  Urgenj. — Sieges  of  Jinghis  Khan  and  Tamerlane. — 
Visits  of  Jenkinson  and  other  Europeans. — Inspection  of  the  ruins. 
— The  minarets  and  mausoleums. — Tombs  of  Tuirebek  Khanim 
and  Sheikh  Nejm-ed-din-Kubera. — Khivan  communications  and 
routes  from  Kunia  Urgenj. — The  town  of  Hojeili. — Settlement, 
near,  of  a  Mennonite  colony. — The  town  of  Kungrad. — Our  lodg- 
ings at  Kunia  Urgenj. — Central  Asian  "home  life."— Marriage 
and  divorce. — Life  in  a  royal  harem. — Seclusion  of  women. — Need 
of  female  missionaries  in  Central  Asia. 

THE  ruins  of  Kunia  Urgenj  are  of  unknown 
antiquity,  upon  which  Hght  is  thrown,  however, 
by  the  annals  of  Arab  and  Chinese  history.  The 
Chinese  knew  Kharezm  as  early  as  the  seventh  cen- 
tury of  our  era,  and  record  several  embassies  there 
from  the  court  of  the  "  Celestials."  One  Chinese 
author  records  the  capture  of  Urgenj  by  the  Mongols, 
and  another  adds,  "  The  city  is  still  more  rich  and 
populous  than  Bokhara."  The  Arabs  called  it  Al 
jorjania,  and  also  Gurganj. 

Tradition  ascribes  its  erection,  says  Kuhn,  to  Iz- 
ud-din,  son  of  Jelal-ud-din,  or  Djelaletdin,  a  successor 
of  the  Abbasides,  whose  descendants  are  said  to  have 
ruled  the  country  for  450  years  before  the  reign  of 
Sultan     Muhammad,     who     reigned     there    when    it 


340  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

was  destroyed  by  the  Mongols.  Mokadessi  de- 
scribes it  as  growing  in  size,  and  having  four  gates. 
Near  the  pilgrims'  gate  was  a  palace  built  by  Al 
Mamun.  Ali,  son  of  Mamun,  also  built  himself  a 
palace  there,  in  the  square  where  the  sheep-market 
was  held.  In  1220  the  three  sons  of  Jinghiz  be- 
sieged Urgenj,  summoning  the  people  to  surrender. 
This  being  without  avail,  the  siege  proceeded,  and, 
for  lack  of  stones,  says  Howorth,  the  Mongol  catapults 
were  served  with  balls  made  out  of  the  neighbouring 
mulberry  trees,  soaked  in  water.  They  fired  its 
buildings  with  naphtha,  and,  after  7  days  of  desperate 
street  fighting,  captured  it.  The  artisans  and  skilled 
workmen,  100,000  in  number,  were  sent  into  Mongolia. 
The  young  women  and  children  were  set  aside  as 
slaves,  24  to  each  soldier,  and  the  rest  of  the  inhabi 
tants  massacred.  The  Mongols  then  destroyed  tb 
city,  and  submerged  it  by  opening  the  Oxus  dykes. 

This  was  a  fatal  blow  to  Urgenj,  but  the  tow 
began  to  flourish  again  under  the  Golden  Horde, 
to  which  it  was  subject,  and  became  populous  and 
the  site  of  a  bishopric.  Ibn  Batuta,  in  his  famous 
journey,  found  it  prosperous  in  1333,  but  in  1379 
Tamerlane  took  it  from  Yusuf  Sofi,  caused  it  to 
be  razed  in  1388,  and  the  ground  sown  with  barley.* 
Three  years  later  Timur  ordered  the  city  to  be  rebuilt, 
and  the  country  peopled  afresh  ;  but  Urgenj  seems 
never  to  have  gained  its  former  prosperity,  though  we 

*  Micah  (iii.  12)  prophesied,  "  Zion  shall  be  plowed  like  a  field." 
Such  immense  armies  as  those  of  Tamerlane  and  Jinghiz  required  not 
a   little   com  for  horses,  to  say  nothing  of  the  needs  of  the  soldiers. 
The  most  recent  instance  I  have  read  of  a  modern  army  growing  cor 
for  its  own  nourishment  is  that  of  the  Chinese,  who,  on  their  way 
Kashgaria  a  few  years  since,  to  put  down  the  insurrection,  stopped  the 
march  in  Mongolia  thus  to  sow  and  reap. 


I- 

J 


KUNIA    URGENT  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       341 

read   that,  in    1393,  Antonio   Pietro  de   Malliano  suc- 
ceeded Boniface  there  as  bishop. 

Jenkinson  was  there  in  1558.  He  estimated  its 
mud  walls  as  four  miles  round,  but  the  buildings  with- 
in were  ruined,  save  one  long  covered  street  or  bazaar. 
He  remarks  that  it  had  been  won  and  lost  four 
times  within  seven  years  by  civil  wars.  Hence  there 
were  few  merchants,  and  they  so  poor  that  he  could 
not  sell  above  four  kerseys.  A  few  years  later  the 
farther  decay  of  the  city  was  ensured  by  the  Oxus, 
which,  Abul  Ghazi  tells  us,  took  a  fresh  course  in  1575. 
In  1603  Urgenj  was  plundered  by  the  Cossacks, 
as  I  have  mentioned.  The  story  that  Khassan  gave 
me  as  we  approached  the  ruins  was  that  the  place  was 
destroyed  by  the  Kalmuks,  he  said  about  650  years 
ago,  which  would  agree  approximately  with  the  con- 
quest of  Jinghiz  Khan,  but  Howorth  mentions  another 
inroad  of  the  Kalmuks  under  Ayuka,  at  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  century. 

Abbott  and  Shakespear  visited  the  place  in  1840, 
and  Basiner  two  years  later,  Vambery  also  in  1863,  and 
then,  ten  years  later,  came  the  Russian  invasion,  when 
their  surveyors  overran  the  country,  examined  the 
former  beds  of  the  Oxus,  and  the  site  of  this  ancient 
town. 

General  von  Grotenhielm  gave  me  some  photographs, 
that  have  done  good  service  for  illustrations  of  the  re- 
maining buildings,  but  he  informed  me  that  the  ruins 
awaited  the  exploration  of  competent  antiquarians. 

In  approaching  the  place  we  could  easily  trace  for  a 
short  distance  the  old  bed  of  the  river,  on  whose  banks 
the  city  stood.  Sandhills  abound,  however,  and  the 
ancient  walls  are  little  more  than  heaps.  We  had  to 
make  a  long  circuit  before  we  could  enter  the  city  area 


342  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

SO  as  to  examine  first  the  westerly  of  two  tall  minarets 
that  are  left  standing.  The  base  of  the  tower — or 
rather  the  bottom,  for  it  has  neither  base  nor  capital — 
was  surrounded  with  broken  bricks  in  such  quantities 
that  it  was  not  easy  to  take  the  circumference.  I 
found  it  to  be  80  feet,  but  the  whole  affair  looked  so 
tottering  as  to  be  dangerous  even  to  approach  it. 
Here  and  there  on  its  surface  are  coloured  bricks,  but 
hardly  sufficient  to  indicate  its  former  appearance. 
The  eastern  minaret,  Kuhn  says,  is  higher  than  the 
other.  I  do  not  know  how  he  reckons  ;  but  I  measured 
the  circumference  on  a  level  with  my  head  as  1 14  feet. 
The  diameter  on  the  photograph  measures  ^^  of  an 
inch  and  the  height  2  J  inches,  which  would  therefore 
make  its  altitude  about  186  feet.  This  minaret  is  in  a 
better  state  of  preservation  than  the  former.  Both 
are  built  of  baked  bricks,  and  the  latter  is  encircled 
by  four  convex  rings  with  inscriptions,  the  letters  of 
which  are  said  by  Glukhovsky  to  be  the  height  of 
a  man.  Kuhn  calls  them  Kufic,  which  they  doubtless 
are,  though  Mr.  Sevier  did  not  readily  allow  them  to 
be  letters  at  all,  until  we  purchased  some  old  coin^ 
found  on  the  spot,  when  the  similarity  of  the  inscrip 
tions  was  manifest.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  in 
scriptions  can  now  be  deciphered,  because  some  of  the 
bricks  that  form  them  are  fallen  out.  Besides  the 
inscriptions,  the  zones  of  coloured  bricks  are  sometimes 
in  mosaic  in  the  form  of  a  scroll,  and  at  others  in  broken 
X  patterns.  Howorth,  quoting  Glukhovsky,  who  visited 
the  place  in  1873,  speaks  of  a  stately  tower  or  minaret 
in  the  shape  of  a  truncated  cone,  and  adds  that  inside 
is  a  winding  staircase  reaching  to  the  roof,  which  is 
quite  probable ;  but,  so  far  as  I  remember,  I  could 
find  no  entrance,  or  I  certainly  should  have  been  eager 


I 


KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA,       343 

to  ascend.  In  my  photograph  of  the  eastern  minaret, 
the  summit  of  the  western  one  only  just  rises  above 
the  horizon,  though  Kuhn  gives  their  distance  apart 
as  only  from  700  to  1,000  feet. 

What  end  these  lofty   towers    served   is  not  clear, 
unless  to  call  the  Muhammadans  to  prayer.      It  seems 


THE    MINARETS   OF    KUNIA   UKGENJ. 


probable  that  the  two  belonged  to  different  medresses, 
though  no  traces  of  the  medresses  remain. 

Besides  these  minarets  there  are  still  standing  5 
ruined  buildings,  once  ornamented.  Some  distance 
west  of  the  first  minaret  we  examined  are  some  walls 
and  an  arch,  or  pishtak,  resembling  that  over  the 
kibleh  in  a  mosque  ;  and  this  may  possibly  be  the  ruins 
of  one  of  the  old  palaces  of  the  Kharezmian  Shahs. 


344  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

They  show  signs  of  having  been  ornamented  with 
coloured  tiles.  A  few  minutes'  walk  south-west  of  the 
west  minaret  is  the  mausoleum  of  Sheikh  Shurif.  It 
has  a  conical  roof  of  coloured  tiles,  supported,  as 
Abbott  says,  upon  a  prism  of  24  sides,  not  inelegantly 
moulded  into  columns  and  recesses.  The  only  mosaic 
ornamentation  left  consists  of  pale-blue  bricks,  with 
raised  letters  round  the  cornice  of  the  edifice  outside. 
The  door  is  a  pointed  arch,  and  inside  I  measured  the 
area  as  37  feet  square.  The  interior  of  the  dome 
was  so  fashioned  as  to  remind  me  of  a  scallop  shell. 
The  grave  of  the  Sheikh  they  showed  us  outside. 

Near  at  hand  we  entered  a  tomb  my  notes  call 
''  Kara  Lau  Baba,  built  of  burnt  brick  plastered  over." 
This  I  suppose  to  be  the  same  as  Kuhn  calls  the 
mausoleum  of  Imam  Fakhr-ud-din,  where  again  the  blue 
tiles  are  found  only  on  the  cupola.  Nearer  the  east 
minaret  we  entered  the  tomb  of  Kara  Kapa  Baba, 
where  was  an  old  man  acting  apparently  the  part  of 
showman,  and  expecting  a  gratuity.  In  Central  Asia 
the  showmen  at  the  resorts  of  pilgrims  are,  I  believe, 
supposed  to  be  descendants  of  the  departed  saints,  but 
as  to  what  are  the  ''  notes  "  of  Muhammadan  sanctity  I 
am  not  clearly  informed.* 

But  the  most  noteworthy  of  the  mausoleums  we 
visited    last,   namely,    that    of    Tiurebek    or   Torebeg 

*  I  think  it  was  Colonel  Maieff  who,  at  a  saint's  tomb  in  Bokhara, 
asked  a  native,  "For  what  was  this  saint  famous?"  The  native 
replied  he  did  not  know,  nor  probably  did  anyone  else.  "Perhaps," 
he  said,  "he  was  a  rich  man,  had  a  great  many  sheep,  talked  very 
little,  and  often  gave  a  feast."  Again,  in  answer  to  my  question  in 
Bokhara,  "  What  does  '  Khoja  '  mean,  as  affixed  or  prefixed  to  a  man's 
name  ?  "  I  was  told  it  meant  a  saint,  and  that  he  would  be  considered 
such  who  had  made  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  so  that  there  could  be  no 
lack  of  sanctity  in  the  case  of  one  of  my  Bokhariot  acquaintances,  who 
had  twice  made  the  journey. 


KUNIA    URGEA^y  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       345 

Khanim,  a  daughter  of  Djanibek  Khan.  It  is  circular 
in  form,  with  a  conical  roof,  having  a  wide  fagade 
with  pointed  arch.  I  presume  it  is  this  that  Howorth, 
quoting  Glukhovski,  calls  ''  a  fine  ruined  palace,  con- 
taining a  large  round  hall  with  a  vaulted  cupola.  The 
hall  has  a  double  row  of  windows,  one  about  6   feet 


THE   TOMB   OK   TIUREBEK    KHANIM. 


from  the  ground,  consisting  of  four,  and  the  other, 
near  the  dome,  of  16  windows;  and  its  walls  are 
decorated  with  reliefs  and  arabesques,  on  which  are 
remains  of  gilding  and  colour."  We  found  the  build- 
ing of  burnt  brick  on  the  exterior,  with  kashi,  or 
coloured  tiles,   inserted  here  and  there,   sometimes  in 


346  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  form  of  a  scroll,  at  others  in  that  of  a  medallion, 
or,  again,  triangular.  The  walls  of  the  interior  have 
once  been  lined  with  kashi,  but  now  only  the  roof 
retains  them,  and  they  told  me  that  men  sometimes 
shoot  at  the  tiles  out  of  reach  to  make  them  fall,  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  off  the  gold,  which  did  not 
sound  to  me  very  reasonable.  One  thing  noteworthy 
in  this  ruin  was  that  the  enamelled  tiles  of  the 
cupola  were  scarcely  damaged  at  all,  as  had  been  the 
case  in  other  buildings  we  had  seen  in  Central  Asia, 
and  this  made  it  possible,  whilst  confining  the  attention 
to  the  interior  of  the  roof,  to  imagine  the  appearance 
of  the  finest  buildings  of  Samarkand  in  their  palmy 
days.  I  would  have  given  something  for  the  pocket 
camera  promised  to  have  been  sent  for  me  to  Tashkend, 
if  only  to  have  secured  the  pattern  of  the  kashi  cupola, 
which  was  certainly  the  most  complete  thing  of  the 
kind  we  had  seen.  All  the  figured  enamelled  bricks 
were  out  of  reach,  or  I  am  afraid  my  antiquarian 
instincts  would  hardly  have  kept  my  fingers  from 
picking  and  stealing.  As  it  w^as,  I  mounted  the  roof 
to  see  if  anything  could  be  had,  but  the  bricks,  which 
were  rather  smaller  than  English,  were  not  only  built 
with  great  regularity,  but  were  of  marvellous  strength. 
I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  I  never  examined  bricks 
so  hard  ;  and  when  I  remarked  this  to  Khassan,  he 
told  me,  what  will  probably  tax  the  reader's  belief  as  it 
did  mine,  that  they  were  made,  or  rather  wetted,  with 
camels'  milk.  I  took  them  to  be  of  Persian  manufac- 
ture, and  they  more  nearly  resembled  stone  than 
anything  I  have  ever  seen.  On  the  following  day, 
upon  offering  a  reward  for  a  few  specimens  of  the 
coloured  bricks,  some  were  brought,  and  though  these 
are  not  of  the  same  clay  or,  at  least,  of  the  same  burning, 


KUNIA    URGEN J  AAW  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       347 

as  those  used  for  building  simply,  I  was  glad  to  obtain 
a  few  specimens  of  kashi  from  this  ancient  town  of 
*'  the  Chorasmian  waste."  Treasure  has  been  found 
from  time  to  time  among  the  ruins  of  Kunia  Urgenj, 
and  Shakespear  adds  ''  mummies,"  but  I  have  not 
seen  this  statement  corroborated. 

Urgenj,  under  the  name  of  Kharezm,  occurs  as  a 
mint  place  on  the  coins  of  the  Golden  Horde  from  the 
reign  of  Mangu  Timur,  in  1296,  to  that  of  Pulad  at 
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.  I  was  fortunate 
enough  to  secure  some  coins  from  this  place,  certain 
of  which  Mr.  Poole,  of  the  British  Museum,  tells  me 
he  has  not  seen  before. 

Between  the  ruins  of  Kunia  Urgenj  and  the  modern 
town,  on  an  aryk,  stands  the  mausoleum  of  Sheikh 
Nedjm-ud-din  Kubera,  built  in  the  form  of  a  double 
mosque.  This  was  erected,  according  to  all  accounts, 
by  order  of  Tamerlane,  and  if  so,  it  seems  likely  that, 
in  ordering  the  rebuilding  of  the  city,  he  may  have 
directed  the  two  minarets  also  to  be  built.  The  tomb 
now  spoken  of  was  restored  by  Muhammad  Emir 
Khan.  On  the  facade  are  two  lines  of  inscription — 
white  letters  on  blue  ground.  Inside  is  a  pair  of 
tombstones,  on  which  are  two  parallelograms  in  mosaic, 
signifying  that  two  persons  are  buried  beneath — the 
Sheikh,  and  Yalgaiz  Khan,  son  of  the  Sheikh  Jinghiz 
Khan.  In  a  line  with  the  slab,  at  the  corner,  is  a  small 
tiled  pillar  about  2  feet  high  (reminding  one  of  the  like 
at  Tamerlane's  own  tomb),  said  to  denote  where  the 
head  lies.  A  wooden  paling  encloses  the  slab,  and  at 
its  head  are  several  flags.  On  the  north  side  of  this 
building,  and  touching  it,  is  a  mausoleum,  wherein  lies 
buried  Piriyar,  the  father  of  Palvan  Ata,  the  patron 
saint  of  Khiva.      Besides  these  ruins  there  are  numerous 


34^  RUSSIA  A'    CENTRAL   ASIA. 

kurgan,  and  heaps  all  round  Urgenj.  Very  few  are 
known  even  by  name,  though  one  remarkable  thing  is 
that  amongst  the  debris  are  found  broken  pieces  of 
glass,  which  Kuhn  says  is  not  the  case  among  the  ruins 
in  the  adjoining  Syr-daria  province,  though  found  at 
Samarkand,  and  suggested  as  being  of  Chinese  origin. 

I  have  thus  entered  somewhat  fully  into  particulars 
concerning  this  former  capital  of  Kharezm  and  its 
ruins,  because  they  are  the  most  ancient  erections  I 
saw  in  the  khanate.  Not,  however,  that  Urgenj  was 
always,  or  first,  the  capital,  for  Arabian  geographers 
(quoted  in  Howorth)  give  this  honour  to  Kat,  the  ruins 
of  which  have  been  found  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Oxus, 
near  Sheikh  Abbas  Vali.  Pinkerton  gives  a  list  of  the 
provinces,  and  Vambery  of  the  towns  and  villages,  of 
Khiva.  Of  inhabited  points  there  remain  two  others 
which  should  be  noticed  in  connection  with  the  north 
of  the  Oasis — I  mean  Khojeili  and  Kungrad. 

Both  were  at  one  time  connected  with  Kunia  Urgenj 
by  the  Oxus,  and  communication  was  by  water,  but 
the  journey   has   now  to   be   made  by  road.*      From 

*  Speaking  generally  of  the  land  communications  of  Khiva,  one  may 
say  there  are  no  properly-made  roads,  but  since  my  baggage  was 
carted  from  the  Amu  to  the  capital,  and  thence  to  Kunia,  the  reader 
will  have  perceived  that  the  tracks  are  practicable  for  wheels.  They 
are  caravan  routes  ;  sometimes  exceedingly  wide,  but  often  very  narrow 
between  the  canals,  and  generally  rough.  Six  of  these  caravan  routes 
branch  out  from  Khiva  :  one  on  the  south  to  Merv  ;  another  eastward 
to  Hazarasp ;  a  third  to  Hanki  ;  a  fourth  to  the  north-east  to  New 
Urgenj,  and  thence  all  along  the  west  bank  of  the  Amu,  touching  Gurlen, 
Manghit,  Kipchak,  and  on  to  Khojeili  and  Kungrad  ;  another  leaves 
Khiva  on  the  north-west  to  Gazavat,  and  through  the  district  watered 
by  the  aryk  of  that  name,  to  Zmukshir,  whence  it  bifurcates  on  the 
left  across  the  desert,  and  on  the  right  to  Iliali.  The  main  road  appears 
to  be  that  we  followed,  which  throws  off  a  branch  beyond  Kosh  Kupyryk, 
through  the  modern  Kiat  to  Gurlen  ;  the  other  continues  to  Tashauz. 
Other  routes  leave  it  on  the  right  at  Iliali,  and  beyond,  but  they  lead  to 
no  large  towns. 


KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       349 

Kunia  Urgenj  radiate  three  routes  :  one  to  the  left 
towards  Sary  Kamysh  ;  another  to  the  north-west 
mounting  the  elevation  of  the  Ust-Urt  at  Spusk-kum- 
djul,  or  Aibugir  ;  and  a  third  route,  20  miles  long,  to 
Khojeili.  This  town  was  visited  by  Vambery,  who 
approached  it  on  the  third  day,  floating  from  Khiva  on 
the  Oxus ;  and  Kuhn  accompanied  the  Orenburg 
division  there  by  land  from  Kunia  Urgenj.  The  latter 
describes  Khojeili  as  about  a  mile  from  the  Amu,  in 
the  midst  of  gardens  and  not  fortified,  situated  on 
both  banks  of  an  aryk  spanned  by  a  bridge.  In  the 
suburbs  are  many  havlzs,  or  farm-houses.  The  town 
has  a  large  bazaar,  300  shops  and  workshops,  5  mosques, 
with  as  many  schools,  one  medresse,  and  one  caravan- 
sary. The  proximity  of  Khojeili  to  the  Amu  facili- 
tated the  establishment  of  a  fish  trade,  and,  in  1873, 
there  were  a  great  many  boat-loads  of  dried  fish, 
principally  carp  and  silurus,  taken  from  the  neighbour- 
hood to  Bokhara,  costing  at  Khojeili  from  6^".  to  9^-., 
and  selling  at  Bokhara  from  12^-.  to  i8j.  per  cwt., 
and  thence  it  is  carried  inland  as  far  as  Shahr-i-sabz. 
"Khojeili"  means  the  "home  of  Khojas,"  who  abound 
in  the  town.^ 

A  propos  of  Khojeili  being  a  town  of  saints,  I  may 
observe  that  land  in  this  region  has  been  given  for  a 
settlement  to  a  body  of  Christians,  called  Mennonites, 
the  party  of  whom  we  heard  first  at  Aulie  Ata,  and  in 
whose  track  we  afterwards  followed,  t     They  travelled 

Tradition  says,  according  to  Kuhn,  that  600  years  ago  a  Khoja, 
named  Aliamin,  settled  here,  and  in  course  of  time  some  Kirghese  and 
Uzbegs  joined  him  ;  but  Howorth  would  suggest  for  the  place  a  greater 
antiquity,  and  imagines  that  it  may  be  the  site  of  the  ancient  Tuk,  so 
often  mentioned  by  Abul  Ghazi,  who  says  that  from  the  ramparts  of  Tuk 
Urgenj  could  be  seen  in  the  distance  to  the  south-west, 
t  Their  story,  given  me  in  part  by  one  of  themselves,  is  that  they  are 


350  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

in  huge  European  wagons,  and  when  they  came  to  the 
sands  between  Karakul  and  the  Amu,  we  heard  that 
they  took  the  wagons  to  pieces,  and  carried  them  on 
camels.  Sixty-four  families  floated  down  the  Oxus  in 
8  boats,  which  cost  for  hire  ^i68.  Some  went  by 
land,  and  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  we  heard  of  them  in 
that  their  demand  for  potatoes  had  sent  up  the  price 
from  2s.  6d.  to  ^s.  9^.  per  cwt. 

I  presume  these  Mennonites  must  be  settled  within 
a  few  miles  of  Khojeili,  whence  the  traveller  proceeds 
to   Kungrad,  about    70    miles   by   road,   or  two  days' 

so  called  from  Simon  Menno,  a  Dutch  sectary,  who  died  in  1561.  In 
consequence  of  persecution  some  of  the  first  Mennonites  left  Holland 
for  Prussia  ;  and  when  the  Prussians  would  have  forced  on  them  military 
service,  they  emigrated  to  the  South  of  Russia,  and  settled  in  the 
Crimea  and  on  the  Volga.  In  1874,  when  conscription  became  universal 
in  Russia,  about  a  thousand  families  emigrated  at  once  to  the  United 
States  and  Canada,  but  the  greater  part  remained  in  Russia,  having 
been  allowed  to  serve  their  time,  not  as  soldiers  in  the  army,  but  as 
foresters  on  the  crown  lands.  Some  Mennonites  of  the  Volga,  however, 
about  150  families,  having  been  carried  away  by  one  of  their  number, 
who  declared  he  had  received  orders  from  on  high  to  proceed  eastward, 
went  to  Turkistan  in  1880  and  1881,  and  tarried  near  Tashkend  till  their 
destination  should  be  fixed.  Schism  then  divided  the  camp,  some 
settling  at  Aulie  Ata,  but  others  going  on  to  the  Bokhara  border,  and 
finally  arranging  with  the  Khan  of  Khiva,  who  consented  to  receive 
them.  They  are  now  settled  in  a  small  colony  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Oxus  opposite  Fort  Nukus  ;  the  schismatical  party  of  Aulie  Ata,  I 
believe,  having  joined  them. 

Their  strong  point,  or  prejudice,  seemed  to  be  that  they  would  not 
accept  employment  of  any  kind,  not  even  that  of  a  watchman,  much 
less  that  of  a  soldier,  under  any  government  they  consider  not  Christian 
When  I  asked  what  government  of  those  existing  they  considered 
Christian,  my  informant  said  "None!"  so  that  they  are  tolerably 
sweeping  in  their  condemnations.  At  the  same  time,  I  observe,  they 
accepted  the  services  of  the  soldiers  sent  to  protect  them  by  the  Emir 
of  Bokhara,  whose  escort  went  before  them  preparing  the  roads,  building^ 
bridges,  and  helping  them  with  food.  My  informant  tells  me  that  the 
have  no  ordained  priests,  but  choose  ministers  among  themselves, 
baptize  adults  only,  and  communicate  weekly.  Some  letters  respect 
ing  these  Mennonites  appeared  in  The  Friend  for  1882  and  1883. 


KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.        351 

journey  by  boat,  when  the  water  is  sufficiently  high. 
In  the  course  of  the  river  journey  one  meets  with  a 
rapid,  or  waterfall,  in  the  Oxus,  about  3  feet  high. 
Kungrad  was  visited,  in  1858,  by  the  Russian  mission, 
with  E.  Klihlewein.  So  late  as  the  beginning  of  the 
present  century  Kungrad  was  independent  of  Khiva, 
and  governed  by  its  own  Uzbeg  princes.  The  old 
inhabitants  say  that  200  years  ago  the  chief  of  the 
Kungrads  (of  the  Karakalpak  tribe),  Mahomet  Nazar 
Beij,  having  subdued  the  neighbouring  tribes,  built  a 
fortress  20  miles  below  the  present  town,  on  the 
shores  of  the  Aral,  as  it  then  was,  and  that  his 
successor  moved  the  fortress  to  its  present  site,  where 
it  was  taken  and  destroyed  by  Mahomet  Rahim  Kuli 
Khan.*  The  most  remarkable  building  in  the  town 
is  the  old  palace  of  the  Khan.  The  commercial  im- 
portance of  the  place  diminished  greatly  subsequently  to 
the  year  i860,  after  a  rebellion  of  the  inhabitants  against 
Khiva.  It  was  inhabited  by  Karakalpaks,  Kirghese, 
and  a  few  Uzbegs,  many  of  whom,  however,  have 
moved  away  to  Chimbai,  in  the  delta,  since  the  Oxus 
has  changed  its  course  further  east.  There  are  also 
some  nomads,  called  Arals,  or  islanders,  from  their 
living  in  the  neighbouring  isles. 

From  Kungrad  there  are  three  possible  routes  to 
make  the  ascent  of  the  cliffs  of  the  Ust  Urt,  the 
northernmost  continuing  along  the  elevated  west  shore 
of  the  Sea  of  Aral.  There  is  also  a  route  due  south- 
wards other  than  that  beside  the  river,  which  strikes 
at  right  angles,  the  route  I  have  named  coming  off  the 
Ust  Urt  at  Aibugir.  By  this  latter  Basiner  travelled 
past  the  ruins  of  Kyzyl  Kala,  and  so  to  the  modern 
Kunia  Urgenj,  where  we  arrived,  as  I  have  said,  on 
*  See  Howorth's  "  Mongols,"  ii.,  1056. 


352  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

November  5th.  We  found  it  a  poor  place — a  walled 
town  of  350  houses,  a  small  bazaar,  with  a  hundred 
shops,  6  mosques,  and  2  schools.  The  town  has 
been  populated  less  than  20  years — that  is,  since  the 
canal  was  cut  that  waters  it — and  thus,  perhaps,  ac- 
counting in  part  for  the  inhabitants  knowing  next  to 
nothing  of  the  adjacent  ruins. 

At  Kunia  Urgenj  we  were  quartered  on  the  Bek, 
a  son  of  the  old  Consul  who  had  conducted  us  to 
Khiva.  Our  room  was  large  and  carpeted,  with  a  fire 
in  the  centre  on  a  hearth,  surrounded  by  a  curb,  but 
there  were  no  chairs  or  tables.  The  Bek  showed  us 
his  own  room,  in  which  were  felts,  a  niche  to  hold  a 
book  or  two,  a  kurjun,  or  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  a 
double-barrelled  gun.  There  was  likewise  a  room  set 
apart  for  the  Batchman,  or  Assistant  Bek,  who  had 
accompanied  us.  In  the  stables  the  best  Turkoman 
horse  was  valued  at  ^20,  and  two  camels  at  ^10  and 
£6  each  respectively.  The  house  was  built  through- 
out of  mud,  at  a  cost,  he  said,  of  about  ^50,  but  that 
houses  so  built  lasted  only  about  60  years.  I  suppose 
that  the  Bek  had  some  wives,  but  not  a  shadow  did 
we  see  of  one  of  them  ;  and  this  reminds  me  that, 
though  I  have  introduced  the  reader  to  several 
native  houses,  I  have  hardly  given  a  picture  of  what 
English  people  love  so  much,  and  call  ''  home  life." 
The  simplest  way  to  supply  this  omission  is  to  say  of 
the  natives,  ''  They  have  none."  I  must,  however, 
endeavour  briefly  to  sketch  what  they  possess  ap- 
proaching  it. 

To  begin,  then,  with  the  marriage  union.  When  a 
boy  reaches  the  age  of  15,  his  parents  seek  a  wife  for 
him,  who,  it  is  preferred,  shall  be  at  least  5  years  older, 
so  that  she  may  know  how  to  manage  his  household. 


« 


KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       },^t, 

Betrothal  among  the  Sarts  Is  usually  effected  by  means 
of  a  professional  match-maker,  who  is  consulted  as  to 
the  amount  and  nature  of  the  kalim  to  be  paid,  which, 
besides  money,  consists  of  various  articles  of  toilette 
— robes,  beshmets,  or  under-tunlcs,  ear  and  finger- 
rings,  kerchiefs,  likewise  sheep,  rice,  fruit,  etc.,  for 
the  wedding  feast.  In  Bokhara  they  said  the  kalim 
varied  according  to  law  from  lo  to  i,ooo  tengas — that 
is,  from  ^s.  to  £2^.  Of  the  dowry  the  bride  is  to 
bring  with  her,  the  husband  knows  nothing  till  after 
the  marriage,  though  her  father,  who,  according  to  the 
prevailing  custom,  keeps  the  greater  part  of  the  kalim, 
Is  bound  to  give  his  daughter  a  tent,  and  an  entire  set 
of  domestic  necessaries. 

When  the  kalim  has  been  paid  and  the  wedding- 
day  fixed,  a  money  security  is  set  aside  by  the  bride- 
groom in  case  he  should  wish  to  divorce  his  wife. 
After  this  point  Is  settled  the  mullah  reads  a  prayer, 
and  asks  the  bride  through  a  closed  door  whether  she 
consents  to  marry  such  an  one,  and,  on  her  assenting, 
the  bridegroom  is  asked  the  same.  The  mullah  then 
hands  the  bridegroom  a  cup  of  water,  from  which  he 
drinks,  and  returns  It  to  the  mullah,  who  sends  it  in  to 
the  bride.  The  remaining  water  is  then  drunk  by 
those  present.  At  the  close  of  the  ceremony,  the 
women  conduct  the  bridegroom  to  the  sleeping  apart- 
ment, and  also  the  bride,  in  whose  society  the  man 
spends  his  first  three  days  of  married  life  in  the  home 
of  her  parents. 

The  bride  Is  then  brought  to  her  husband's  house, 
and  begins  her  every-day  and  stay-at-home  existence. 
She  goes  Into  the  streets  only  on  business,  and  seldom 
makes  social  visits,  except  now  and  then  for  a  funeral 
or  a  wedding.     When  her  husband  goes   out   she  is 

VOL.  II.  23 


354  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

commonly  locked  up,  and  this  want  of  confidence 
between  man  and  wife,  and  the  prevalence  of  polygamy, 
constantly  leads  to  unfaithfulness.  An  educated 
Muhammadan  magistrate  told  me  that  he  thought 
polygamy  had  a  most  pernicious  tendency.  The 
principal  crimes  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  among  the 
Kirghese  and  Sarts  are  murders  in  which  a  woman  is 
concerned.  One  of  the  patients  we  saw  in  the  Sart 
hospital  there  had  been  fighting  about  a  woman. 
Captain  MirbadalefT  had  declined  his  case,  and  sent  it 
to  the  kasi,  or  native  judge.  Poisoning  would  appear 
not  to  be  common,  though  a  case  had  recently  occurred 
at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  committed  with  the  intention 
of  administering  an  opiate  for  a  nefarious  purpose. 
Formerly  the  punishment  on  a  wife  for  unfaithfulness 
was  very  severe,  but  it  is  less  so  now,  and  the  mullah 
at  once  gives  a  divorce. 

About  Petro-Alexandrovsk  not  many  men  have  two 
wives,  yet  if  a  man  be  rich,  and  his  first  wife  chosen 
by  his  parents  be  old  (forty  is  considered  very  old), 
then  he  not  unfrequently  chooses  for  himself,  with  the 
aid  of  a  match-maker,  a  second  and  very  young  wife,. 
who  by  law,  however,  in  Khiva,  must  not  be  less  thar 
II  (in  Bokhara  they  told  me  12)  years  of  age.  On 
the  other  hand,  though  a  girl  has  usually  to  accept  the 
first  husband  her  father  finds  for  her,  yet,  if  not  content 
she  may  get  a  divorce,  and  then  choose  her  next 
husband;  but,  in  ordinary  cases,  if  either  husband  o 
wife  objects,  divorce  is  stayed. 

But  these  are  the  darker  parts  of  the  picture,  it  ma 
be  said.  Supposing  there  is  no  divorce,  and  things  go 
on  fairly  well,  what  can  then  be  said  for  home  life  in 
Central  Asia?  In  Bokhara  I  was  told  men  feed  their 
wives  badly,  giving  them  tea  and  bread  in  the  morn- 


I 


KUNIA    URGENJ  AND  NORTHERN  KHIVA.       355 

ing,  and  tea  and  peas  in  the  evening,  and  on  bazaar 
days  condescend  to  eat  pilau  with  them  ! 

One  informant  represented  to  me  the  harem  of  the 
Emir  as  a  miserable  place,  where  they  get  only  5  lbs.  of 
bread  a  day,  and  pilau  twice  a  week.  Another  account, 
however,  from  a  man  who  knew  a  boy,  brother  of  one 
of  the  Emir's  wives,  said  that  each  woman  in  the 
harem  had  a  separate  house  and  maid-servant,  with  3 
meals  a  day,  of  her  own  choice,  and  the  food  was  said 
to  be  good,  because  the  boy  in  question,  being  poor, 
frequently  weni:  to  see  his  sister,  and  was  given  a 
meal.  The  Emir's  wives,  I  was  told,  might  visit,  but 
they  had  no  amusements,  unless,  perhaps,  they  played 
the  guitar,  "  but  quietly,  so  that  no  one  might  hear !  " 
I  did  not  infer,  from  the  little  I  heard  of  the  Emir's 
affairs,  that  he  cultivated  what  we  should  call  ''family 
life."  We  were  told  in  Samarkand  that  he  has  two 
unmarried  daughters,  whom  he  visits  once  a  year,  but 
otherwise  has  no  domestic  relations  with  them. 

As  I  have  said,  it  was  only  in  the  case  of  one  or 
two  who  came  to  Sevier  for  medical  advice  that  I  saw 
a  woman's  face  all  through  Bokhara  and  Khiva.  I 
thought,  however,  that  I  should  like  to  do  so,  if  only 
in  the  case  of  my  hostesses  at  Khiva,  whereupon  I 
cautiously  approached  the  subject  to  Matmurad.  I 
had  already  invited  him  to  England,  and  to  this  I 
added,  "  When  you  come,  the  first  person  to  whom 
you  will  be  introduced,  after  the  gentleman,  will  be  the 
lady  of  the  house.  Moreover,  I  expected,  when  I 
returned,  that  the  English  ladies  would  be  curious  to 
know  what  the  Khivan  ladies  are  like.  Further,  I 
thought  it  possible  that  his  Khivan  ladies  might  like  to 
know  what  the  English  ladies  were  like.  Would  he  not, 
then,  do  me  the  pleasure  to  introduce  me  to  his  wife  ?" 


356  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

How  much  these  sentences  altered  their  shape  in 
passing  through  interpreters  I  know  not,  but  he  repHed 
that  it  would  give  him  pleasure  to  do  so,  only  that  it 
was  contrary  to  their  customs.  Moreover,  that  they 
were  always  locked  in  their  chambers,  and  would  be  so 
frightened  at  the  appearance  of  a  stranger  that  they 
would  drop  !  And  Yakoob  afterwards  informed  me 
that  Matmurad  was  offended  at  my  asking. 

This  incident  gave  me  a  text  on  the  need  of  Zenana 
work  and  women's  labour  in  the  mission  field,  such  as 
I  shall  not  quickly  forget.  Here  was  I  with  abundance 
of  prestige  at  my  back,  a  court  guest,  in  the  house  of 
a  host  who  seemed  desirous  to  please  me  in  every- 
thing. Yet  I  was  refused !  How,  then,  can  male 
missionaries,  for  educational  purposes,  gain  access  to 
Oriental  women  ?  and  if  they  are  not  reached,  how  shall 
the  children  be  influenced  to  advantage  ? 

But  what  I  could  not  do,  or  any  other  Christian 
f7ian,  a  Christian  woman  can  do.  And  here  is  a  field 
of  usefulness  for  English  ladies,  which,  thank  God, 
some  have  nobly  commenced,  but  of  which  others  do 
not  yet  realize  the  importance.  England  would  appear 
to  have  a  contingent  of  about  700  women  missionaries, 
representing  British  societies  in  the  mission  field 
abroad.  Has  Russia,  then,  no  daughters  to  send  to  so 
noble  a  work  in  Central  Asia  ?  Can  girls  be  found, 
recklessly  to  throw  away  their  lives  in  shooting  police 
officers  and  promoting  the  horrible  "  cause  "of  Nihilism, 
whilst  none  offer  themselves  to  minister  in  womanly 
sympathy  to  their  Muhammadan  sisters — dark,  ignorant, 
and  uneducated  ?  Let  us  hope  that,  as  the  Russian 
Church  has  formed  a  Missionary  Society  for  the 
employment  of  men,  so  another  may  be  formed  foi 
lady  missionaries  to  the  native  women  ! 


CHAPTER   LXVII. 

KUNIA     URGE N J  AND   PREPARATIONS 
FOR  THE  DESERT. 

Delay  in  getting  camels. — A  Kirghese  court  of  justice  and  witnesses. — 
Kirghese  interpreter. — A  new  servant. — Need  of  Kirghese  litera- 
ture.— Preparation  for  the  desert ;  camel  cradles  ;  cooking  utensils, 
and  provisions. — Arrival  of  camels  and  dishonesty  of  attendants. — 
Presumptive  danger  ahead. 

SOON  after  our  arrival  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  on  the 
5th  of  November,  the  postman  Tailly  put  in  his 
appearance,  but  not  with  camels.  He  had  so  easily- 
obtained  the  money  asked  on  two  previous  occasions, 
that  he  seemed  determined,  if  possible,  to  exact  higher 
terms.  To  that  end  he  had  fabricated  a  story  I  did 
not  believe,  and  the  upshot  was  that  he  left  us  about 
sunrise  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  promising  to  be 
back  in  a  few  hours  with  our  ''  ships  of  the  desert." 
But  he  did  not  come  till  night,  when  it  was  too  late 
to  start,  and  thus  we  were  compelled  by  his  machina- 
tions to  spend  three  or  four  days  at  this  our  last 
outpost  of  Khivan  civilization.  The  place,  however, 
was  not  devoid  of  interest,  and  we  had  several  pre- 
parations to  make.  We  saw,  too,  some  fresh  incidents 
of  native  life,  better,  perhaps,  than  when  in  larger 
places  and  under  more  pretentious  patronage. 

Our  host,  being    Bek,  was,   of  course,  chief  magis- 


k 


358  RUSSIAJV  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

trate  in  his  district,  and  during  our  stay  there  came 
from  a  distance  two  Kirghese  of  the  Adaef  tribe  for 
judgment.  Captain  Mirbadaleff,  at  Petro-Alexan- 
drovsk,  told  me  that  the  cases  brought  before  him 
amongst  the  Kirghese  and  Sarts  were,  for  the  most 
part,  robberies,  murders,  and  thefts.  The  Russians 
leave  the  bis  among  the  Kirghese  to  administer  justice 
after  their  own  customs.  In  the  court  of  the  Bek  of 
Kunia  Urgenj  the  mode  of  procedure  was  simple 
enough.  The  litigants  squatted  on  the  platform  near 
the  door  of  our  apartment,  told  their  tale,  and  the 
Bek  gave  judgment.  Anything  more  primitive  could 
not  well  be  ;  but  it  was  manifest  that  the  judge,  being 
bound  by  no  apparent  code,  could  so  easily  give 
unrighteous  judgment,  that  the  '*  glorious  uncertainty 
of  the  law  "  was,  with  the  Kirghese,  about  the  only 
thing  certain.* 

The  prison  was  not  far  distant  from  the  Bek's 
house.  I  found  it  ''in  the  gate," — not  a  dungeon,  how- 
ever, like  those  we  had  visited  at  Charjui  and  Khiva, 
but  a  good-sized  room,  in  what  was,  I  imagine,  the 
house  of  the  keeper  of  the  gate.     There  was  but  one 

*  The  autocratic  power  in  the  hands  of  such  a  judge,  and  the  kno\vn 
corruption  of  the  natives,  call  to  mind  "Thy  princes.  .  .  .  every  one 
loveth  gifts  and  followeth  after  rewards  :  they  judge  not  the  fatherless, 
neither  doth  the  cause  of  the  widow  come  unto  them  "  (Isa.  i.  2t^). 
We  had  seen  one  instance  wherein  a  Kirghese  widow  had  preferred  to 
come  to  a  Russian  officer  with  her  suit  rather  than  to  her  own  people. 
The  answer  she  received  was  one  of  several  incidents  that  reminded 
me  of  the  similarity  between  Russian  Central  Asia  in  the  present  day, 
?.nd  Palestine  in  New  Testament  times,  in  that  both  had  concurrently 
a  law  of  the  people,  and  a  higher  law  adminstered  by  foreigners.  Had 
this  woman  come  to  General  Kolpakovsky  she  might  have  used  the 
language  of  Paul  to  Agrippa,  "  I  think  myself  happy  because  I  shall 
answer  this  day  before  thee,  because  I  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  all 
customs  and  questions  which  are  among  us  "  (Acts  xxvi.  2,  3) ;  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  answer  she  received  was  near  akin  to  that  of 
Pilate  :  "Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to  your  law"  (John 


PREPARATIONS  FOR   THE  DESERT.  359 

prisoner,  and  he  was  quite  ready  to  receive  alms, 
though,  by  comparison  with  the  imprisoned  at  Khiva, 
he  was  in  easy  circumstances. 

We  saw  more  of  these  Adaef  or  Adai  Kirghese  in 
the  bazaar,  perched  aloft  on  their  tall  camels,  and 
looking  the  more  conspicuous  by  reason  of  enormous 
woolly  hats  they  wear,  made  in  something  of  the 
shape  of  a  baby's  hood,  the  flaps  covering  the 
shoulders,  by  no  means  elegant  in  appearance,  but  a 
great  protection  from  the  cold  wind  of  the  Steppe. 
The  Kirghese  women  also  come  riding  into  the  town 
astride  of  horses  or  oxen.  We  came  into  contact  here 
with  a  very  superior  young  Kirghese,  whom  the  Khan, 
according  to  his  promise,  had  bidden  offer  himself  as 
our  interpreter.  Meanwhile,  as  we  did  not  find  him 
on  our  arrival,  we  had  been  looking  about  for  our- 
selves ;  for  since  Yakoob  could  not  be  prevailed  upon 
to  go  further  than  Sary  Kamish,  it  became  clear  that 
we  should  have  to  do  our  own  cooking — an  art  in 
which  I  had  not  graduated.  Yakoob,  moreover,  had 
found  in  the  bazaar,  one  Rosi  Muhammad,  or  Mahmet, 
a  poor-looking  Sart,  with  no  very  definite  calling,  and 
sadly  in  want  of  cash,  who  had  once  been  in  a  party 
with  some  Russian  surveyors  between  Khiva  and  the 
Caspian.  He  could  speak  a  little  Russian,  and  said 
he    could    cook.      He    was    willing   to   go   with  us  as 

xviii.  31) ;  or  of  Gallio,  *'  If  it  be  a  question  of  the  law  you  have  among 
yourselves,  look  ye  to  it"  (Acts  xviii.  15).  What  the  officer  really 
answered  was,  however,  more  considerate.  He  said,  "  Go  first  to  your 
own  court,  and,  if  the  decision  does  not  please  you,  come  again  to 
me."  Further,  the  case  of  the  two  Adaef  Kirghese,  travelling  together 
to  present  themselves  to  the  judge,  brought  out  the  meaning  of  a 
phrase,  I  thought,  in  Matt.  v.  25  :  "  Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly, 
-whiles  thoic  art  with  him  in  the  way''  lest  haply  "the  adversary 
deliver  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge  to  the  officer,  and  thou  be 
cast  into  prison." 


360 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


servant  for  £2  los.  and  all  found,  and  to  make  himself 
generally  useful  ;  ornamental  he  could  never  be,  for 
his  eyes  were  at  cross  purposes,  he  was  sadly  pitted  J 
with  small-pox,  and  looked  many  removes  from  one^ 
of  nature's  gentlemen.  The  Russians  at  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk  had  said  we  should  be  able  to  get  on 
without  a  Turki-speaking  interpreter,  but  I  declined 
the  obvious   risk  ;  and  our  short  experience  between 


A   KIRGHESE   EQUESTRIENNE. 


Pitniak  and  the  Russian  fort,  where  we  had  left 
Yakoob  in  the  boat,  warned  me  that  there  might  be 
many  extremely  unpleasant  little  episodes  if  unable 
to  say  so  much  as  ''  Yes  "  or  "  No  "  with  our  guides 
during  a  fortnight's  journey  in  the  wilderness. 

I  was  inclined,  therefore,  to  settle  with  ''  Rosy,"  as 
we  afterwards  flatteringly  called  him,  especially  as  we 
heard  nothing  of  the  interpreter  promised  by  the  Khan. 


PREPARATIONS  FOR   THE  DESERT.  361 

Yakoob,  however,  suggested  that  we  should  keep  Rosi 
Mahmet  as  a  reserve,  and  wait  to  see  if  the  promised 
one  came,  and  what  he  was  like.  At  length,  on  the 
afternoon  before  we  started,  one  Jumagala  Mataief 
arrived  from  Nukus,  concerning  whom  Yakoob  came 
in  to  report  that  he  feared  he  was  ''  too  great  a  swell  " 
to  do  any  cooking.  Yakoob  had  also  heard  him  say 
that  he  should  not  think  of  asking  less  than  ^20  for 
accompanying  us  to  Krasnovodsk  ! 

Accordingly,  when  the  grand  man  was  introduced, 
he  appeared  in  a  cloth  tunic,  respectably  dressed 
throughout,  and  carrying  a  watch,  with  its  silver  chain 
dangling  from  his  breast  and  shoulders.  Almost 
before  we  had  ascertained  his  powers  of  interpretation, 
we  had  to  ask  the  ignoble  question  whether  he  could 
cook,  to  which  he  replied  with  the  Frenchman,  who 
was  asked  if  he  could  play  the  fiddle,  that  "he  had 
never  tried,"  but  he  was  willing  to  do  so. 

He  said  that  he  had  been  engaged  for  3  years, 
winters  excepted,  as  one  of  five  interpreters  who  accom- 
panied 10  Russian  engineers,  engaged  in  surveying 
the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus,  with  a  view  to  ascertain 
whether  water  communication  could  be  again  estab- 
lished between  the  Caspian  and  the  Amu-daria.  He 
had  evidently  profited  by  his  intercourse  with  the 
Russians,  and,  I  should  imagine,  had  proved  a  faithful 
servant,  for,  at  the  end  of  his  3  years'  service,  the 
principal  officer  had  given  him,  as  a  parting  reward, 
the  silver  watch  and  chain  he  now  displayed.  He 
appeared,  too,  to  be  highly  intelligent,  and  I  quite  took 
I  to  him  as  a  man  to  be  depended  on  ;  but  the  cooking 
difficulty  was  too  serious,  as  a  mere  question  of  health, 
to  be  treated  lightly. 

We  thought  it  better,  therefore,  to  forego  this  grand 


362  RUSSIAiY  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

interpreter,  and  be  content  with  Rosi  Mahmet,  who 
suddenly  increased  in  value  in  his  own  estimation,  and 
asked  20  per  cent,  more  than  before,  whereupon  I 
clenched  matters  by  writing  in  my  note-book,  and 
bidding  him  place  ''  his  mark  "  thereto  that  he  agreed 
to  accompany  us  as  servant  and  interpreter  to  Kras- 
novodsk  for  ^3.  We  then  gave  Jumagala  Mataief  a 
consideration  for  the  time  he  had  lost  in  coming  to  us, 
and  he  was  content  to  accept  that  and  our  thanks, 
asking,  however,  my  recommendation,  if  I  knew  of 
any  one  seeking  an  interpreter,  which  I  promised. 

What  I  saw  and  heard  from  him  reminded  me  of 
much  that  M.  von  Ghern  had  said  of  the  Kirghese  at 
Vierny  respecting  the  desirability  of  doing  more  for 
their  mental  elevation.  Kirghese  morals  are  said  to 
be  very  bad;  conjugal  fidelity  and  virginal  purity  being 
alike  unknown.  Moreover,  they  appear  to  have  at 
present  no  books  in  their  own  dialect.  The  Kirghese 
New  Testament  I  have  spoken  of  is  largely  mixed 
with  Tatar,  and  it  seems  very  desirable  that  a  few 
simple  primers  and  tracts  should  be  written  and  trans- 
lated for  them,  which,  I  was  told,  could  probably  be 
done,  if  someone  would  bear  the  expense  of  printing. 
Anything  written  expressly  for  them  would  have  to  be 
extremely  simple,  for,  of  course,  the  ideas  of  the  natives 
are  very  limited,  as  some  of  their  questions  showed, 
whenever  I  could  get  their  inquisitiveness  sufficiently 
aroused  to  ask  any.  They  inquired  how  far  Petersburg 
was  from  London,  and  whether  it  was  surrounded  by 
water,  by  steppe,  or  gardens,  which  I  answered  ;  but 
telling  them  that  the  latter  city  had  4,000,000  inhabi 
tants  seemed  to  convey  nothing  to  their  minds.  The 
batchman  asked  also  about  the  comet  that  was  just 
then  visible,  and  upon  my  explaining  the  matter,   h( 


PREPARATIONS  FOR   THE  DESERT  363 

said  they  had  always  been  taught  to  look  upon  such 
things  as  supernatural,  and  portending  coming  events. 

The  "  coming  event,"  however,  with  us  was  that  we 
were  about  to  plunge  into  the  desert,  where,  even 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  we  might 
expect  to  be  many  days  without  seeing  house  or 
inhabitant,  and  so  be  thrown  upon  our  own  resources. 
We  had  taken  from  the  newspaper  account  of  the 
Russian  doctor  and  engineer,  who  had  crossed  before 
us,  two  or  three  hints,  one  of  them  being  the  desira- 
bility of  two  cradles  wherein  to  sleep  at  night  on  the 
camel's  back.  They  had  no  such  thing  at  Kunia 
ready-made,  so  we  had  to  call  in  a  native  carpenter, 
whom  Yakoob,  without  my  desiring  it,  and  quite 
unnecessarily,  beat  down  in  his  price,  and  the  conse- 
quence was  that,  though  the  cradles  came  in  time,  they 
were  so  badly  made  that  they  threatened  not  to  hold 
together  even  to  the  first  halting-place. 

Next  we  were  informed  that,  as  the  purchase  of  a 
horse  does  not  include  his  bridle,  so  we  had  to  find 
all  things  requisite  and  necessary  for  loading  our  camels 
and  keeping  the  goods  from  the  effects  of  the  weather. 
Hence  I  thought  it  necessary  to  purchase  several  large 
pieces  of  felt  to  cover  the  baggage,  lest  it  should  get 
wet,  and  two  also  to  lay  at  the  bottom  of  our  tent. 
These  cost  435-.  Then  came  rope  in  large  quantities 
to  tie  on  the  loads,  and  we  were  specially  advised  to 
take  one  very  long  piece,  because  some  of  the  wells 
were  deep.  Our  two  predecessors  had  taken  corn  for 
their  horses,  and  we  were  enjoined  to  take  also  chopped 
clover,  at  which  Tailly  said  the  horses  would  turn  up 
their  noses,  for  that  we  should  find  plenty  of  grass  on 
the  way.  We  purchased,  notwithstanding,  two  corn 
sacks,  and  a  third  for  a  dozen  melons  and  water-melons, 


364  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

some  of  which  I  judge  must  have  weighed  20  lbs.  each, 
though  the  sackful  cost  only  2s. 

Next  came  sundry  humble  articles,  namely,  a  round, 
open  saucepan,  about  18  inches  in  diameter,  and  a 
wooden  soup  ladle  as  big  as  a  saucer,  2  nose-bags  for 
the  horses,  2  japanned  wooden  bowls  for  soup,  and  a 
china  basin,  which  last  came  to  a  dreadfully  tragic  end, 
as  will  be  described  hereafter.  In  Khiva  the  price  of 
meat  had  been  given  us  as  3^^.  per  lb.,  beef  rather  less, 
and  mutton  rather  more,  so  of  one  or  the  other  we 
took  about  20  lbs.;  of  chicken  we  added  8,  at  ^d.  each. 
Then  came  the  difficult  question  of  eggs.  They  used 
to  sell  in  Khiva  at  7  for  a  halfpenny,  but,  having 
advanced  to  6  for  a  penny,  we  took  an  economical  view 
of  matters,  and  purchased  a  limited  number  only.  By 
way  of  luxuries  we  secured  10  pheasants,  the  price  of 
which,  I  had  better  perhaps  add,  lest  I  should  be 
deemed  extravagant,  was  ^d.  each. 

These  were  our  viands,  but  I  have  yet  to  add  a  bag 
of  rice,  onions  and  carrots,  a  keg  of  cream,  about  50 
cakes  of  native  bread  taken  fresh  from  the  oven,  and 
for  dessert,  apples  and  grapes,  whilst  the  batchman 
gave  us  for  his  parting  present  a  nicely-packed  little 
box  of  large  pears.  These,  with  some  native  salt  for 
cooking  purposes,  finished  our  list  of  eatables  pur- 
chased in  Kunia  Urgenj,  and  to  this  list  must  be  added 
candles,  wooden  spoons,  and  a  teapot. 

I  was  glad  to  secure  in  Kunia  an  addition  to  my 
curiosities  for  the  British  Museum  in  the  shape  of  an 
iron  pendent,  for  a  horse-collar,  formed  of  a  flat  plate 
with  loop  and  staple  for  attachment.  It  correspond 
to  a  horse-bell,  and  flaps  against  the  wooden  collai 
with  a  ringing  sound.  More  interesting  were  som* 
coins  found    in  ruins  near    Kunia,  one    of  which  wa 


« 


PREPARATIONS  FOR   THE  DESERT.  365 

said  to  be  "a  thousand  years  old," — a  statement  I  have 
not  yet  verified.  I  purchased,  too,  at  Kunia  some  of 
the  common  native  lamps  of  Central  Asia,  which  ap- 
peared to  be  for  the  most  part  of  one  form  only. 

The  purchase  of  these  provisions  took  us  from  time 
to  time  to  the  bazaar,  and  gave  us  a  peep  at  the  poor 
and  insignificant  modern  town  of  Kunia  Urgenj.  It  is 
surrounded  by  a  wall  with  three  gates.  There  are 
about  350  houses,  a  small  bazaar  with  100  shops,  6 
mosques  and  2  schools.  This  was  rather  disappointing, 
for  we  had  been  told  that  we  could  get  all  that  was 
necessary  for  the  desert  journey  at  this  border  towm, 
so  that  we  had  deferred  some  of  our  purchases. 

To  our  disgust,  Tailly  did  not  return  all  day  on 
Tuesday,  so  that  we  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  time 
in  packing,  and  after  we  were  in  bed  he  arrived  with  a 
trumped-up  story  to  the  effect  that  on  his  way  one  of 
the  hired  camels  had  stuck  in  a  bog,  that  they  had 
great  difficulty  in  getting  it  out,  and  when  they  did,  it 
was  in  so  disreputable  a  condition  that  he  did  not  like 
to  bring  it  on,  and  had  consequently  purchased  another 
in  its  stead.  This  was  a  tissue  of  falsehoods.  At  least, 
the  story  we  afterwards  heard  from  the  camel  owner 
was  that  he  brought  5  camels,  as  agreed,  to  Kunia 
Urgenj,  but  that  Tailly  said  I  would  not  pay  for  the 
fifth,  and  consequently  he  sent  one  back.  I  knew 
nothing  of  this,  however,  until  some  days  afterwards. 

Accordingly,  on  Wednesday  morning,  I  directed  the 
camels  to  be  loaded,  and  this  was  accomplished  with 
no  little  difficulty.  They  used  the  rope  so  lavishly 
that  I  thought  we  should  exhaust  all  the  stores  in  the 
town.  There  was  no  more  to  be  had  new,  and  the 
second-hand,  according  to  Yakoob's  account,  kept 
rising  in  price.      Unsolicited  by  us.  Rosy  told  us  later 


366  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

on  that  Yakoob  out  of  this  rope  had  been  making  a 
little  harvest  for  himself  I  had  received  a  hint  at 
Samarkand  that  I  must  look  sharp  after  Yakoob,  for 
that,  although  he  was  not  a  thief,  yet  he  had  his 
own  notions  of  honesty.  Yakoob  told  us  that  in  one 
commission  we  had  entrusted  to  the  new  interpreter 
he  had  overcharged  us  sufficiently  to  allow  of  his  pur- 
chasing a  store  of  tobacco.  For  the  future,  therefore, 
I  sent  Yakoob  on  errands,  not  thinking  that  his  pro- 
bable reason  for  "  splitting  upon  "  Rosi  was  that  he 
might  get  the  business  into  his  own  hands. 

My  costly  felts,  that  I  expected  would  be  put  over 
the  goods  to  keep  them  clean,  Tailly  coolly  folded,  and 
placed  beneath  the  baggage  to  keep  it  from  rubbing 
the  camels'  sides.  I  rather  demurred,  thinking  that 
the  owner  ought  to  provide  that  much  for  his  own 
animals.  I  urged  that  I  wanted  the  felts  to  keep  the 
things  from  rain.  Here  no  doubt  he  laughed  in  his 
sleeve  at  my  ignorance,  as  he  replied,  ''  We  will  put 
them  on  the  top  when  the  rain  comes."  We  did  not 
have  a  drop  all  across  the  desert,  and  evidently,  by 
Tailly,  rain  was  as  little  expected  as  when  Samuel 
called  for  a  storm  in  harvest.*  I|< 

I  confess  to  being  a  little  disappointed  at  the  look  of 
the  camels  hired  for  us.  I  had  given  the  best  price, 
that  he  might  secure  the  best  animals,  which  I  supposed 
to  be  the  graceful,  long-haired,  two-humped  Bactrian 
camel.  Instead  of  this  appeared  five  short-haired, 
one-humped,  gaunt-looking  creatures  of  anything  but 
attractive  appearance.  I  was  reconciled,  however,  to 
the  new  animals  on  Yakoob' s  telling  me  that  the  one- 
humped  (nar  tuya)  animals  are  stronger  than  the  two- 
humped  (tuya).  Accordingly,  when  our  camels  were 
*  I  Sam.  xii.  17. 


PREPARATIONS  FOR   THE  DESERT  367 

loaded,  our  litde  string  of  ^v^  filed  out  of  the  Bek's 
yard,  and  I  was  somewhat  amused  at  this  novel  fashion 
of  removing  my  baggage. 

I  imagine,  however,  that  there  was  a  serious  side  to 
the  affair,  that  my  ignorance  did  not  permit  me  to  see, 
but  which  seemed  to  be  present  to  the  mind  of  the 
Bek.  He  had,  I  presume,  never  before  seen  two 
foreigners,  comparatively  unarmed,  starting  with  three 
natives  only  to  cross  the  Turkoman  desert.  The 
Russian  surveying  parties  had  been  escorted  by  a 
guard  of  Cossacks,  and  the  two  private  parties  I  have 
alluded  to  did  not  come  so  far  north  as  Kunia  Urgenj. 
The  Bek,  too,  knew  the  dangers  of  the  desert  better 
than  I,  and  sent  for  a  man  who  offered  himself  as 
guide  ;  but  this  did  not  seem  necessary,  I  thought, 
since  Tailly  was  supposed  to  have  made  adequate  pro- 
vision on  this  score,  and  every  individual  added  to  the 
company  rendered  necessary  the  taking  also  of  his 
provision  for  nearly  three  weeks. 

What  were  really  the  Bek's  fears,  if  he  had  any,  I 
know  not,  but  it  looked  rather  ominous  when,  just 
before  starting,  he  asked  me  for  a  written  statement 
that  I  had  in  safety  left  him,  and  been  properly  treated. 
I,  therefore,  formally  wrote,  ''  This  is  to  certify  that 
Dr.  Lansdell,  having  received  much  kindness  and 
attention  from  the  Bek  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  leaves 
to-day  for  Krasnovodsk,  with  Mr.  Sevier  and  Rosi 
Mahmet  as  interpreters,  and  under  the  guidance  of 
(i)  Tailly,  (2)  Nazar  Muhammad,  (3)  Murad,  and  (4) 
Yakoob,"  and  then  handing  this  to  the  Bek,  with  a 
slight  touch  of  the  feeling  with  which  I  suppose  a 
mariner  puts  a  paper  in  a  bottle  for  what  may,  perhaps, 
be  his  floating  epitaph,  I  mounted  Diotrephes  and 
prepared  for  the  start. 


CHAPTER    LXVIII. 

FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR. 

Departure  from  Kunia  Urgenj. — Rest  in  a  Turkoman  tent. — Forced 
labour  of  the  Khan. — Dismissal  of  attendants  with  presents. — 
New  interpreter  and  guides. — Our  last  habitation. — Doctoring  a 
Turkoman, — "  Turning  in  "  to  camel  cradles. — Rosy's  accident. — 
My  ride  through  the  night. — Wells  of  Karategin. — First  caravan 
breakfast. — Endeavours  to  hasten  the  drivers. — Journey  in  the  old 
Oxus  bed. — The  dam  of  Egin  Klych. — Ruins  of  Mashrek, — Pitch- 
ing our  tent  opposite  Kunia  Vezir. — Reference  thereto  by  Abu' I 
Ghazi. — Jenkinson's  forecast.— Routes  of  other  Englishmen  from 
Kunia  Urgenj. 

ON  Wednesday  morning,  November  8th,  at  half- 
past  lo,  we  left  the  city  walls  in  a  cavalcade  of 
14  men.  First  came  three  djiguitts,  who  represented 
a  military  escort,  and  were  supposed  to  be  armed, 
though  I  forget  with  what.  These,  with  Tailly  and 
Yakoob,  after  seeing  us  well  started,  were  to  return  on 
the  morrow.  Besides,  there  were  a  number  with  us 
whose  presence  I  did  not  understand,  and  also  Khassan, 
the  Batchman,  and  his  servant,  who  were  to  accom- 
pany us  as  a  compliment  a  short  portion  of  the  way. 
We  passed  few,  if  any,  gardens,  the  only  cultivated 
land  lying  to  the  right  on  the  banks  of  the  aryk  that 
had  been  cut  to  run  through  the  modern  Kunia 
Urgenj.  Plunging  quickly  into  the  steppe,  we  again 
had    ruins   on   either  side  of  the  road,  as  in  coming 


I 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR,        369 

from  Iliali,  but  dating  only  from  half  a  century  ago  at 
most.  Khassan  said  they  were  about  30  years  old, 
and  were  forsaken  when  the  Turkomans  quarrelled 
with  the  Uzbeg  inhabitants,  and  the  latter  fled,  their 
Khan,  Madamin,  having  been  killed.  Before  this  civil 
war,  land  about  Urgenj  sold  for  100  tillahs  a  tanap, 
or  ^18  an  acre. 

When  Khassan  bade  us  farewell  we  took  a  parting 
view  of  Kunia  Urgenj.  Its  tall  minaret  was  the  one 
reminder  we  saw  in  Asia  of  the  spire  of  an  English 
church,  and  as  it  faded  away  in  the  distance  we  said 
good-bye  to  fixed  habitations  for  many  days.  At 
noon  we  were  taken  to  the  tent  of  one  who  was  said 
to  be  a  ''  rich  "  Turkoman,  where  they  brought  forth 
melons  for  lunch,  and  by  half-past  4  we  arrived  at  an 
oba  or  collection  of  Yomud. Turkoman  tents,  in  one  of 
which  we  were  to  take  up  our  quarters  for  the  night, 
or,  as  Yakoob  put  it  in  New  Testament  language, 
"till  the  cock  crew."  * 

In  unloading  the  camels  one  of  the  cradles  went 
hopelessly  to  pieces,  but  fortunately  we  found  another 
among  the  Turkomans.  Yakoob  came  to  inquire 
whether  he  should  cook  some  of  the  butcher's  meat 
for  a  feast  to  my  retinue.  I  replied  "Certainly,"  but 
was   hardly  prepared   for  their  making  off  with  little 

*  Matt,  xxvi.  34.  This  was  not  the  only  answer  I  received  in  Central 
Asia  characteristic  of  a  people  who  have  not  clocks  and  watches,  or 
even  sun-dials  so  far  as  T  saw,  and  who,  consequently,  do  not  practi- 
cally divide  their  day  into  hours  and  minutes.  One  morning-  I  stirred 
up  Yakoob  before  it  was  light,  whereupon  he  murmured,  "Why,  the 
mullah  hasn't  called,"  meaning  the  call  to  sunrise  prayer.  Again,  as 
Nehemiah's  men  worked  "  from  the  rising  of  the  morning  till  the  stars 
appeared ' '  (iv.  2 1 ),  so,  in  the  desert,  one  weary  eve  I  asked  the  camel 
driver  how  soon  we  should  arrive  at  the  next  well,  and  instead  of  saying 
in  so  many  hours,  he  pointed  to  the  evening  star,  and  intimated  when 
that  should  have  sunk  to  a  certain  part  of  the  heavens,  we  should  be 
there. 

VOL.  II.  24 


370  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

short  of  three-fourths  of  our  stock.  A  tent,  belonging 
apparently  to  an  old  man,  who  shifted  elsewhere  for 
the  night,  was  set  apart  for  Sevier  and  me  ;  Tailly 
and  Rosy  paying  us  visits  to  settle  sundry  minor 
affairs.  We  had  a  fire  burning,  and  a  piece  of  green 
wood  was  sputtering  out  sap,  which  I  observed  Tailly 
take  with  his  finger  and  rub  on  his  eyelids,  for  the 
purpose,  he  said,  of  *'  improving  his  sight." 

Next  morning  we  were  astir  at  dawn,  and  after 
drinking  tea  I  pleased  our  old  host  by  presenting  him 
with  Zs.  for  our  night's  lodging.  He  fairly  danced  with 
delight,  and  vowed  that  ''  the  Russians,"  as  he  called 
us,  were  excellent  people,  for  that  whereas  their  Khan 
exacted  from  them  labour,  and  gave  nothing  in  return. 
the  Russians  paid.  I  suppose  the  old  man  referred 
to  a  practice  of  the  Khan,  who,  when  he  wants  a 
great  work  done,  such  as  making  a  canal  or  dam, 
raises  a  levy.*  At  the  time  of  the  Russian  invasion. 
the  Khan  directed  a  levy  to  be  gathered  from  the 
districts  of  Khojeili,  Chimbai,  and  Kungrad,  to  help 
the  Russian  steamers  in  the  Ulkun-daria  to  ascend 
the  Amu.  A  certain  Yessaul-bashi,  who  had  boasted 
that  he  could  find  the  channel  for  the  ships,  was 
authorized  to  deal  as  he  saw  fit  with  the  inhabitants  of 
the  delta,  and  this  power  he  abused  by  summoning  the 
labourers  right  and  left  from  their  fields  in  the  hope 
that  the  unfortunate  people  would  bribe  him  to  let 
them  off,  and  thus  whole  villages  were  fleeced.  I 
know  not  whether  my  old  host  had  this  sort  of  thing 
in  mind,  or  whether  he  thought  that,  as  we  were  guests 
of  the  Khan,  he  might  expect  no  payment  for  his  tent 
and  bread  and  melons  ;  but  he  appeared  very  much 
gratified,  and  we  parted  on  excellent  terms.t 

*  As  did  King  Solomon  of  30,000  men  (i  Kings  v.  13). 

t  This  incident ,  and  what  transpired  about  the  melons  at  Koshkupi 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        371 

I  had  now  to  pay  off  Yakoob  and  Tailly,  for  neither 
wanted  to  go  any  further  ;  and  as  they  had  found  me 
other  men  to  take  their  places,  there  was  no  reason 
why  they  should  not  return  together  to  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk.  Accordingly  I  paid  Yakoob  what  was 
due,  and  added  a  present,  and  I  gave  a  present  to 
Tailly  too,  with  which  they  were  both  pleased. 
Yakoob  had  asked  for  my  portrait,  and  now  kissed  my 
hand,  and  seemed  to  have  become  attached  to  us  ;  but 
Tailly,  I  afterwards  discovered,  was  a  thief. 

The  Governor  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  had  given  me 
to  understand  that  Tailly  received  £^  for  taking  the 
post  to  Krasnovodsk.  If,  therefore,  I  chose  to  take 
him  as  my  guide,  and  give  him  a  present,  ''pour 
boire,"  as  he  said,  at  the  end,  I  might  do  so,  and  this 
offer  I  thankfully  accepted.  Next,  to  facilitate  matters, 
Tailly  was  to  go  forward,  and  hire  for  us  in  Khiva 
four  really  good  camels,  and  their  owner  was  to 
accompany  them  and  us  to  Krasnovodsk  ;  for  which 
Tailly  thought  ^6  would  suffice.  This  I  gave  him, 
with  the  understanding  that  any  present  to  the  owner 
at  the  end  of  the  journey  was  to  be  voluntary  on 
my  part.  At  Khiva  he  came  to  us  with  a  story  that 
;^6  was  insufficient,  and  I  gave  him,  as  he  asked,  12^-. 
more.  Again,  at  Kunia  Urgenj  he  came  trying  the 
milch-cow    again,    but     not     successfully    this     time, 

as  well  as  sundry  other  exactions  we  had  seen,  helped  to  remind  me  of 
a  custom  that  obtained  in  Palestine,  under  the  Persians,  when  the 
governors  were  charg-eable  unto  the  people,  and  took  of  them  bread  and 
wine,  from  doing  which  Nehemiah  refrained  because  of  the  fear  of  God 
(Neh.  V.  15).  Long  before  this  time,  however,  the  people  were  warned 
when  they  asked  for  a  king.  This  shall  be  the  manner  of  the  king. 
**He  will  take  your  sons,  and  appoint  them  for  himself,  for  his  chariots, 
....  and  your  goodliest  young  men,  and  your  asses,  and  put  them  to 
his  work"  (i  Sam.  viii.  11-16)— a  picture  this  of  Bokhara  and  Khiva 
to  the  present  day. 


Z12  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

though  at  parting  I  gave  him  a  present  of  £\  for 
his  trouble. 

It  was  interesting,  therefore,  to  compare  notes  one 
morning  at  breakfast  with  our  new  men,  Nazar 
Mahomet,  who  replaced  Tailly,  and  Murad,  the  owner 
of  the  four  camels.  The  latter  said  he  had  been  paid 
only  243-.,  and  seemed  greatly  surprised  that  I  had 
given  -^-iyS.  for  each  animal.  As  for  Nazar,  who  lived 
at  Gazavat,  Tailly  told  him  that  he  received  £(^  8^.  for 
carrying  the  post,  which  he  brought  as  far  as  Gazavat, 
and  then  sent  it  on  by  Nazar,  over  the  greater  and 
the  worst  part  of  the  way,  giving  him  ^3  4^.,  or  only 
half  the  spoil,  leaving  him  to  find  his  own  camel  or 
horse,  or  do  as  best  he  could.  Upon  this  auspicious 
occasion,  however,  Tailly  had  given  Nazar  nothing, 
telling  him  that  I  should  doubtless  give  him  a  present 
of  ;^5,  and  that  if  I  did  not  do  so  he  would. 

Then,  to  complete  this  little  expose.  Rosy  informed 
us,  rightly  or  wrongly,  that  Yakoob  and  Tailly  stole 
melons  and  ropes  from  me  at  our  first  stopping-place, 
and  asked  him  not  to  tell.  Further,  they  said  that,  at 
Kunia  Urgenj,  Tailly  had  threatened  to  cut  them 
across  the  face  with  his  whip  if  they  dared  to  expose 
him  ;  and  as  he  was  a  tall,  powerful  bully,  I  suppose 
they  thought  it  better  not  to  provoke  him.  I  knew 
nothing  of  this,  however,  when  Tailly  and  Yakoob 
left,  and  we  parted  with  mutual  good  wishes,  the  two 
volunteering  the  remark  to  Sevier  that  they  were 
*'  well  satisfied." 

To  those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  Orientals, 
I  suppose  this  story  will  be  sufificiently  commonplace, 
and  perhaps  they  will  add  a  caution  against  believing 
the  informers  without  sufficient  proof.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  I  was  sorry  to  hear  of  Yakoob' s  peccadilloes, 


I 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        2>^t, 

which,  however,  if  true,  I  should  be  disposed  to  regard 
leniently,  for  he  had  a  conscience,  and,  on  the  whole, 
served  us  well  ;  so  that,  if  I  were  returning  to  the 
country,  I  would  willingly  employ  him  again  ;  though 
I  was  not  minded  to  let  off  Tailly  so  easily,  and  took 
measures  to  bring  him  to  book. 

With  Yakoob  and  Tailly  we  dismissed,  also  with  a 
present,  the  three  djiguitts  who  had  escorted  us,  so 
that  we  were  now  reduced  to  a  party  of  5  men. 
Rosy,  after  the  fashion  of  the  country,  had  asked  for 
half  his  pay  before  starting,  had  bought  a  new  cloth 
cap,  and  otherwise  put  on  a  rather  more  respectable 
appearance  ;  but  we  soon  found  that  he  was  of  inferior 
calibre  to  Yakoob — a  capital  trencherman,  but  by  no 
means  industrious,  or  one  that  could  be  left  to  his  own 
devices.  He  was  a  Sart,  and  afflicted  with  the 
failings  of  his  race.  The  other  two  men  were  black- 
hatted  Uzbegs,  brown  as  berries,  but  of  very  different 
character  and  temperament,  as  will  be  presently  seen. 
I  shall  speak  of  the  three  as  Rosy  our  servant,  Murad 
the  camel-owner,  and  Nazar  the  postman. 

We  had  started  on  this  our  second  day  from  Kunia 
Urgenj  soon  after  sunrise,  and  as  we  went  along  we 
passed  more  ruins,  some  of  them  so  large  that  I  rode 
forward  to  look  them  over.  Also  I  turned  aside  here 
and  there  to  look  at  the  tents  of  the  semi-nomad 
Turkomans,  who  tilled  patches  of  land,  presenting 
myself  alone,  and  saluting  them  with  an  Aman!  — 
one  of  the  few  salutations  I  knew  in  the  vernacular."^ 
At  1 1  o'clock  we  came  to  an  aul  they  told  us  would  be 

*  This  phrase,  with  Salaain  aleikum,  I  observed  to  be  used  when 
two  persons  met,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  hearing  the  form  of 
salutation  bestowed  by  a  traveller  on  the  road  upon  a  man  labouring  in 
the  field.  I  have  heard  it  in  Connemara  among  the  Romanists,  tlius, 
"  God  and  Mary  bless  the  work  ! "  to  which  the  labourer  replies,  **  And 


374  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  last  habitation  we  should  see  for  some  time,  and  as 
Nazar  had  a  brother  or  relation  here,  they  proposed  to 
stop  for  5  hours,  and  then  to  set  off  in  real  earnest. 
Accordingly  we  stretched  ourselves  in  the  tent  of  this 
friendly  Turkoman,  the  master  not  being  at  home  on 
our  arrival,  though  a  neighbour  unceremoniously  came 
in,  nominally  to  pay  a  visit,  but  seemingly  to  stare  at 
us.  Meanwhile  they  prepared  a  meal  for  Sevier  and 
me,  and  w^hen  we  had  eaten  it,  the  master  of  the  tent 
returned,  and  took  down  a  leg  of  mutton  wherewith  to 
feast  his  friends.  When  cooked,  he  invited  us  to 
partake,  but  I  declined,  saying  most  truthfully  that  we 
had  just  dined,  and  wanted  no  more.  Here  I  forgot 
that  being  able  to  eat  no  more  is  a  mere  figure  of 
speech  to  a  Turkoman,  and  I  am  afraid  that  my  host 
either  thought  me  rude,  or  attributed  my  refusal  to 
national  or  religious  exclusiveness,  for  he  gave  a  poly- 
glot grunt  that  would  be  understandable  in  any  language, 
and  appeared  to  be  huffed. 

Sevier  was  able  to  make  a  good  impression,  how- 
ever, by  doctoring  him.  Soon  after  entering,  our  host 
stretched  himself  on  the  floor.  Then  his  boy,  8  or  lo 
years  of  age,  stood  on  him,  and  walked  up  and  down 
his  body,  as  if  kneading  the  patient  with  the  soles  of 
his  feet.  This  was  an  intended  cure  for  a  pain  in  the 
stomach  I  had  never  before  seen,  nor  Sevier,  at  any  of 
the  three  European  capitals  where  he  had  studied,  so 
he  proceeded  instead  to  paint  the  patient  with  iodinq 
from  the  ribs  to  the  loins.  For  this  the  man  seemedf 
to  be  grateful,  and  good-fellowship  progressed  to  such 

you,  too  !  "  and  something  of  the  kind  appears  to  be  referred  to  in 
Ps.  cxxix.  8.  They  who  go  by  say  not  so  much  as  "  The  Lord  prosper 
you  !  We  wish  you  good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  '  "  There  is. 
also  the  case  of  Boaz  and  his  reapers  (Ruth  ii.  4). 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.         375 

a  degree  that,  when  the  time  drew  near  for  us  to  be 
moving,  the  three  natives  would  willingly  have  stopped 
for  the  night.  This  was  precisely  what  had  happened 
in  the  case  of  the  Russian  doctor  and  engineer,  in 
whose  account  we  had  read  that  their  guide  took  them 
as  guests  to  the  tent  of  a  friend  for  two  days.  I  was 
accordingly  ware  of  the  delay,  and  said  "No."  Rosy 
urged  that  the  men  did  not  exactly  know  the  way  at 
night.  This  difficulty  was  surmounted  by  arranging 
to  take  a  man  from  the  aul  as  guide.  Then  our 
servant  further  pleaded  for  a  prolonged  stay,  on  the 
ground  that  it  would  be  our  last  stopping-place  with 
fellow  ''  humans,"  and  that  our  host  was  such  a  ''  right 
good  fellow,"  with  which  I  agreed,  but  recommended 
that  they  should  make  haste  back  and  then  further 
cultivate  his  acquaintance. 

When  they  saw  I  was  firm,  they  began  to  load  the 
camels.  Hitherto  Sevier  and  I  had  travelled  on 
horseback,  but  now  we  thought  it  better  on  starting  to 
"  turn  in  "  for  the  night,  and  directed  the  cradles  to  be 
prepared  accordingly.  The  other  of  our  new  cradles 
was  now  pronounced  unsound,  so  as  our  host  happened 
by  a  lucky  fortune  to  have  an  old  one  at  hand,  this  was 
patched  up  and  an  exchange  effected,  the  articles 
hitherto  placed  in  the  cradles  being  distributed  over 
the  remaining  beasts.  Now  they  said  that  there  was 
too  much  baggage  for  5  camels  (the  fifth  belonging  to 
the  postman).  It  was  fully  late  to  find  this  out,  nor 
was  it  quite  apparent  how  the  defect  was  to  be 
remedied,  for  there  was  only  one  camel  in  the  oba, 
belonging  to  an  old  woman,  who  was  anything  but 
amiable,  and  seemed  not  to  like  my  face,  declaring  she 
would  not  let  it  to  me,  though  I  know  not  exactly  why. 

Our  host  began  to  show  us  some  cheap  politeness, 


376  RUSSIAN  CEATTRAL  ASIA. 

as  I  thought,  by  saying  that  had  he  not  recently  sold 
his  camel,  he  would  have  lent  it  to  us  gratis,  in  recog- 
nition of  Sevier's  kindness  in  doctoring  him  without 
charge.  I  capped  this  by  answering  that,  if  he  were 
really  grateful,  he  might  show  it  by  persuading  the  old 
woman  outside  to  hire  us  her  camel.  This  he  pro- 
ceeded with  alacrity  to  do,  and  for  34^".  we  secured  her 
treasure  to  accompany  us  to  Krasnovodsk.  The 
owner  gave  strict  injunctions  as  to  its  being  brought 
back  by  our  men,  and  bade  them  God-speed,  but  she 
would  not  shake  hands  with  me,  a  Kafir,  and  evidently 
was  with  difficulty  persuaded  to  let  her  animal  go. 

About  seven  o'clock  all  was  in  readiness,  and  Sevier 
and  I  were  to  get  into  our  queer  sleeping-cages.  Let 
the  reader  imagine  two  narrow  wooden  crates  such  as 
earthenware  is  packed  in,  each  sufficiently  large  for  a 
man  to  lie  in  when  twisted  to  the  shape  of  the  letter  S  ; 
and  let  him  further  imagine  them  suspended  on  either 
side  of  the  huge  hump  of  a  kneeling  camel.  This  I 
am  given  to  understand  is  to  be  my  sleeping-place 
for  the  night,  and  I  accordingly  choose  my  berth  on 
the  port-side  of  this  "  ship  of  the  desert,"  first  putting 
into  the  cradle  for  a  lining  a  piece  of  felt,  and  then 
two  pillows.  So  far  all  is  well  ;  but  inasmuch  as  my 
lodging  is  to  be  beneath  the  frosty  sky,  it  seems 
desirable  to  multiply  my  sleeping  garments.  First  I 
put  on,  over  my  ordinary  suit,  my  jackal-lined  khalat, 
enveloping  me  from  head  to  foot,  over  that  my  Ulster, 
and  on  my  head  a  sheepskin  hat,  to  say  nothing  of 
fur-lined  boots  kindly  lent  by  General  Grotenhielm  ; 
and  then,  getting  into  the  cradle,  I  cover  my  feet 
with  my  sheepskin  coat. 

And  now  comes  the  tug  of  war!  Nazar  asks,  are 
we  ready  ;  bids  us  hold  on  !  and  says  to  the  camel, 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ   TO  KUNIA    VEZIR,         ^'j'j 

C/iu  !  whereupon  the  animal  gets  up  leisurely,  first  on 

its  hind  legs,  and  In  so  doing  raises  our  feet  to  an  angle 

of  60   degrees,   thereby  threatening  to  pitch    us    out 

bodily.     We  hold  on,  however,  for  dear  life,  and  then 

comes  a  lurch  from  the  fore,  lifting  our    heads    once 

more   to   the   horizontal.     The  fear  of  danger  now  is 

past  ;  but   It   Is   not  easy  at  first  to  get  accustomed  to 

the  strange  motion  caused  by  the  long  strides  of  the 

j    camel.     When  the  creature   was   urged  to  go  quickly, 

!    the  nearest  simile  for  the  cradle  I   can  think  of  Is  that 

of  a  bottle  of  physic   in    the    process   of  being  ''  well 

;    shaken  before  taken"  ;  but    when   the    camel    walked 

I    leisurely,  then  one  lay  as  in  a  boat  idly  tossed  by  the 

-    billows  ;  and  sleep  became  possible  just   as  it  is   in  a 

Russian   tarantass,  when  one  is   dead   tired,  cramped, 

and  ''used  to  It." 

But  we  were  not  the  first  night  to  enjoy  our 
slumbers  undisturbed.  As  we  went  along  we  passed 
some  men  with  huge  fires  making  charcoal,  and  then 
towards  midnight  there  came  a  crash  and  a  bellowing 
from  one  of  the  camels  which  had  fallen.  The  jerk 
had  broken  the  ropes,  and  the  baggage  lay  hither  and 
thither,  needing  new  ropes  to  secure  It  afresh.  But 
how  to  get  them  ?  We  thought  of  the  charcoal 
burners,  and  It  was  suggested  that  Sevier  and  Rosy 
should  go  back  and  inquire  whether  they  had  any  to 
sell.  Sevier  took  my  horse  and  Rosy  the  other,  whilst 
I  turned  In  to  my  cradle  again,  now  on  the  ground, 
and  went  off  to  dreamland.  Sevier,  taught  by  experi- 
ence, warned  Rosy  not  to  gallop  his  horse,  because  not 
sure-footed  ;  but  this  was  not  heeded,  and  presendy 
down  went  the  horse,  and  Rosy,  not  getting  his  foot 
I  free  from  the  stirrup,  was  dragged  along  and  bruised, 
until   the    horse  got  free  and  ran  away.     Sevier  was 


378  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

slightly  ahead,  and  did  not  at  first  miss  the  rider,  but 
when  he  came  back  he  found  him  on  the  ground,  calling 
out,  '' I'm  dead!  I'm  dead!" 

He  was  brought  back  alive,  notwithstanding,  and 
though  sufficiently  bruised  in  tender  parts  to  put  him 
in  great  pain,  he  was  not  seriously  hurt,  and,  on  looking 
out  of  my  queer  sleeping-place,  I  could  see  Sevier 
doctoring  him  up  and  painting  him  with  iodine  by  the 
light  of  the  fire.  It  was  a  weird,  curious  sight.  There 
we  lay  under  a  lowering  midnight  sky,  the  darkness 
relieved  by  the  glare  of  a  saxaul  fire.  The  camels 
were  kneeling  around  asleep,  and  so  were  the  out- 
stretched drivers,  whilst  Sevier  was  busy  with  his 
groaning  patient  in  the  application  of  bandages. 

When  at  length  the  doctoring  was  over,  it  was  plain 
that  the  wounded  man  could  neither  walk  nor  ride  on 
horseback,  and  the  only  thing  left  was  that  he  should 
occupy  one  of  the  cradles,  to  which  end  I  volunteered 
to  give  up  mine,  and  to  ride  Diotrephes  for  the  re- 
mainder of  the  night.  I  had  to  speak  sharply  to  the 
men  to  rouse  them  from  their  slumbers,  especially  to 
Murad,  whom  I  perceived  to  be  not  in  the  least 
hurried,  and  to  take  things  a  great  deal  more  coolly 
than  suited  my  anxiety  to  get  forward.  Matters,  more- 
over, had  not  been  improved  by  my  having  heard, 
through  Rosy,  that  the  men  had  talked  of  throwing 
overboard,  in  the  night,  the  melons  and  clover  in  order 
to  lighten  the  ship.  I  saw,  therefore,  that  I  must  be 
firm,  and  I  spoke  in  tones  that  needed  no  interpreter 
to  show  that  I  meant  to  be  obeyed,  and  at  length  we 
got  under  way. 

Once  started,  Nazar  and  Murad  became  hilarious,  anc 
commenced  singing,  now  in  duet,  now  in  solo,  but  nevei 
in  harmony,  and  always  in  dubious  melody.      In  one  o 


i 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        379 

his  strains  Murad's  voice,  whether  intentionally  or 
otherwise,  approached  perilously  near  to  the  braying 
of  a  donkey,  but  he  seemed  to  enjoy  it,  and  it  helped 
to  keep  me  awake.  For  a  time  I  got  on  pretty  well, 
sometimes  walking  and  sometimes  riding,  but  the  wind 
was  cold  ;  and  as  we  passed  ruin  after  ruin  the  "Queen 
of  night  rose  not  in  clouded  majesty,  nor  o'er  the 
dark  her  silver  mantle  threw."  Not  even  an  owl 
swooped  by,  and  the  gloom  was  decidedly  uninspiring. 

In  plain  English,  I  began  to  get  fearfully  sleepy  and 
tired,  and  I  had  so  far  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  that  it 
was  no  singular  weakness  on  my  part,  inasmuch  as  the 
local  guide,  who  went  on  ahead,  now  and  then  galloped 
a  little  further  than  usual,  and  then  got  off  his  horse 
and  lay  on  the  ground  for  a  few  minutes'  sleep  till  the 
caravan  came  up.  I  did  not  attempt  this,  but  vainly 
tried  in  all  sorts  of  ways  to  put  myself  in  a  posture  for 
horseback  sleep.  Then  I  called  in  the  aid  of  reason, 
and  argued  how  useful  it  might  be  in  my  experience  to 
have  spent  one  night  thus  out  in  the  open ;  what 
sympathy  it  would  give  me  in  future  for  policemen, 
night-watchmen,  nurses,  and  such  persons.  Other 
thoughts  too,  better  than  of  reason's  light,  came  to  my 
aid  about  self-denial,  and  "  enduring  hardness,"  with 
sundry  other  appropriate  reflections. 

So  things  went  on  till  Aurora  opened  the  gates  of 
morning,  and  dawn  found  us  at  the  four  wells  of 
Karategin,  or  Kara-Kum,  in  the  dry  bed  of  the  Oxus. 
Here  we  were  to  draw  water  for  the  first  time,  and  to 
prepare  breakfast  at  a  camp  fire  ;  so,  after  directing 
Rosy  to  cook  a  pheasant,  I  was  minded  to  turn  into 
the  cradle  for  a  nap  ;  but  sunrise  brought  vigour  to  my 
fatigued  limbs,  and  I  could  not  sleep  amid  such  novel 
surroundings.      My  thoughts  were  speedily  taken  back 


38o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

to  the  days  of  Abraham,  and  the  herdmen  of  Gerar 
striving  with  Isaac's  herdmen  at  the  well  of  Contention.* 

We  were  upon  the  verge  of  doing  the  same  thing, 
without  my  knowing  it,  at  Karategin,  for  a  shepherd 
had  come  before  us  to  water  his  'flock,  and,  being 
"  first  come,"  had  a  right  to  be  "first  served."  This, 
however,  would  not  only  cause  us  delay,  but  by  the 
time  his  bucket  had  descended  often  enough  to  give 
drink  to  a  thousand  sheep,  the  water,  if  there  were  any 
left,  would  be  so  muddy  as  to  be  unfit  to  put  into  our 
barrels.  My  men  represented  this  to  the  shepherd, 
and  ominously  added  that  the  Englishman  carried  a 
revolver,  and  would  certainly  shoot  him  if  he  did  not 
give  way.  This  impromptu  story  caused  the  shepherd 
to  yield,  so  that  I  was  not  called  upon  to  carry  out  their 
murderous  threat,  and  Nazar  proceeded  to  get  water, 
drawing  it,  to  my  astonishment,  in  the  horses'  nosebags! 
This  was  the  nearest  approach  I  had  seen  to  "  holding 
water  in  a  sieve,"  but  the  bags,  being  made  of  thick 
woollen  material,  answered  the  purpose  admirably.  We 
were  also  able  to  purchase  some  more  rope  here,  and 
our  local  guide  went  back  to  his  aul. 

Breakfast  went  off  pretty  well  for  a  first  occasion. 
The  pheasant  was  preceded  hy  potage  att  faisan,  and 
we  made  an  attack  upon  our  Russian  bread  from 
Petro-Alexandrovsk.  When  looking  over  the  hospital 
there,  I  had  tasted  the  patients'  bread,  and  was  so 
pleased  that  I  asked  the  General  if  the  baker  might 
make  me  a  number  of  loaves,  and  these  we  had  been 
saving  till  we  could  get  no  more  fresh  native  nans  or 
bread-cakes.  The  Russian  loaves  were  now  12  days 
old,  and,  truth  compels  me  to  add,  ^^r^  getting  hard  ; 
but  we  soaked  the    bread    in    tea,   besides   which   we 

*  Gen.  xiii.  7  ;  xxvi.  20. 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        381 

had  cream  that  was  wondrously  accommodating.  On 
opening  the  keg  at  even,  the  motion  of  the  camel 
was  found  to  have  converted  it  into  ''  whipped  "  cream, 
whereas  in  the  morning  the  frost  of  night  had  given 
us  "  iced "  cream,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  day  we 
had  crenie  ate  naturel.  Then  we  sliced  a  melon,  and 
having  thus  partaken  of  ddjeilner  a  la  fourchette  at 
the  somewhat  abnormal  hour  of  sunrise,  I  directed  the 
camels  to  be  reloaded. 

First,  however,  I  had  a  little  serious  talk  with  the 
men  concerning  despatch.  From  the  very  outset,  even 
as  far  back  as  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  I  had  found  it 
difficult  to  get  a  satisfactory  answer  from  Tailly  to  the 
straightforward  question,  "  How  many  days  will  it  take 
you  to  get  us  from  Khiva  to  Krasnovodsk  ?"  He  said 
about  12  or  14  days,  and  mumbled  out  some  sort  of 
reckoning,  at  which  the  General  only  laughed,  and  said 
the  man  did  not  really  know.  The  Russian  doctor 
•and  engineer  had  taken  1 7  days  from  Iliali,  but  in  hot 
weather,  and  had  been  compelled  to  rest,  whereas  we 
were  going  by  a  longer  route,  though  in  a  cool 
month.  I  gravely  put  it,  therefore,  to  the  men  as  to 
how  many  days  it  would  take  them  to  reach  Krasno- 
v'odsk  from  where  we  were. 

They  answered  "Nine."  ''Very  well,"  said  I.  "Then 
or  every  day  less  than  nine  I  will  add  ten  shillings  to 
:he  present  I  am  thinking  of  giving  you  ;  whilst  for 
ivery  day  you  take  more  than  nine  I  shall  deduct  ten 
shillings."  Remembering  also  what  I  had  heard  of  their 
ntention  to  fling  overboard  some  of  my  possessions, 
I  informed  them  that,  if  they  lost  any  of  my  belongings, 
hey  might  expect  to  have  the  cost  of  it  deducted  from 
he  present.  They  assented  to  this  arrangement  and 
hen  we  started. 


382  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Our  way  lay  for  14  miles  along  the  Urun-daria, 
the  old  watercourse  by  which  the  Oxus  used  to  reach 
the  Caspian,  so  that  as  we  marched  along  the  bottom 
of  its  bed  with  the  rising  banks  on  either  hand,  we  had 
the  pleasure  of  imagining  how,  in  bygone  centuries, 
fishes  sported  in  the  space  we  occupied,  and  how  gallant 
ships  went  over  our  heads  with  cargoes  of  Asiatic 
produce  to  be  transported  over  the  Caucasus  to  the 
Black  Sea  and  onwards,  for  the  aristocrats  of  ancient 
Greece  and  Rome.  We  started  to  walk  in  the  fresh 
morning  air,  but  instead  of  meeting  anything  to  remind 
us  of  "  the  briny  deep,"  or  rather  fluvial  remains,  we 
came  upon  three  or  four  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  with 
their  shepherd,  who  was  to  be  our  ''  last  man  "  for 
many  days. 

Since  my  retinue  had  eaten  so  ravenously  of  my 
butcher's  meat,  I  had  offered  to  purchase  a  sheep  at 
Karategin,  but  the  shepherd  had  only  one  that  he 
cared  to  sell,  and,  what  was  worse,  would  be  paid  only 
in  silver,  and  not  paper,  which  latter  circulating 
medium  the  country  people  in  Khiva  do  not  take  to 
kindly  ;  and  it  certainly  would  not  have  been  convenient 
for  this  unhoused  shepherd  to  carry  in  his  pocket  for 
many  days,  since  he  was  simply  *'  abiding  in  the 
field  "  with  his  flock.  On  the  other  hand,  I  could  not 
spare  so  large  a  proportion  of  my  Russian  coin,  lest  I 
might  want  small  change  further  on,  and  so  negotiations 
fell  through,  much,  I  fancy,  to  the  disgust  of  Murad, 
who  was  hoping  for  a  share  of  the  prospective  mutton 
feast.  The  second  shepherd  had  shot  a  fawn,  which 
he  sold  us  for  ^s,  8^.,  and  thus  we  added  venison  to 
our  marching  larder.  We  passed  three  wells,  but  saw 
no  other  reminder  of  inhabitants,  save  some  arbas  for 
the  transport  of  firewood.     At  2   o'clock  we  came  to 


« 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        383 

Igin,  or  Egen-Klych  bent — that  is,  the  "  bent,"  or  dam, 
of  Egen-Klych,  a  Turkoman  of  that  name,  who  built  it 
in  1 84 1,  by  the  help  of  100  workmen   in   6   months.* 

We  now  had  the  ruin  Benam-baladi  on  the  left,  and 
ascending  out  of  the  river  bed  we  passed  by  a  ruined 
fortified  place  called  Mashrek.  These  ruins  have  not 
the  character  of  an  ordinary  fortress,  but  consist  of  a 
large  area  surrounded  by  a  shallow  moat  and  a  low 
wall.  Within  are  numerous  clay  houses,  some  well 
preserved,  and  between  them  streets  and  squares. 
These  ruins  have  been  deserted  not  much  more  than 
a  quarter  of  a  century — at  the  same  time,  in  fact,  as 
the  ruins  we  had  passed  on  the  previous  day,  and  from 
a  similar  cause. 

At  half-past  four,  about  3  miles  beyond  the  ruins  of 
Mashrek,  we  came  to  what  was  deemed  to  be  a 
suitable  place  to  encamp  till  midnight.  Here  we 
pitched  our  tent  for  the  first  time,  and  were  reminded 
of  the  kindness  of  General  Grotenhielm  in  lending  it, 
for  it  suited  our  wants  exactly.  We  were  offered  the 
use  of  a  larger  one,  but  preferred  this  yulamaika,  its 
construction  and  erection  being  alike  simple. 

Taking  the  two  pieces  of  felt  from  the  cradles,  we 

*It  is  1,000  feet  long,  and  the  present  dyke  is  still  in  good  presenta- 
tion ;  but  two  previous  ones  were  washed  away,  the  slope  being  so 
great  and  the  water  at  that  time  so  excessive,  that  it  found  its  way 
round  the  dam,  and  at  length  rushed  40  miles  southwards  to  Lake 
Tiuniukli,  which  it  filled,  and  still  poured  along  an  old  channel  towards 
Sary  Kamish.  Some  few  years  before,  the  Laudan,  the  most  northerly 
branch  of  the  Amu,  had  overflowed,  and  inundated  the  country  between 
Kunia  Urgenj  and  Khojeili,  and  entered  the  Aibughir  gulf.  But  it  after- 
wards made  another  channel  for  itself  into  the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus,  and 
filled  Sary  Kamish.  I  presume  it  must  have  been  this  inundation  that 
Abbott  saw  in  1840,  and  at  first  thought  to  be  the  Aral,  but  afterwards 
found  it  *'  only  the  Lake  Lowdahn,  which  receives  an  arm  of  the  Oxus." 
One  looks  in  vain  now  for  any  water  in  the  direction  he  indicates,  since 
it  is  all  completely  dried  up. 


384  RUSSIAjV  central  ASIA. 

laid  them  side  by  side  for  the  tent  floor.  Next  we 
spread  thereon  a  number  of  rods,  perhaps  8  feet  long, 
and  joined  at  the  top  so  as  to  stand  like  a  cone,  leaving 
two  wider  apart  than  the  others  for  a  doorway.  Then 
summoning  all  hands,  we  hauled  over  this  cone  a  huge 
shape  of  thick  felt,  all  in  one  piece,  that  covered 
everything,  and  left  a  flap  for  entrance.  We  next 
folded  other  felts  and  placed  pillows  for  two  beds, 
leaving  a  space  between  for  the  dining  arrangements 
— a  change  truly  from  the  spacious  halls  and  palaces 
wherein  we  had  been  lately  lodged,  but  amusing 
enough  in  its  way  at  first  and  for  a  limited  time. 
Rosy  was  quickly  voted  a  very  fair  cook.  His 
pheasant  soup  at  even  was  pronounced  excellent  by 
hungry  men,  whose  last  meal  had  been  eaten  at  sun- 
rise, whilst  the  venison  was  the  best  of  its  kind  I 
think  I  have  tasted  before  or  since. 

There  was  one  thing  that  specially  impressed  this 
our  first  encampment  on  my  mind,  in  that  we  could 
see  across  a  plain,  about  7  miles  from  the  camp,  but 
only  3  or  4  miles  north  of  the  road  we  had  come,  the 
ruins  of  a  town  now  called  Deu-Kesken,  doubtless 
none  other  than  the  ancient  Vezir,  where  the  first  of 
the  Uzbegs,  Sultan  Ilbars,  was  proclaimed  Khan,  in 
1 512.  It  is  the  "  Sellizure  "  of  Jenkinson,*  who,  in 
1558,  spoke  of  it  as  a  castle  seated  on  a  high  hill,  and 

*  Abu'l  Ghazi  refers  to  it  as  Vezir,  six  parasangs  from  Urgenj.  Its 
actual  distance  in  a  direct  line  is  55  versts,  or  say  7  parasangs,  and  he 
adds  that  there  were  formerly  several  towns  dependent  on  Vezir,  each 
having  its  own  governor.  It  is  called  in  an  ancient  Jagatai  work, 
Howorth  says,  Shehr  Vezir,  probably  a  corruption  of  Shehr-i-Vezir,  or 
town  of  the  Vizier.  Others,  again,  call  it  Kunia,  or  Old  Vezir,  as  I  have 
done  to  correspond  with  Kunia  Urgenj.  Jenkinson  adds  that  to  the 
south  of  the  castle  the  land  is  low,  producing  a  fruit  called  a  "  dinie 
(this  is  the  native  name  for  what  I  have  called  a  *'  melon  ").  It  is  ver) 
large  and  full  of  moisture,  the  people  eating  it  after  meat  instead  of 


i 


FROM  KUNIA    URGENJ  TO  KUNIA    VEZIR.        385 

ihough  the  residence  of  the  King  Azim  Khan,  yet 
3uilt  of  earth,  not  strong,  and  making  a  poor  figure. 
It  may  have  happened,  however,  that  the  place  was 
idded  to  in  after  years,  for  when  Glukhovski's  ex- 
jedition  visited  it,  in  1873,  they  were  surprised  at  the 
ine  appearance  of  the  arches,  arcades,  and  facades, 
md  at  the  extent  of  the  ruins.  To  us,  as  the  old 
Duildings  stood  out  against  the  sky  on  an  outlying 
promontory  of  the  Ust  Urt,  close  to  the  Chink,  or 
bounding  cliff  of  the  plateau,  they  looked  a  superior 
:lass  of  ruin  altogether  to  the  mad  houses  and  30-year- 
)ld  ruins  we  had  passed,  and  comparable  rather  with 
;uch  as  we  had  seen  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  to  which  the 
own  seems  to  have  ranked  next  in  importance. 

Jenkinson,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  the  only  Englishman 
vho  has  ever  entered  the  ancient  Vezir,  going  from 
md  returning  to  Mangyshlak,  though  Captain  Abbott 
lIso,  like  myself,  saw  it  from  a  distance,  but  not 
Lpparently  from  the  same  spot.*  As  the  sun  went 
lown  upon  this  interesting  ruin,  we  retired  for  a 
ew  hours'  sleep,  and  at  midnight  resumed  our 
ourney. 

rink  (which  is  precisely  what  we  did).  There  is  another,  called 
■  karbus''  (which  the  Russians  call  arbuz ;  I  have  called  it  a  ''  water- 
melon," because  resembling  our  fruit  of  that  name)  ;  but  when  Jenkin- 
on  calls  this  latter  "the  size  of  a  great  cucumber,  yellow,  and  sweet 
s  sugar,"  I  should  rather  have  said  the  size  of  a  large  pumpkin.  The 
Id  traveller  then  goes  on  to  say,  "The  water  that  serveth  all  this 
ountry  is  drawn  by  canals  out  of  the  Oxus,  so  that  it  falleth  not  into 
le  Caspian  Sea,  as  formerly,  and  in  a  short  time  all  that  land  is  likely 
J  become  a  wilderness  for  want  of  water."  This  has  now  come  to 
ass,  though  it  was  more  than  300  years  before  the  forecast  was 
ihilled. 

*  Shakespear's  route  from  Kunia  Urgenj  lay  further  north,  mounting 

■  le  Ust  Urt  at  Aibugir,  and  so  reaching  the  Caspian  at  Fort  Novo 

-lexandrovsk,   or  Dasht  Gullah,  on  the  bay  of  Mertvi  Kultuk,  487^ 

dies  from  Khiva,  whence  he  started  on  the  3rd  August,  and  arrived  on 

ith  September. 

VOL.  II.  25 


CHAPTER  LXIX. 

FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR   TO   SARY  KAMISH. 

Order  of  march  and  loading  camels. — Tragical  end  of  a  china  basil 
— Climbing  a  camel's  hump.  —The  Oxus  bed  at  Ak-bugut. — Descrij 
tion  of  old  Oxus  bed  from  Kunia  Urgenj. — The  Butenau  plates 
and  Kazak  tombs. — Cliifs  of  the  Ust  Urt  and  traces  of  Jenkinsori? 
— The  Kitchkine-daria.  — The  pool  at  Dekche. — Further  descrip- 
tion of  the  Oxus  bed. — Wells  of  Sary  Kamish. — Correction  of 
Murad  for  stealing.  —  Character  of  guides. — Arrival  at  Sarv" 
Kamish.  * 

WHEN  urging  upon  Tallly  that  I  was  anxious 
to  cross  the  desert  with  all  possible  despatch, 
he  had  intimated  that  our  plan  would  be  to  encamp 
about  sunset,  let  the  camels  graze  for  a  couple  ot 
hours,  then  collect  them  for  2  hours'  sleep,  and  go  on 
again  at  midnight.  He  thought  it  necessary  to  add 
that  we  must  get  up  when  called,  or  he  could  not 
undertake  to  get  us  to  our  destination  in  the  specified 
time.  He  evidently  thought  he  was  dealing  with 
feather-bed  travellers,  whose  night  and  morning  views 
about  early  rising  would  not  agree,  instead  of  with  one 
who  professes  to  rise  at  5  all  the  year  round,  and  who 
gets  up  every  morning  at  the  bidding  of  an  alarum 
I  had  taken  with  me  one  of  these  comforts  of  my  life, 
and  before  midnight  was  stirring  up  the  natives,  who 
lay   snoring  round   the   fire,  by  gentle  applications  ol 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR   TO   SARY  KAMISH.  387 

shoe-leather.  They  did  not  seem  to  appreciate  this 
disturbance  of  their  ''beauty"  sleep,  but  I  thought  it 
better  from  the  outset  to  enforce  discipline,  and  made 
them  stir. 

We  also  lent  a  hand  in  loading.  I  cannot  pretend 
that  getting  a  caravan  under  way  on  a  dark  night  is 
no  more  uncomfortable  than  changing  carriages  at  a 
railway  junction  ;  still,  both  no  doubt  have  their  points 
of  interest.  Sevier  and  I  always  undertook  the 
arrangement  of  our  cradles,  which  were  hoisted  by  4 
on  to  the  back  of  the  leader  camel.  Then  came  the 
loading  of  the  water-barrels,  oval  in  shape,  and  resting 
on  short,  wide  ladders,  against  the  animals'  flanks — a 
great  improvement  on  titi^suks,  or  skins,  which  commu- 
nicate, I  am  told,  an  ill-flavour  to  the  water  they  carry. 
For  the  loan  of  these  barrels  we  were  indebted  also  to 
the  kindness  of  General  Grotenhielm.  This  load  was 
assigned  to  the  animal  we  had  last  hired,  a  she-camel, 
that  gave  herself  airs  like  her  mistress.  So  long  as 
the  creature  was  let  alone,  all  was  well ;  but  when  made 
to  kneel,  whether  to  be  laden  or  unladen,  she  whined 
and  roared  as  if  being  imposed  upon,  and  tried  to  get 
up  before  she  was  told.  I  assumed  the  function,  there- 
fore, of  holding  her  down  by  the  nose,  and  more  than 
once  had  to  thank  merely  my  own  cleverness  in  not 
getting  my  fingers  bitten.  She  was,  however,  a  strong 
beast,  that  never  flagged.  The  third  animal  carried 
our  portmanteaus  and  bags  ;  the  fourth  had  a  sack  of 
barley  and  fodder  for  the  horses.  On  the  fifth  were 
the  tent  poles  and  a  strong  crate,  with  our  food  and 
ive-stock.  By  this  last  I  mean  chickens  tied  by  the 
legs,  and  at  first  suspended  by  Murad  from  the  top  of 
:he  saddle,  until  I  saw  them  suffering,  and  directed  them 
:o  be  placed  in  the  crate.      Even  so  they  voted  camel 


388  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

travel  very  fatiguing,  and  one  of  them  succumbed, 
though  the  others  were  ready,  on  stopping,  for  barley 
and  water,  until  it  came  to  their  turn  to  be  eaten. 
The  sixth  camel  brought  up  the  rear  with  a  bundle  on 
its  back  as  big  as  itself,  consisting  of  the  tent,  on  the 
top  of  which  Murad  loved  to  mount,  and,  if  possible, 
go  to  sleep,  whilst  Nazar  trudged  in  front,  or  rode  one 
of  the  horses,  dragging  on  the  foremost  camel  of  the 
nose-tied  caravan,  which  had  very  much  the  appear- 
ance of  a  Kirghese  family  flitting,  save  that  we  had  no 
cows. 

Rosy,  though  much  improved  by  doctoring,  was  not 
yet  sufficiently  recovered  to  mount  a  horse  without 
pain.  Accordingly,  on  leaving  Kunia  Vezir,  Sevier 
generously  gave  up  his  cradle  and  rode,  whilst  Rosy 
and  I,  on  opposite  sides,  "  turned  in."  Presently  we 
had  to  "  turn  out,"  for  about  4  o'clock  I  heard  an 
ominous  cracking  of  my  cradle,  and  I  thought  it  best 
to  get  down. 

But  how  should  I  make  Nazar  comprehend  ?  Sevier 
was  not  at  hand,  and  Rosy  was  snoring.  Almost  the 
only  native  word  I  knew  was  Yakshi,  meaning  ''  All 
right!"  whereas  just  then  I  feared  things  were  all 
wrong,  and  I  vainly  called  out  in  Russian,  Stoi !  or 
stop.  Suddenly  remembering  the  word  used  by  the 
drivers  when  they  wished  the  camel  to  kneel,  I  shouted 
Chok !  Chok !  whereupon  the  sapient  animal  went 
down  suddenly  upon  its  knees  with  a  thud.  The  jerk 
broke  out  the  side  of  my  cradle  completely,  and  1 
descended  to  terra  firma  with  unexpected  alacrity. 

My  head,  however,  was  pillowed  on  down,  an^ 
fortunately  I  was  not  hurt.  Meanwhile,  on  the  othc 
side  of  the  ship  things  had  taken  a  different  turr 
explanatory  of  the  pathetic  end  of  the  china  basin,  a 


Page  388,  Vol.  II. 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR    TO   SARY  KAMISH.         389 

recently  hinted.  We  had  but  one  of  these  useful 
articles,  and  fearing  to  put  it  into  the  crate,  lest  it 
should  be  broken,  I  committed  it  to  Rosy,  to  carry, 
IS  he  suggested,  in  his  bosom.  Later,  however,  he 
xansferred  it  to  the  interior  of  his  sheepskin  hat,  and 
le  was  enjoying  his  slumbers  when  the  crash  came, 
and  he  was  pitched  out  on  his  head,  not  to  the  break- 
ing of  his  skull,  indeed,  but  to  the  utter  destruction  of 
my  china  basin ! 

It  took   Rosy  a   few  minutes   to   realize    in    all   its 

bearings  this  sudden  termination   of  his  dreams,  and 

then  I  saw  that  he  was  disposed  to  take  a  serious  view 

I  of  matters.     This  was  the  second  time  his  perpendicu- 

■  larity  had  been  inverted,  and  he  now  solemnly  informed 

as  that  if  he  were  thrown  upon   his  head    again   he 

would  die !     This,  of  course,  we  deprecated,  as  we  had 

:not  yet  made  sufficient  progress  in  the  vernacular,  and 

i  sve  accordingly  roped  up  the  broken  cradle,  once  more 

I  to  turn  in. 
The  men  suggested,  however,  that,  in  deference  to 
ihe  frailty  of  the  broken  panier,  we  should  not  get  in 
^vhilst  the  camel  was  kneeling,  but  after  it  had  risen. 
This  was  a   feat  less    difficult  of  accomplishment,  no 
\  doubt,  than  climbing  an  elephant's  trunk,  but  by  no  means 
I  sasy.     First,  Murad  was  made  to  tuck  his  head  in  the 
j  :amers  shoulder,  whilst   I   climbed  up  his  back  on  to 
}  :he  camel's  neck,  my  first  landing-stage,  after  which  it 
'emained  to  struggle  over  the  front  of  the  pack-saddle, 
md  let  one's  self  down  into  the  cradle,  the  opposite 
:>anier  being  held  down  till  my  fellow-rider  arrived  by 
:he  same  route,  and  established  the  equilibrium. 

During  the   night,  after  marching   three  miles,   we 

'proached  again  the  bed  of  the  Oxus  at  Ak-bugut,  or 

white  dam,  12  miles  from  Egen-Klych  by  the  road,  but 


390  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

many  more  by  the  river  bed,  which  in  this  reach  is  par- 
ticularly tortuous.  This  last  remark  will  hold  good  of 
our  road,  more  or  less,  all  the  way  from  Kunia  Urgenj.* 
Ak-bugut  is  situated  at  the  apex  of  a  bend  of  the  old 
bed,  where  the  sandy  hillocks  on  the  banks  are  of  con- 
siderable height,  and  where  the  water  has  dug  out  a  big 
hole,  surrounded  by  woods  and  high  natural  walls. 
From  Ak-bugut  our  road  continued  west  for  9  miles, 
when  we  again  crossed  the  Oxus,  the  river  bed  mean- 

*  As  no  English  author  has  described  this  part  of  the  old  bed  of  the 
Oxus  in  detail,  I  ought  perhaps  to  attempt  it,  especially  as  I  have  a 
Russian  account,  edited  by  Professor  Lenz,  as  well  as  his  and  Mr 
Morgan's  admirable  papers  on  the  "Old  Channels  of  the  Lower  Oxus.' 
At  the  old  fort,  Ak-kala,  opposite  the  ruins  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  the  bee 
is  encumbered  with  sand  ;  but,  a  few  hundred  paces  below,  the  bank; 
become  so  high  and  steep  that  a  ramp  had  to  be  cut  for  the  wheelec 
traffic  of  Glukhovsky's  expedition.     On  the  left  bank,  within  about  : 
mile  of  Ak-kala,  the  ground  is  covered  with  sand-dunes,  and  5  mile 
off  begins  the  dry,  salt,  clay  steppe,  with  tamarisks  and  saxaul.     Whet 
tracks  lead  16  miles  south  to  the  ruins  of  Medemin-kala  and  Kandum 
kala,  near  a  lake  of  the  latter  name,  whence  saxaul  and  salt  are  obtainec" 
Seven  miles  from  Ak-kala  the  bed  is  wide,  the  left  bank  high  and  steej 
and  the  bottom  and  right  bank  covered  with  sand.    About  9  miles  beyon 
is  the  dam  of  Ushak-bent.     Here  the  banks   are  lofty,  covered  wit 
tamarisk,  growing  20  feet  high.     The  dam  across  the  bed  measure 
200  paces,  and  in  breadth  about  25  feet  on  its  flattened  top,  and  6 
at  the  bottom.     There  still  exists  a  road  across  the  dam  to  Kandun 
kala. 

Within  the  next  3  miles,  below  Ushak-bent,  are  lakes,  or  rath 
reaches,  of  fresh  water,  Kara-Kum,  Mamuly,  and  Autsi.  Three  milt 
west  of  this  last  the  bed  divides,  and  forms  an  elongated  island  of  san 
called  Gudalchi ;  4  miles  further  on  are  the  reaches  Salak-bent  ar 
Nazar-bai,  and  near  to  this  last  the  ruins  of  Baklyk.  The  reach 
derive  their  names  from  the  constructors  of  the  dam,  Salak-bent,  4  mil 
below. 

This  dam  was  constructed  about  1843,  in  order  to  raise  the  water  hii 
enough  to  fill  a  large  aryk  running  from  the  left  bank.  Two  or  thi 
hundred  men  were  employed  on  the  works  during  the  winter,  ea 
family  working  15  days.  All  this  labour,  however,  was  in  vain.  T 
Turkomans,  who  had  dwelt  on  the  banks  of  the  Urun-daria  for  a  centu 
were  troublous  subjects  to  the  Khans  of  Khiva,  and  were  protected 
distance  and  difficult  communications.  The  Khans,  therefore,  wishi 
them  to  settle  nearer  Khiva,  dammed  up  the  Laudan,  and  so  cut 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR   TO   SARY  KAMISH.         391 

while  having  made  a  double  bend  to  the  south,  and  for 
the  last  5  miles  skirted  on  the  left  the  Butenau  hills,  a 
plateau  in  the  shape  of  a  boot,  and  having  on  its 
northern  edge  a  group  of  Kazak  tombs,  one  of  which 
bears  the  appellation  Ibrahim  Khan,  or  Ibrahim  Ata. 
Another  is  that  of  Ismail  Khan,  and  at  the  north-west 
headland  that  of  Mazar  Ata. 

Thus  far  from  Kunia  Urgenj  the  country  on  the 
south  had  been  a  level  plain,  whilst  on  the  north  this 
plain  abuts  on  the  Ust  Urt  plateau,  the  escarpment  or 
border  of  which  is  called  in  Turki  Chink.^     West  of 

their  water  supply,  and  forced  them  to  come  about  Gazavat.  Hence  the 
many  deserted  houses  we  had  seen. 

Up  to  1862  a  certain  amount  of  water  came  up  to  Salak-bent,  and  to 
Kunia  Urgenj  for  6  years  later.  The  width  of  the  old  bed  here  is  770 
feet.  Along  each  bank  runs  a  channel,  and  in  the  middle  is  a  sandbank. 
The  greatest  depth  of  the  left  channel  is  10  feet,  and  of  the  right  5 
feet.  Three  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  canal,  on  the  right  bank,  are 
the  ruins  of  Sheruana,  which  must  be  somewhere  left  of  the  spot  I 
passed  on  the  night  of  Rosy's  accident,  where  also,  on  the  right  of 
the  road,  three  miles  north  of  Sheruana,  are  the  ruins  of  the  fortress, 
Kalak-kala. 

Three  miles  below  Salak-bent  is  the  well  Karategin,  where  we 
descended  into  the  Oxus  bed,  and  from  thence  marched  along  it  to 
Egen-Klych.  Below  Egen-Klych  the  channel  becomes  more  tortuous, 
and  contains  quantities  of  loose  sand,  which  the  river,  however,  if  it 
returned,  would  easily  carry  away.  In  the  next  13  miles  by  the  river 
bed  to  Ak-bugut,  or  "  white  dam,"  are  wells  in  at  least  7  places,  but 
deeper  than  those  mentioned  before,  owing  probably  to  the  earlier 
stoppage  of  the  current. 

*  The  slopes  commence  at  the  low  plateau  Akimen,  about  a  mile 
north  of  the  well  Karategin,  and  the  chink  runs  along  the  river  bed  for 
S  or  7  miles,  then  makes  a  bend  northward,  where  the  hills  become 
<nown  as  the  Armanzyk  range.  Three  miles  further  west,  and  the  same 
iistance  north  of  Egen-Klych,  is  what  some  would  call  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  Ust  Urt,  and  four  miles  westward  the  promontory 
.vhereon  we  saw  standing  so  proudly  the  ruins  of  Old  Vezir.  Here 
he  perpendicular  walls  of  the  chink  are  70  feet  high,  but  for  22  miles 
o  the  westward,  the  elevation  appears  to  be  less.  When  we  reached 
he  Oxus,  west  of  Ak-bugut,  we  again  had  on  our  right,  6  miles  off, 
he  chink  running  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  and  forming  two 
11^  leadlands,  the  first  called  Bish-Tishik  (five  holes),  and  the  second 
t 


392  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

that  part  of  the  plateau,  called  Bish-Tishik,  are  the 
ruins  of  Denki-Kena,  and  still  further  west,  on  the 
crest  of  the  cliffs,  a  ruin  called  Shamaka,  of  which, 
says  Lenz,  we  know  nothing  except  by  hearsay. 

Lenz  says  that  Ibrahim  Ata  is  found  on  the  march 
route  of  Jenkinson.  This  would  be  natural  enough, 
and  the  most  direct  route  that  I  see  from  Kunia  Vezir 
or  Sellizure,  as  he  calls  it,  to  Mangyshlak  ;  and  I  see 
no  route  on  my  large  map  connecting  Deu  Kesken  with 
Aibughir,  1 7  miles  to  the  north-west,  where  Shakespear 
mounted  the  Ust  Urt. 

After  reaching  the  Oxus  beyond  Ak-bugut,  and 
north  of  the  Butenau  hills,  we  stopped  at  sunrise,  on 
November  nth,  for  breakfast,  and  encamped  at  sunset 
at  Jedurun,  in  or  near  the  dry  bed  called  Kitchkine- 
daria,  or  ''  little  river,"  a  stream  that  branches  off  from 
the  old  Oxus  bed  about  two  miles  from  where  we  last 
crossed  it,  and  runs  parallel  thereto,  but  at  a  distance 
of  from  I  to  2  miles,  to  Sary  Kamish."^  We  were 
now  passing  between  the  Butenau  hills  on  the  left,  and 
the  Chink  on  the  right,  with  a  valley  8  miles  between 
of  friable,  clayey  soil,  mixed  with  stones.  Saline 
patches  were  visible,  and  much  tamarisk,  and  in  the 
morning  we  passed  through  a  fine  wood  of  saxaul, 
with  white  willows  here  and  there  in  favoured  localities. 

Aur-Murun  (big  cape).  Between  these  headlands  the  cliffs  art 
evidently  inaccessible,  but  to  the  north  of  Bish-Tishik  the  slope  h 
gentler,  and  to  the  west  of  Aur-Murun  is  a  narrow  but  convenien 
ramp,  after  which  the  cliffs  again  become  steep,  and  from  70  to  100  fee 
high,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  trending  off  round  Sary  Kamish. 

*  The  bed  of  the  Kitchkine-daria  is  150  feet  wide,  but  filled  wit! 
sand.  Still,  its  banks  are  high  and  steep,  and  it  therefore  present 
difi&culties,  though  not  insuperable,  to  wheeled  vehicles  crossing  it 
The  windings  of  the  Kitchkine-daria  cover  so  large  an  area  that  th 
road  from  Ak-bugut  to  Dekche  crosses  it  7  times.  At  Dekche  the  be< 
turns  south,  but  again  approaches  the  road  from  Dekche  to  Saur  , 
Kamish,  and  then  crosses  this  road  twice. 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR    TO    SARY  KAMISH.         393 

On  the  preceding  day  we  flushed  a  pheasant,  and  later 
saw  crows  and  a  finch,  and  here  and  there  the  tracks 
of  sheep,  but  otherwise  few  signs  of  animal  life. 

On  the  next  morning,  November  12th,  I  was  in  an 
indulgent  mood,  gave  the  men  an  extra  rest,  and  did 
not  stir  them  up  till  4  o'clock,  and  by  9  we  had 
reached  Dekche.  This  was  now  the  third  day  since 
we  had  taken  water,  and  the  horses  were  faint  from 
being  restricted  in  drink,  and  also  from  finding  little 
on  the  ground  to  eat.  But  at  Dekche  there  was  ''  corn 
in  Egypt,"  though  not  easily  accessible,  for  both  grass 
and  water  were  at  the  rush-grown  bottom  of  a  deep 
gorge  in  the  Oxus  bed,  and  just  there  the  banks  were 
quite  imposing.*  The  right  bank,  though  of  clay, 
obstinately  resisting  atmospheric  influences,  was  much 
weatherbeaten,  and  stood  up  before  us  like  a  cliff,  as 
we  scrambled  down  a  narrow  path  on  the  opposite 
bank,  to  water  our  animals  and  refill  the  barrels. 

We  thus  gained  an  opportunity  of  observing  one  of 
the  many  lakes,  or  reaches,  in  the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus, 
They  are  not  only  numerous,  but  in  some  cases  very 
deep.  That  they  existed  before  the  river  ceased  to 
run  is  shown  by  the  presence  therein  of  fish.  It  is  to 
be  presumed  that  a  considerable  amount  of  filtration 
from  the  Amu  and  canals  goes  on  under  the  old  bed, 
by  means  of  which  the  wells  along  its  course — usually 
from  4  to  20  feet  deep — are  supplied.     The  water  in 

*  After  giving  off  the  Kitchkine-daria  the  bed  gradually  widens  and 
deepens.  At  first  the  right  bank  is  steep,  but  the  left  disappears  under 
the  sand.  A  short  distance  further  the  bed  is  like  a  deep  precipice,  the 
outline  of  the  banks  being  irregular.  As  the  bed  approaches  the  Ust 
Urt  it  narrows,  the  walls  are  140  feet  high,  and  the  sands  on  the  bottom 
are  replaced  by  stretches  of  clear  water.  This  was  the  case  at  Dekche, 
where  the  width  of  the  Urun-daria  (which  usually  averages  from  ^  to  ^ 
a  mile)  is  from  700  to  1,050  feet,  and  the  depth,  according  to  Lehmann, 
at  least  210  feet. 


394  RUSSIA?^  CENTRAL   ASIA, 

the  reaches  is  rather  yellow,  but  fairly  transparent, 
and  sweet,  until  the  meridian  of  Aibughir  is  reached, 
when  it  begins  to  be  brackish.  So,  at  least,  say 
several  writers,  adding  that,  at  Dekche,  the  water  is 
''  salt  and  bitter,  and  quite  unfit  for  use"  ;  but  we  made 
use  of  it  for  all  purposes,  and  I  have  no  recollection  of 
its  being  particularly  disagreeable. 

Rosy  told  us  that  the  Russian  engineers  stayed  at 
Dekche,  with  their  Cossack  escort,  for  6  weeks,  and  we 
unladed  our  camels  close  to  the  earthworks  they  had 
thrown  up.  The  place  commanded  a  good  view  of 
the  cliffs  of  the  Ust  Urt,  with  well-marked  horizontal 
indentations.  As  we  descended  into  the  gorge  the 
path  contracted  in  one  place  to  a  few  inches  between 
rocks,  and  here  was  cleverly  set,  not  a  man-trap,  but  a 
smaller  one  with  teeth  to  catch  some  luckless  gazelle 
going  down  to  drink.  This  led  us  to  think  there 
might  be  Turkomans  in  the  vicinity,  in  which  case  it 
seemed  desirable  not  to  leave  our  baggage  unguarded. 
Murad  told  us  for  our  comfort  that  in  this  very  place, 
three  years  before,  the  post  had  been  attacked  and 
robbed  ;  but  as  he  himself  had  been  robbed  some  ten 
or  a  dozen  times,  he  seemed  to  make  little  of  it.  We 
had  seen  no  habitations  since  we  left  the  Turkoman's 
tent,  but  I  have  read  that  In  this  neighbourhood  there 
are  to  be  found  here  and  there  under  thickets,  sub- 
terraneous sheds,  deserted  in  summer,  but  into  which, 
in  winter,  cattle  are  driven  on  the  approach  of  danger. 

On  leaving  Dekche  we  proceeded  ten   miles  to  the 
wells   of  Sary   Kamish,   in   the  Oxus  bed,   where  the 
surface   of  the  water  was   i8  feet  deep.     I   did    most 
of  the  way  in  the  cradle.     Sevier  gave  up  his  panidi 
all  the  morning  to  Rosy,  who  was  much  better,  thougfii 
still    taking    very   kindly   to  the  cradle,   and  perfectl 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR    TO    SARY  KAMISH.         395 

content  to  be  treated  as  an  invalid  !  About  5  o'clock 
we  reached  the  wells,  which  are  within  sight  of  the 
great  lake  ;  and  here  we  had  to  descend  so  steep  a  path 
that  the  men  desired  us  to  get  out  of  the  cradles, 
lest  the  camel  should  fall  and  break  its  legs.  Thus 
far  we  had  met  with  no  piece  of  road,  I  think,  whereon 
our  tarantass  might  not  have  been  drawn,  but  now  it 
would  have  been  out  of  the  question.* 

For  some  reason  unknow^n  to  me  our  men  wanted 
to  stop  at  the  wells  Sary  Kamish  only  two  hours,  and 
then  to  go  rapidly  on  for  a  long  journey,  as  they  said, 
on  the  morrow.  This  was  our  fifth  day  from  Kunia 
Urgenj,  and  up  to  this  time  we  had  accomplished  only 
about  85  miles,  or  not  much  more  than  I  have  some- 
times posted  in  Siberia  in  12  hours,  and  I  was  begin- 
ning to  get  tired  of  this  slow  progress.  I  reminded 
the  men  of  their  probable  lessening  of  the  present  they 
hoped  to  receive  ;  but  they  did  not  appear  much  con- 
cerned. An  incident  now  occurred,  however,  that 
brought  my  dissatisfaction  to  a  climax,  for,  on  going  to 
the  crate  to  get  half  a  water-melon  we  had  left  uneaten, 
I  found  its  pinky  flesh  scooped  out  and  the  rind  only 
left.     Murad  was  the   culprit,  whom   Sevier  had   seen 

*  From  this  point  the  Oxus  bed  becomes  gradually  wider,  and  the 
ground  rapidly  falls  towards  the  lake.  The  banks  of  the  river  bed, 
gradually  sinking,  remain  vertical  at  first,  and  then  gently  and  imper- 
ceptibly disappear  in  the  banks  of  the  old  lake.  The  ground  is  sandy, 
covered  with  tamarisk  and  white  willows  {J>oj[>ulus  divers  if  olio), 
numerous  enough  to  be  called  woods.  The  area  occupied  by  the 
thickets  is  considerable,  and  bears  traces  of  former  cultivation. 
Another  evidence  of  this  is  the  fairly  preserved  system  of  aryks  and 
canals.  The  copses  become  less  dense  on  approaching  the  lake, 
finally  give  place  to  thick  steppe  grasses,  after  which  comes  a  zone  of 
firm,  clayey,  salt  soil ;  but  beyond  this,  and  nearer  to  the  lake,  the  soil 
is  so  spongy  as  not  to  support  a  man  on  horseback  200  paces  from  the 
water,  thereby  exhibiting  signs  of  being  merely  a  crust  over  a  liquid 
foundation. 


396  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

put  in  his  great  black  hand,  and  tear  out  the  luscious 
morsel.  I  called  him  up,  and  charged  him  with  pur- 
loining, whereupon  he  said  that  when  the  crate  fell, 
which  it  had  done  early  in  the  day,  one  of  the 
camels  had  put  his  nose  into  the  crate  and  cleaned  out 
the  melon.  Sevier,  however,  witnessed  against  him. 
and  I  gave  him  a  lecture. 

But  shortly  after  Rosy  came  to  divulge  that  Murad 
had  stolen  about  five-and-twenty,  or  nearly  half,  of  my 
native  bread-cakes,  whereupon  I  felt  that  it  was  high 
time  for  me  to  turn  policeman,  and  to  give  him  some- 
thing more  than  sharp  words,  which  by  the  time  they 
had  left  me  in  English,  Sevier  in  Russian,  and  Rosy  in 
Turki,  had  lost  much  of  their  flavour.  1  adopted,  there- 
fore, a  corrective  idea  from  Captain  Burnaby's  book 
and  holding  up  the  bag  with  the  remaining  cake.'- 
before  Murad's  face,  I  addressed  him  in  English,  and, 
to  make  it  understandable,  I  administered  on  his  back 
two  or  three  sharp  cuts  with  my  horsewhip.  He  wore 
so  many  khalats  over  his  well-seasoned  hide  that  I  dc 
not  think  he  was  much  hurt,  but  under  the  conscious- 
ness of  guilt  his  swarthy  face  became  a  few  shades 
darker  than  before,  and  Sevier  cried  out  that  he  acknow  . 
ledged  himself  wrong,  promising  not  to  offend  again 
whereupon  I  desisted. 

I  know  not  whether  this  narrative  may  cause  some 
to  think  that  I  was  forgetting  my  profession,  but 
acted  advisedly  and  thought  I  was  right.  We  wer* 
not  yet  half-way  to  the  Caspian,  and  if  I  did  not  ii 
some  way  establish  my  authority,  we  might  have  hal 
our  provisions  stolen.  There  was  no  policeman,  magis 
trate,  or  bek  within  scores  of  miles,  and  I  could  no 
rid  myself  of  the  thief  either  by  advance  or  by  retrcc 
I   was  thankful,   therefore,  that    I   had  the  courage 


FROM  KUNIA    VEZIR   TO   SARY  KAMISH.  397 

'*  take  the  bull  by  the  horns  "  and  administer  what  the 
French  call  une  petite  correction,  and  it  had  precisely 
the  effect  that  I  wished. 

Murad  slunk  off  to  Nazar,  and  presently  a  message 
came  in  the  plural  number  to  say  that,  if  I  scolded  and 
beat  them,  they  would  go  back,  which  united  action  I 
counter-manoeuvred  by  telling  both  that  they  had  only 
to  be  honest  and  all  would  be  well,  and  adding  that 
I  was  not  angry  with  Nazar.  This  honourable  excep- 
tion pleased  Nazar,  and  he  thanked  me,  and,  what  was 
better,  proved  himself  afterwards  true  as  steel.  Murad 
continued  the  idle,  lazy  lout  he  had  been  all  along, 
putting  his  work,  when  he  could,  on  the  others,  and 
wanting  to  ride  when  Nazar  walked  ;  but  I  had  estab- 
lished my  position  as  master,  and  he  obeyed,  so  that 
henceforward  we  got  on  better. 

After  resting  three  hours  at  the  well,  we  ascended 
out  of  the  river  bed  by  a  path  equally  difficult  to  that 
by  which  we  had  entered.  Murad's  temper  had  not 
quite  recovered,  and  he  said  at  first  that  they  were 
going  back,  but  made  no  attempt  in  that  direction,  and 
soon  after  midnight  we  came  to  a  land  of  reeds  and 
rushes.  Then  the  men  came  to  say  that  the  camels 
were  so  tired  that  they  must  rest,  for  one  of  them  was 
ill ;  also  that  it  was  so  dark  they  could  not  see  the  way. 
With  regard  to  the  camels  I  thought  it  a  lie,  but  as  for 
the  other  plea,  if  they  did  not  know  the  way,  certainly 
\  I  could  not  tell  them,  nor  blame  them,  for  it  was  so 
dark  as  to  surprise  me  how  they  could  make  out  the 
way  at  all.  I  gave  permission,  therefore,  to  stop  and 
rest  till  daybreak,  when,  on  opening  our  eyes,  we  saw 
stretched  out  in  the  grey  light  of  morning  the  little- 
known  lakes  of  Sarv  Kamish. 


CHAPTER  LXX. 

SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OX  US. 

Lakes  of  Sary  Kamish  and  their  characteristics. — Testing  specific 
gravity  of  water. — Its  chemical  analysis, — Crossing  the  lake 
basin  to  the  Ust  Urt. — Jenkinson's  alleged  "  Bay  of  the  Caspian." 
— Geographical  problems  respecting  the  course  of  the  Oxus  and 
Sea  of  Aral. — Historical  discussion  and  physical  investigation.— 
Testimony  of  travellers  from  1717. — Reconnaissances  of  Markozoff, 
Stebnitzky,  Glukhovsky,  Lupandine,  and  Petrusevitch. — Four  dry 
Oxus  beds. — The  feasibility  of  diverting  the  Oxus  into  the  Caspian. 
— The  cause  of  its  deflection  eastwards. 


L 


AKE  SARY  KAMISH,  or,  as  the  Turkomans 
call  it,  "  Betandali  Goel,"  comprises,  properl 
speaking,  two  elongated  sheets  of  water,  united  bj 
a  narrow  and  sinuous  strait,  two-thirds  of  a  mile  widj 
and  7  miles  long.  They  lie  from  north-east  to  souths 
west,  and  the  one  we  first  approached  measures  I 
miles  long  by  4  wide,  and  has  several  barren  islands 
Between  the  two  lakes,  and  almost  surrounded  b} 
water,  is  a  rocky  eminence,  on  the  northern  an^ 
western  sides  of  which  runs  the  strait.  The  second 
lake  is  10  miles  long,  and  varies  from  3  to  6  mile 
wide.  The  altitude  of  the  former  is  said  to  be  a  littLl 
higher  than  that  of  the  latter,  and  the  Cossacks  0 
Glukhovsky' s  expedition  found  the  current  of  th' 
strait  running  accordingly.  Both  lakes  are  very  deep 
and  their  beds  are  in  places  firm  and  sandy,  thoug! 


f 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OX  US.     39Q 

for  the  most  part  unapproachable  at  the  edge  of  the 
water,  whilst  their  flat  and  open  shores  are  one  mass 
of  salt  marshes.  The  lakes  are  surrounded  by  sand, 
and  one  easily  sees  that  their  surface  once  occupied 
a  far  wider  extent  than  now,  especially  on  the  east, 
west,  and  south,  the  shores  of  the  former  basin  being 
in  some  places  8  miles  distant  from  the  present  lakes. 
Vegetation  exists  only  on  the  former  shores. 

When  daylight  showed  us  our  whereabouts  on  the 
morning  of  November  13th,  we  found  ourselves  at  the 
north  end  of  the  first  lake,  in  a  dry  portion  of  its 
present  basin,  whence  we  proceeded  in  a  south- 
westerly direction,  about  3  miles  distant  from  the 
water,  till  in  the  afternoon  we  approached  sufficiently 
near  to  the  second  lake  to  lead  me  to  ride  forward,  and 
attempt  to  get  to  the  water  for  the  purpose  of  testing 
its  specific  gravity  ;  but  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the 
margin  my  horse  sank  to  the  knees,  and  I  was  obliged 
to  desist.  Returning  to  the  caravan  for  assistance, 
Nazar  brought  me  to  another  place,  where,  tucking 
up  my  trousers,  I  found  myself  also  sinking  to  the 
knees  within  a  dozen  feet  of  the  water's  edge.  I 
dared  not  undress,  because  I  could  see  no  means  of 
washing  off  the  mud  with  which  1  must  inevitably  be 
covered  on  wading  out  to  terra  firma.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  did  not  like  to  be  so  near  the  goal  and  not 
attain  to  it.  Whereupon  Nazar  and  I  plucked  some 
tussocks  of  a  bushy,  prickly  plant,  which  was  the  only 

egetation  growing  near,  and,  putting  these  before  me 
step  by  step,  and  putting  my  bare  feet  thereon,  I 
managed,  at  the  cost  of  scratching  myself,  to  keep 
from  going  down  out  of  all  soundings,  and  to  attain  to 
the  edge  of  the  lake.  The  water  was  clear,  but  in- 
tensely salt — more  so  than  sea- water — and  so  great  was 


400  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

its  density,  that  my  instrument  for  the  determination  of 
the  specific  gravity  of  different  waters,  and  graduated 
from  o°  to  1 00°,  would  not  sink  below  a  point  which, 
had  the  scale  been  continued,  would  have  read  120°.* 

I  was  fortunate,  or  unfortunate,  as  the  reader  may 
regard  it,  in  not  attempting  to  bathe  in  Sary  Kamish. 
A  member  of  Glukhovsky's  expedition  found  a  stony 
beach  on  the  south-east  of  the  upper  lake,  and,  on 
going  in  to  have  a  swim,  found  the  water  so  buoyant 
that,  at  100  paces  from  the  beach,  he  could  hardly 
dive.  The  sub-strata  of  the  water  appeared  a  greenish 
yellow,  and  viscous  like  oil,  with  a  disagreeable  odour, 
that,  in  the  course  of  a  long  walk  on  the  beach,  pro- 
duced in  him  a  sensation  of  nausea.  The  buoyancy 
of  the  water  reminded  one  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which 
these  lakes  resemble  further  in  that  the  natives  say 
they  contain  no  fish.  The  banks  are  deserted.  Gulls, 
Woodcocks,  and  Ducks,  however,  are  sometimes  seen 
flying  over  the  water,  and  we  saw  in  the  course  of  the 
afternoon  a  Magpie  and  a  Dun  Crow. 

Leaving  the  water  to  our  left,  we  crossed  a  piece  of 
rising  ground,  and  on  looking  back  we  had  rather  a 
pretty  view  of  the  lakes,  but  the  place  was  barren  of 
trees.  We  came  about  3.30  to  a  promontory,  Kakh- 
Pular,  and  to  sands  on  our  left  of  the  same  name, 
whilst  the  sands  to  the  right  of  the  road  are  called 

*  Samples  of  Sary  Kamish  water,  in  5  bottles,  were  taken  by  Glu- 
khovsky's expedition,  and  each  submitted  to  chemical  analysis  at  the 
Tashkend  laboratory,  with  the  following  results  : — Specific  gravity  103 
at  58°.  In  1,000  cubic  centimeters  of  water  there  were,  in  each  of 
the  5  samples,  grains  of  solid  matter  from  40*92  the  lowest,  to  47*04  the 
highest;  sulphuric  acid,  4*61  to  5*44;  chlorine,  I9'4t  to  2i"j()  ;  chalk, 
2*03  to  2*57  ;  magnesia,  i-86  to  2 "09.  Besides  the  foregoing,  there  are 
in  the  waters  of  Sary  Kamish,  in  quantities  not  stated,  natron,  sulphu- 
retted hydrogen,  silica,  aluminium,  carbonic  acid,  and  organic  matter 
in  solution. 


11 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OX  US.     401 

Kyzyl- Kaia.  x-\t  Kakh^Pular  we  pitched  our  tent, 
as  my  notes  have  it,  ''  near  what  looks  like  the  dried 
basin  of  a  large  lake."* 

We  started  on  the  morning  of  November  14th,  at  i, 
stopped  for  3  hours  at  sunrise,  and  at  half-past  2 
arrived  at  the  cliffs,  which  had  long  bounded  our 
horizon.  I  have  no  note  or  recollection  of  the  hollow 
way,  or  water-course,  which,  according  to  my  map,  we 
must  have  crossed,  but  we  noticed  particularly  at  the 
foot  of  the  cliffs  a  narrow  line  of  beach,  or  pebbles, 
rounded  apparently  by  the  action  of  water,  and  mixed 
with  sand  and  shells,  which  we  at  first  took  to  be 
evidence  indicative  of  an  ancient  sea  shore  ;  and  as  we 
were  mounting  a  declivity,  or  natural  ramp,  in  the 
cliffs,  it  looked,  in  common  parlance,  just  as  if  we  were 
emerging  from  the  sea  at  low  water,  across  beach 
washed  up  by  the  last  tide,  on  the  southern  English 
coast,  and  mounting  the  downs,  say,  at  Newhaven  or 
Eastbourne.  Then,  on  looking  back  from  a  height, 
one  could  think  of  the  vast  expanse  of  land  stretching 
to  the  horizon  as  of  nothing  else  but  the  bed  of  a 
former  lake  or  sea. 

It  occurs  to  me  to  add  that  if  at  this  point  Jenkinson 
emerged  from  the  wilderness  after  20  days'  journey 
from  Mangyshlak,  and  if  the  water  then  came  up  to 

"^  This  is  precisely  what  the  guide  to  Glukhovsky's  expedition  in- 

med  them,  adding  that  the  level  steppe  extended  **  to  the  cliffs  of 

-ic  Ust  Urt,  and  there,  at  a  distance  of  about  a  verst  from  their  base, 

inay  be  seen  a  long  lowland,  or  rather  a  flat,  hollow  way,  running  parallel 

the  cliffs,  which  perhaps  served  as  the  former  issue  of  the  Oxus  flowing 

m  Sary  Kamish  towards  the  Caspian."     The  commencement  of  the 

ilow  way,  the  guide  said,  was  about  17  miles  from  the  western  bank  of 

ay  Kamish.     Subsequent  exploration  would  appear  to  have  confirmed 

this,  for  on  my  Russian  map,  20  versts  to  the  inch,  the  Oxus  bed  leaves 

the  Sary  Kamish  basin  in  a  westerly  direction,  about  6  miles  west  of 

the  southern  lake,  and  then  quickly  turns  at  right  angles  and  runs 

south,  parallel  to  the  Ust  Urt  cliffs,  called  here  Ust-Kaplan-Kir. 

VOL.  II.  26 


402  RUSSIA  AT  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  cliffs,  he  may  very  well  be  pardoned  for  mistaking 
it  for  a  gulf  of  the  Caspian.  Muravieff,  many  years* 
afterwards,  called  the  cliffs  "  a  sea  shore,"  and  I  coul< 
well  have  done  the  same,  looking  only  at  what  Wc 
before  me.*  I  fear,  however,  that  I  am  laying  mysell 
open  to  objection  from  the  general  reader,  in  that  I  ai 
trying  to  throw  light  on  the  interesting  geographicc 
problems  belonging  to  this  region,  without  having  stated 
them.  They  concern  the  ancient  course  of  the  Oxus, 
and  the  condition  of  the  Sea  of  Aral.  Not  many  years 
ago  it  was  asserted  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  and  other 
eminent  geographers,  that  the  Oxus  has  more  than 
once  changed  its  course,  flowing  now  into  the  Caspian, 
and  now  into  the  Aral,  and  that  the  Aral  has  accord- 
ingly fluctuated  a  good  deal  at  different  periods, 
between  the  condition  of  a  great  inland  sea  and  that 
of  a  reedy  marsh,  and,  further,  that  when  the  supply 
of  water  from  those  feeders  has  been  entirely  cut  off 
for  a  lengthened  period,   the  Aral   has  dried  up,  and 

*  There  is  a  route  indicated  on  Walker's  map   that   would   bring 
Jenkinson  here  from  Mangyshlak,  with  his  thousand  camels,  in  about  2C 
days,  and,  on    reaching  this    cliff  at    Sary    Kamish,    the   distance   tc 
Sellizure  would  be  just  3  da3^s'  journey  at  25  miles  a  day.     His  state- 
ment also,  that  the  Oxus  once  fell  into  this  g"ulf,  would  accord  with  whaf 
anyone   may  now  see  of  the  dry  bed,  though  there  may  have  subse 
quently  been  an  intermittent  flow  of  water  all  the  way  to  Sary  Kamish 
and,  lastly,  if  his  report  be  adduced  as  a  difficulty  of  the  water  bein^ 
fresh,  one  may  fairly  suppose  this  to  have  been  the  case  when  the  lak( 
had  been   supplied  from   the   Oxus  only  recently  through  the  Urun 
daria.     Besides  this  I  have  read  nothing  to  show  that  the  lake  may  no 
still  have  been  reached  by  some  of  the  now  dry  beds  of  the   Oxu 
approaching   Sary    Kamish   on   the   other  side.      The  guide  to   Glu 
khovsky's  expedition    "showed   us   the    place   where  the  Jity-Murai 
formerly  fell  into  the  eastern  angle  of  the  lake,  and  also,  15  to  20  verst 
away,  the  old  bed  of  Iliansky-Daudan,  which  fell  into  the  old  lake 
whose  limits  extended  thus  far  from  those  actually  existing."     I  shal 
have  presently  to  refer  to  another  inland  bed  of  a  sea,  or  lake,  we  cam 
to   farther  west   at  another   Kaplan- Kir,    which    no  Englishman    l* 
myself,  and  ver>^  few  Russians,  I  believe,  have  ever  seen.     But  suppos 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OX  US.     403 

disappeared  from  the  map  of  Asia.  In  opposition  to 
this  It  was  maintained  by  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  and 
others  that  though  the  Ox  us  may  at  times  have  partially 
flowed  into  the  Caspian,  yet  that  the  main  outlines  of 
the  Aralo-Caspian  region  have  not  materially  varied  in 
historic  times,  and  that  there  is  not  sufficient  ground 
for  saying  the  Aral  has  ceased  to  exist.* 

Up  to  within  about  12  years  ago  the  country  was 
closed  to  scientific  observers,  and,  therefore,  the  ques- 
tion could  be  discussed  only  upon  historical  grounds, 
which  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  stated  to  the  effect  that 
from  the  earliest  date,  say,  from  600  years  B.C.  to  about 
600  years  a.d.,  the  Sea  of  Aral  is  utterly  unknown  in 
any  Greek,  Latin,  or  Persian  writings  we  possess. 
The  Oxus  and  Jaxartes  are  described  as  running 
iinto  the  Caspian.  Further,  the  Asiatic  trade-route  of 
those  days  is  represented  as  starting  from  the  foot  of 
the  Indian  Caucasus,  or  Central  Asian  mountains, 
down  the  Oxus  to  the  Caspian,  ascending  the  Kur,  and 
descending  the  Phasis  to  the  Black  Sea,  and  thence 
crossing  into  Europe. 

For  the  next  700  years,  he  adds,  there  is  a  con- 
sensus of  testimony  exactly  in  the  other  direction. 
The  Arabs  were  then  the  possessors  of  the  country, 
md  their  geographical  works  Invariably  represent  the 
Oxus   and   Jaxartes  as   falling   into   the   Sea  of  Aral. 

ng  for  a  moment  that  the  Kara-boghaz  indented  the  coast  in  this 
lirection  as  far  even,  say,  as  Uzun  Kuyu,  it  would  be  impossible  to  get 
L  caravan  from  thence  to  Sellizure  in  3  days.  So  far,  then,  as  my 
imited  reading  upon  the  subject,  and  my  personal  observation,  enable 
ne  to  form  an  opinion,  I  think  that  Jenkinson  emerged  from  the 
vildemess  at  Sary  Kamish,  and  mistook  this  lake  for  a  gulf  of  the 
-pian,  as  Mr.  Howorth  also  suggests. 
See  the  question  as  stated  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  and  Sir 
■Roderick  Murchison  in  the  Pj'oceediiigs  of  the  Royal  Geogra^phical 
■ociefy  for  1867,  pp.  114,  204. 


404  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

The  presumption,  therefore,  is  that  from  some  natural 
disturbance  the  rivers  had  changed  their  course,  and, 
running  into  a  hollow,  probably  made  for  themselves 
the  Sea  of  Aral* 

During  the  next  200  years,  from  1300  to  1500, 
frequent  missions  were  sent  from  the  courts  of  Europe 
through  Central  Asia  to  Mongolia;  and  though  the 
routes  lay  in  most  cases  across  the  Aral  region  (Sir 
Henry  even  says  the  route  lying  across  the  bed  of  the 
Aral),  yet  not  one  of  the  travellers  records  the  existence 
of  the  sea.  Colonel  Yule,  however,  having  examined 
these  records,  states  there  is  no  ground  for  saying  th' 
route  lay  across  the  bed  of  the  Aral,  though  it  may  hav( 
gone  partially  round  it.t 

In  addition  to  this  negative  evidence  Sir  Henr\ 
Rawlinson  adduced  extracts  from  a  Persian  manuscript 
containing  a  geographical  account  of  the  province  0 
Khorassan  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century 
In  this  the  writer,  speaking  of  the  Lake  of  Kharezm 
or  Aral,  says  :  "  In  all  the  ancient  books  the  Lake  0 
Kharezm  is  described  as  the  receptacle  of  the  water 
of  the  Oxus,  but  at  the  present  date  (141 7)  the  lake  n( 
longer  exists,  the  Oxus  having  made  a  way  for  itsel 
to  the  Caspian,  into  which  it  disembogues  at  a  spc 
called  Karlawn "  (or  Akricheh).  The  same  write 
states  that  the  Jaxartes,  passing  into  the  desert  c 
Kharezm,  joins  the  Oxus,  and  thus  reaches  th 
Caspian. 

Next   we  come  to  the  time  of  Jenkinson,  who,  i ' 
1558,  landed  on  the  north-east  coast  of  the  Caspiai^ 

*  The  bed  of  this  sea,  it  should  be  remembered,  is  about  130  fe  j 
above  the  level  of  the  Caspian,  so  that,  if  a  communication  were  foma  I 
between  the  two  seas,  the  Aral  would  naturally  be  drained.  I 

t  See  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  for  i8<  \ 
p.  211. 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OX  US.     405 

travelled  for  20  days  to  a  sheet  of  water,  which  he 
called  a  bay  of  the  Caspian,  but  which,  for  reasons 
already  mentioned,  I  can  think  of  only  as  Lake  Sary 
Kamish,  since  the  water  was  sweet,  and  within  3  days' 
journey  of  Sellizure.  I  myself  passed  over  some  miles 
of  the  dry  bed  of  this  shrunken  lake,  but  supposing 
that  Jenkinson  kept  along  the  cliffs  to  the  north,  as 
apparently  did  Muravieff,  to  Bish-deshikwells(Dekche?), 
then  both  travellers  must,  in  all  probability,  have  seen, 
as  I  did,  if  not  crossed,  what  is  now  called  the  Urun- 
daria,  and  Jenkinson  might  well  have  there  learned 
that  the  river  had  lately  changed  its  course,  and  gone 
back  to  the  Sea  of  Aral.  This  change  is  amply  con- 
firmed by  Abul  Ghazi,  who  mentions  the  very  year 
when  the  river  began  to  return  to  the  Aral,  and  relates 
how  the  Oxus  dried  up,  and  formed  the  present  sea. 

With  regard  to  the  Oxus  bed  beyond  Sary  Kamish, 
the  reviewer  of  Yale's  "Marco  Polo,"  in  x\\^ Edinburgh 
Review  for  1872,  whom  I  take  to  be  Sir  Henry 
Rawlinson,  thinks  that  when  Bekovitch  went  to  Khiva 
in  1 71 7,  the  desiccation  of  the  Turkoman  steppe  was 
complete,  and  that  not  a  drop  of  the  Oxus  water  at 
that  time  flowed  to  the  Caspian  ;  and  when  we  come  to 
the  present  century  it  would  appear  that  the  bed  south 
of  Sary  Kamish  was  undoubtedly  dry,  as  witnessed  by 
Muravieff,  who  passed  from  Balkan  Bay  to  Khiva  ; 
from  Conolly,  who  attempted  to  cross  from  Astrakhan 
to  Khiva  ;  and,  lastly,  by  Vambery.  All  of  these  came 
upon  the  old  dry  bed. 

So    much,   then,    for   the   historical  .  inquiry,    which 

shows    a    fourfold    change    of    course.*      We    come 

j!  next  to  scientific  investigations  of  Russian  engineers, 

*  Further  information  may  be  found  in  the  work  of  M.  de  Goeje, 
the  brochure  of  Professor  Lentz,  and  a  paper  of  Major  Wood. 


4o6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

who  have  had  every  inducement  to  go  into  the 
question  thoroughly  ;  since,  if  the  Amu  could  be  turned 
into  its  old  channel  and  rendered  navigable,  Russia 
would  have  a  highway  from  Petersburg  to  Afghanistan. 
As  General  Grotenhielm  laughingly  said  to  me,  "When 
you  come  to  pay  us  your  next  visit,  and  the  Oxus  is 
open,  you  will  be  able  to  take  your  ticket  from  London 
Bridge  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  in  the  heart  of  Asia, 
and  come  all  the  way  by  water  !  "  meaning,  of  course, 
by  way  of  Petersburg,  and  through  the  canals  to  the 
Volga  and  Caspian.  This  practical  question  occupied 
the  mind  of  Peter  the  Great,  who  sent  Bekovitch  Cher- 
kassky  to  Khiva  with  a  view  of  investigating  the  old 
bed  of  the  Amu,  and  diverting  it  again  into  the 
Caspian  ;  but,  as  will  be  remembered,  he  was  mur- 
dered, and  the  data  he  collected  perished  with  him. 
Again,  Muravieff,  in  1819,  crossed  the  old  bed  of  the 
Oxus  at  Besh-dishik  wells,  where  he  found  it  700 
feet  wide,  margined  on  the  north  by  the  chink  of  the 
Ust  Urt,  or  "sea  shore"  as  he  calls  it.  On  his 
return  journey  he  crossed  the  old  river  bed  at  the 
bitter  salt  spring  of  Tunuklu,  on  the  parallel  ap- 
parently of  Dakhli  wells,  277  miles  from  Krasnovodsk, 
where  one  bank  is  again  steep, -and  the  bottom  covered 
with  brushwood,  but  the  channel  not  so  deep  as  at 
Besh-dishik.  Also,  in  1836,  General  Blaramberg  had 
the  opportunity  of  exploring  the  old  bed  from  its 
mouth,  in  Balkan  Bay,  to  the  Balkan  mountains 
but  it  was  not  till  after  the  occupation  of  Krasnovodsk^ 
in  1870,  that  the  Russians  commenced  to  survey  thf 
steppes  east  of  the  Caspian  and  the  desiccated  Oxu5 
bed,  their  alleged  object  being  to  find  a  good  numbei 
of  roads  for  the  furtherance  of  commerce  with  Central 
Asia.     To  this  end  Colonel   Markozoff  made  two  re  j 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OXUS.     407 

connalssances,  the  first  to  the  north-east  beyond  Sary 
Kamish,  to  Dekche;  the  second  along  the  lower  por- 
tions of  the  Uzboi  (as  the  natives  call  this  part  of  the 
old  bed),  but  reached  only  to  Topiatan. 

To  this  peaceable  object  was  added,  shortly  after, 
the  necessity  of  finding  routes  with  wells,  along  which 
troops  might  march  for  the  occupation  of  Khiva. 
Colonel  Stebnitzky's  expeditions,  in  1872,  were  in  part 
intended  to  push  on  Markozoff's  work  in  the  Uzboi. 
He  found  a  good  slope  all  the  way  from  the  Caspian 
to  the  wells  of  Igda,  a  distance  of  187  miles,  and 
indications  that  a  great  river,  from  60  to  70  feet  deep, 
had  once  flowed  there.*  In  the  following  year,  1873, 
during  the  Khivan  expedition.  Colonel  Glukhovsky 
went  along  the  old  bed,  as  I  have  said  before,  to  Sary 
Kamish,  in  the  direction  I  myself  travelled,  and  I 
have  incorporated  the  principal  results  of  his  work  in 
my  own  account.  It  was  not  till  1875,  however,  that 
the  topographer  M.  Lupandine  mapped  the  remaining 
section  of  the  Uzboi,  between  Igda  and  Sary  Kamish, 
•so  that  the  entire  direction  of  the  old  bed  was  made 
known,  its  length  from  the  Amu  at  Kipchak  to  Balkan 
Bay  being  500  miles,  with  a  fall  of  400  feet. 

After  this  it  was  prgposed,  in  1876,  to  establish  a 
;  permanent  trade-route  from  Khiva  to  Krasnovodsk, 
.  along  a  line  drawn  by  Glukhovsky,  which  is  practically 

*  At  Dso-Yuruk  spring  the  steep  sides  are  composed  of  regularly 
stratified  steppe  lime.  From  the  springs  of  Burgun,  close  to  the  right 
bank,  the  stream  must  have  bored  its  way  through  horizontal  layers  of 
marl  and  shell-limestone  belonging  to  the  miocene  formation.  From 
'  Dso-Yuruk  to  Topiatan  the  bed  is  nearly  a  mile  in  breadth.  Traces  of 
freshwater  shells,  however,  could  nowhere  be  found,  nor  ruins,  nor 
traces  of  irrigation  works  between  the  Caspian  and  Igda.  Between  Igda 
and  Sary  Kamish,  however,  Lupandine  found  shells,  a  Muhammadan 
cemetery,  and  3  old  irrigation  canals,  probably  belonging  once  to  a 
Turkoman  aul.  Otherwise  this  central  portion  of  the  Uzboi  does  not 
diifer  from  the  lower  in  important  respects. 


4o8  RUSSIAAr  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  one  I  followed  ;  but  as  there  were  large  tracts 
without  water,  and  the  country  was  not  safe  from 
Tekke  Turkomans,  it  was  proposed  to  build  a  fort 
between  Kunia  Urgenj  and  Sary  Kamish,  and  to 
supply  it  with  water  by  turning  back  the  Amu  into 
its  old  course,  with  a  view  to  its  reaching  as  far  as 
Ak-Inish — a  spot  19  miles  from  Uzun  Kuyu  well. 
The  expedition  for  preliminary  investigations  was 
committed  to  Colonel  Petrusevitch,  from  whose  report 
it  appears  that  there  are  in  the  Khivan  oasis  alone 
three  old  beds  of  the  Oxus,  and  the  Turkomans  told 
M.  Stebnitzky  it  has  another  dry  bed,  leaving  the  Amu 
at  Charjui,  and  turning  westward  into  the  desert.* 
But  this  last  statement,  according  to  information  which 
I  have  had  within  the  last  few  days  from  Mr.  Lessar, 
is  a  mistake.! 

As  to  the  possibility  of  diverting  the  Amu  into  its 
ancient  bed,  it  is  very  likely,  says  Kostenko,  if  the 
dams    placed    in    the    Laudan    and   Kunia-daria    were 

*  Of  the  remaining  three,  the  southernmost,  called  Tonu,  or  Sonu- 
daria,  takes  its  rise  near  Hazarasp,  and  passing  close  to  Khiva,  on  the 
south,  makes  its  way  towards  the  wells  of  Adji-Kui,  but  where  after 
that  is  not  known.  This  channel  is  said  to  form  the  southern  boundary 
of  the  Khivan  oasis  from  Hazarasp  to  Mount  Bishik-gir.  The  channel 
next  further  north,  called  the  Daudan,.or  Darialyk,  begins  near  the 
town  of  Hanki,  runs  past  Kosh-Kupyr  (where,  it  will  be  remembered,  I 
alluded  to  crossing  it)  and  Iliali,  and  then  to  Lake  Tiuniukli  (throwing 
off  an  arm,  however,  to  the  east,  before  reaching  the  lake),  and  be3'ond 
to  Sary  Kamish.  The  northernmost  and  best  known  of  the  three  is  the 
Urun-daria,  composed  of  two  branches — one,  called  the  Laudan,  issuing 
from  the  Amu  between  the  Kipchek  and  Khojeili  hills,  running  south* 
west ;  and  the  other,  called  the  Darialyk,  leaving  the  Amu  at  Urgenj, 
proceeds  north-west,  joining  the  Laudan  about  13  miles  above  Kunia 
Urgenj,  past  which  the  united  stream,  called  the  Urun-daria,  or  Kunia- 
daria,  runs  to  Sary  Kamish.  The  distance  from  the  confluence  of  the 
two  rivers  to  Sary  Kamish  is  133  miles,  and  it  is  the  same  distance 
from  Sary  Kamish  to  Igda. 

t  See  Proceedings  of  the  Geographical  Society,  1883,  p.  430; 
Cotnpte  rendu,  p.  299,  of  the  Geographical  Society  of  Paris,  1883. 


SARY  KAMISH  AND  OLD  BEDS  OF  THE  OXUS.     409 

removed,  that  the  water  would  pass  along  the  Urun- 
daria  as  far  as  Sary  Kamish.  But  beyond  this  it  is 
hardly  to  be  expected  the  Amu  would  have  strength 
to  clear  for  itself  a  passage  to  the  Caspian,  for  first  it 
would  have  to  fill  the  entire  basin  of  Sary  Kamish, 
the  level  of  which  in  1877  was  found  to  be  42  feet- 
below  the  Caspian  ;  and,  secondly,  it  would  have  to 
scour  for  about  330  miles  the  old  bed,  which,  in  places. 
Is  completely  choked  with  sand.  Further,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  slight  elevation  of  the  Aral  over  the 
Caspian,  the  small  amount  of  water  in  the  Amu  near 
Its  mouth,  and,  lastly,  the  sandy  nature  of  the  soil,  it 
would  be  difficult,  nay,  almost  impossible,  so  to  con- 
trive that  the  Amu  should  again  find  its  way  to  the 
Caspian.  When  we  arrived  at  Krasnovodsk,  the 
Commandant  told  us  that  the  Russian  expedition, 
which  surveyed  the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus,  found  a 
depression  that  would  take  all  the  water  of  the  Oxus 
and  Aral  to  fill,  and  this  was  subsequently  confirmed 
by  surveyors  we  met,  just  come  from  the  steppe. 

The  cause  of  the  deflection  of  the  Oxus  is  unknown, 
but  all  combines  to  indicate  that  the  direction  of  the 
lower  course  of  the  Amu  has  been  subject  to  changes 
which  have  followed  one  regular  law,  namely,  of 
inclining  to  the  right  from  the  south-west,  by  turning 
its  main  channel  in  a  semicircle.  So  that  the  present 
Taldik  and  Ulkun-daria  may  be  expected  to  dry  up, 
as  have  the  Urun-daria  and  Laudan,  and  that  the  Amu 
will  enter  the  Aral  by  its  easterly  branches  only. 

Having  now  thrown  what  little  light  I  can  upon 
some  of  the  problems  concerning  the  ancient  course  of 
the  Oxus,  I  shall  proceed  on  my  way  to  the  Caspian. 


CHAPTER  LXXI. 

FROM  SARY  KAMISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR. 

Mounting  the  Ust  Urt. — The  well  Uzun  Kuyu. — Saxaul  and  other  fuel. 
— Bread  baken  on  the  coals. — Capture  of  a  gazelle. — Remains  of 
sun  worship. — Troubles  with  attendants. — Breakfast  on  a  camel's 
back. — The  wells  of  Kazakhli. — The  bay  of  Kaplan  Kir. — A  dry 
ocean  bed. —  Kaplan  Kir  not  an  island. — The  wells  of  Kum-sebshem. 
— Ascent  from  the  bed  of  Kaplan  Kir. 

W''E    ascended   from   the    lacustrine  bed   of  Sary 
Kamish  at  half-past   2   on   the   afternoon   o| 
November   14th,  to  make  for  Uzun   Kuyu,  or  "  deej 
well,"  27  miles  distant.     After  toiling  up  a  hill  we  foun< 
ourselves  on  an  immense  table-land,  bounded  on  the  sid^ 
of  the  lake  with  cliffs,  that  still  bore  traces  of  beinj 
water-worn.      The   receding   waters   had  left  a  lon^ 
narrow  line  of  beach,  and  shells  similar  to  those  found 
at  Krasnovodsk  on  the  shore  of  the  Caspian,  and,  as 
we  passed  over  them,  I  hoped  that  now  we  might  be 
about  half-way  on  our  journey,  but  to  our  great  dis- 
appointment we   were  told   that   it  was  not  so.     We 
could  soon  see,  however,  that  we   had  attained  to  a 
very  different  tract  of  country — an  excellent  specimen 
of  a  level  steppe,  where  there  was  not  a  hill  to  be  seei 
all  round,   nor  was  the  line  of  the  horizon  cut  by  s< 
much   as   a   tree,  hardly  a  bush,  but  the  surface  wi 
covered  with  a  coarse,  scrubby  vegetation.     The  soil 


FROM  SARY  KAAIISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR.  411 

was  not  saline,  but  stony,  though  the  stones  were  not 
rounded  like  those  In  the  bed  of  the  lake.  Our  men 
had  asked  to  stop  at  midday  to  bake  their  bread, 
whereupon  I  gave  them  some  of  mine,  and  Insisted 
upon  their  going  on.  Thus  we  continued  marching 
till  9  in  the  evening,  hoping  to  reach  the  well  at  Uzun 
Kuyu  ;  but,  failing  to  do  so,  we  stopped  till  an  hour 
past  midnight  to  rest,  for  which  I  was  quite  prepared, 
having  spent  8  hours  in  the  saddle  that  day. 

Before  daybreak  the  men  judged  us  to  be  near  Uzun 
Kuyu,  but  said  they  could  not  find  the  well  in  the  dark  ; 
and  at  sunrise  this  was  seen  to  be  perfectly  reasonable, 
for  there  was  no  erection  to  mark  the  spot,  and  we 
might  have  easily  walked  by,  or,  for  that  matter,  into 
it.  This  was  one  of  the  deep  wells  of  which  we  had 
been  forewarned.  I  reckoned  it  180  feet,  but  Markozoff 
133  feet,  to  the  water.  Accordingly,  Nazar  did  not 
straddle  over  the  top,  as  in  other  cases  ;  but,  finding  a 
stake  placed  athwart  the  w^ell,  he  let  down  his  nose- 
bags, and  then  fastened  the  rope  to  a  camel  to  draw 
them  up.  The  water,  containing  sulphuretted  hydrogen, 
had  a  disagreeable  smell  and  taste,  with  a  specific 
gravity  indicating  on  my  hygrometer  102  degrees. 

With  this  deterioration  of  water  there  came  another 
change  in  our  lot.  Thus  far  we  had  made  our  fires  of 
saxaul,  the  well-known  fuel  of  Central  Asia.  At  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk,  General  Grotenhlelm  gave  me  a  piece 
of  this  singular  wood,  about  the  thickness  of  the  thumb, 
but  grown  into  a  knot,  the  size  of  a  double  fist,  and  as 
curiously  intertwined  as  if  It  had  been  rope.  East  of 
Sary  Kamish  we  passed  through  little  forests  of  It,  the 
trees  being  12  or  14  feet  high,  and  it  was  curious  to 
find  that,  though  so  hard  as  to  defy  the  cutting  of  a 
switch  with   a   pocket-knife,    yet   one  could   break   off 


47  2  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

great  boughs  thicker  than  one's  wrist.  On  our  first 
evening  upon  the  Ust  Urt  there  were  only  dwarfed 
clumps  of  saxaul,  about  as  high  as  a  gooseberry-bush, 
and  these,  strange  to  say,  we  could  break  off  at  the 
root,  so  that  the  collection  of  sufficient  fuel  was  an 
easy  task.  But  Rosy  had  told  me  that  we  should  have 
no  more  saxaul  ;  and  when  I  asked  what  we  should 
do,  he  replied  that  "  I  should  see  "  at  Uzun  Kuyu. 
And  truly  I  did  so,  for  he  had  gone  on  a  little 
ahead,  had  ignited  an  immense  lump  of  horse  and 
camel  dung,  and  this  was  to  be  our  fuel  for  the  rest 
of  the  way. 

It  was  no  part  of  my  business  to  feed  Nazar  and 
Murad,  and,  that  we  might  be  quite  clear  upon  this 
point,  I  asked  them,  before  we  left  Kunia  Urgenj,  if 
they  had  plenty  of  their  own  provisions.  They  re- 
plied that  they  had  a  bag  of  flour,  but  they  hoped  I 
should  give  them  what  we  left  of  the  mutton.  Thii 
was  a  contrast,  truly,  to  the  many  things  I  was 
taking !  They  had,  indeed,  the  advantage  of  ne) 
bread  instead  of  stale,  in  that  they  wet  flour  in 
wooden  dish,  and  then  baked  the  dough  in  the  ashes 
of  the  fire.  I  did  not  taste  the  cake  thus  *'  baken  on 
the  coals,"  like  that  of  Elijah  in  the  wilderness  ;  *  but 
after  our  bread  robbery,  when  provision  was  running 
short,  I  asked  them  to  feed  Rosy  also  on  native  bread, 
in  exchange  for  other  things.  This  they  said  they 
would  do,  and  graciously  added  that,  if  our  bread 
supply  ran  out,  we  should  have  some  of  theirs.  This, 
so  far,  was  obliging  ;  and  so  long  as  the  bread  was 
cooked  in  wood  ashes,  one,  perhaps,  might  eat  it, 
failing  anything  else  ;  but  when  I  saw  them  cook  their 
bread  in  precisely  the  same  way,  putting  it  uncovered 

*  I  Kings  xix.  6. 


I 


FROM  SARY  KAMISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR.  413 

into  fuel  of   dung,    I    am  afraid  it   lessened   my  con- 
fidence as  to  having  a  store  to  fall  back  upon.^ 

An  unexpected  opportunity  occurred  of  adding  to 
our  larder  at  Uzun  Kuyu;  for  Sevier,  wandering  about 
after  breakfast,  came  upon  an  empty  well,  about  10 
feet  deep,  with  a  funnel-shaped  mouth,  the  sides  of 
which  bore  vegetation.  He  had  the  curiosity  to  go 
near  and  look  in,  and  saw,  to  his  surprise,  at  the  bottom 
a  Persian  gazelle.  It  was  quite  young,  of  exquisitely 
graceful  form,  and,  when  it  saw  us,  made  frantic  but 
vain  efforts  to  spring  out  of  its  prison-house.  Our 
camels  had  drunk  nothing  since  the  third  day,  and  I 
would  not  have  the  natives  told  till  the)'  had  watered 
them  and  filled  the  barrels,  lest  their  hunting  pro- 
pensities should  be  excited  and  we  should  lose  time  ; 
but,  when  all  was  ready,  I  pointed  out  to  our  men  the 
captive.  Nazar  immediately  volunteered  to  be  let 
down  to  secure  the  little  beauty,  which  it  seemed  the 
height  of  cruelty  to  kill.  Something  was  said  about 
bringing  it  alive  to  London,  but  it  was  manifestly  out 
of  the  question,  so  the  grim  office  of  the  butcher  was 
entrusted  to  our  butler  Rosy.  I  watched  him  par- 
ticularly, and  observed  that  he  looked  up  to  the  part  of 
the  heavens  whence  the  sun  was  shining,  and  turned 
the  animal  in  that  direction.  Then  Murad  (who  was 
standing  by)  and  he  stroked  their  beards,  and  ap- 
parently uttered  a  prayer,  after  which  Rosy  cut  the 
animal's  throat.  I  afterwards  noticed  Rosy,  when 
killing  a  chicken,  do  the  same,  but  I  fancied  they 
seemed  rather  ashamed  of  it,  and  not  willing  to 
explain  the  matter. f      I   observed  further  that   Rosy, 

*  The  preparation  of  bread  in  this  way  manifestly  throws  light  upon 
the  manner  in  which  Ezekiel  (iv.  12-15)  was  commanded  to  prepare  his 
bread,  as  prefiguring  coming  scarcity. 

t  It  struck  me  as  a  possible  remnant  of  the  very  ancient  sun  worship 


414  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

before  cutting  the  gazelle's  throat,  scooped  out  a  hole, 
and  then  covered  up  its  blood.  I  asked  why  he 
covered  the  blood,  and  he  said,  ''  For  good  luck,  that 
we  soon  may  catch  another.* 

Before  leaving  Uzun  Kuyu  I  took  Nazar  to  task 
about  what  I  considered  the  slow  progress  we  were 
making.  I  also  lectured  Rosy  for  his  idleness  and 
putting  his  work  upon  others.  In  fact,  I  found  that 
Nazar  was  at  once  the  best  servant  and  the  weak  man 
of  the  three,  for  he  allowed  the  other  two  to  impose 
upon  him.  He  said  he  was  perfectly  willing  to 
hasten ;  but  Murad  was  the  lazy  fellow,  who  had 
told  Nazar  that,  having  received  his  money  before- 
hand, he  did  not  want  his  camels  hurried,  and  cared 
not  to  push  on. 

This  was  plain  speaking,  though  not  intended  for 
me,  and  I  determined  that  Murad  should  not  have  ii 
all  his  own  way.  If  I  set  him  to  lead  the  camels,  ai 
allowed  Nazar  to  rest  in  one  of  the  cradles,  Mun 
dawdled  so  tantalizingly  that  I  took  the  camel  strii 
out  of  his  hand,  and  on  horseback,  or  walking,  led  tl 

to  which,  perhaps,  Job  alludes  (xxxi,  26,  2^^),  and  Ezekiel  (viii.  16),  wh 
saw  25  men,  with  their  backs  towards  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  thai 
faces  towards  the  east,  who  worshipped  the  sun  :  the  same  idolatr}-  tha 
was  forbidden  to  the  children  of  Israel  (Deut.  iv.  19),  and  punishabh 
with  death  (xvii.  3-5). 

*  Whether  this  had  any  religious  origin  I  know  not ;  but  Dr.  Her 
mann  Adler  tells  me  the  Jews  act  similarl}^  in  obedience  to  the  commanc 
in  Leviticus  xvii.  13  :  **  Whatsoever  man  there  be  .  .  .  which  huntetl 
and  catcheth  any  beast  or  fowl  that  may  be  eaten  ;  he  shall  even  pou 
out  the  blood  thereof,  and  cover  it  with  dust."  ,  Maimonides  suppose 
that  one  of  the  reasons  of  this  command  was  to  prevent  the  Israelite 
from  assembling  round  the  blood  to  eat  meals  as  was  the  custom  ( 
idolatrous  nations.  Rosy  looking  up  to  the  sun  and  uttering  a  prayt 
recalls  Ezekiel  xxxiii.  25,  "  Ye  eat  with  the  blood  and  lift  up  your  eyft 
toward  your  idols." 

As  a  matter  of  anthropological  interest  1  ought  to  mention,  perhaps 
that  the  natives  of   Central  Asia  appeared  to   be  most  particular 


I 


FROM  SARY  KAMISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR.  415 

caravan  myself.  Nazar  quickly  pronounced  me  an 
able  camel-leader,  and  said  that  if  I  continued  in  office 
we  should  make  excellent  headway. 

Thus  we  travelled  from  Uzun  Kuyu  towards  the 
next  wells  at  Kazakhli,  the  road  continuing  along  the 
level  elevation  of  the  Ust  Urt  over  excessively  hard 
soil,  almost  devoid  of  vegetation,  but  never  so  bare 
that  the  camels  could  not  find  food.  We  rested  as 
usual,  and  started  again  at  midnight.  Soon  afterwards 
we  missed  Rosy  and  Murad,  who  rode  the  horses, 
whilst  Nazar,  on  foot,  led  the  caravan,  and  Sevier  and 
I  were  "  in  bed."  The  sun  rose  and  gilded  the  plain, 
but  nothing  could  we  see  of  Rosy  or  Murad.  To  lose 
the  caravan  in  such  a  spot,  and  without  provisions, 
would  mean  almost  certain  death,  and  I  began  to 
wonder  whether  I  should  have  to  go  back  to  look  for 
their  corpses — and  not  only  for  them,  but  my  journal 
also,  which,  for  safe  keeping,  I  had  placed  in  my 
saddle-bag. 

Then  came  breakfast  time,  when  we  were  to  try  an 
cAperiment.  Nazar,  who  seemed  inclined  to  push  on, 
had  pointed  out,  and  truly,  how  much  time  we  wasted 
by  stopping  to  cook  breakfast,  and  said,  on  the  1 5th, 
that  if  we  halted  only  once  a  day,  we  might  get  to 
Krasnovodsk  in  about  4  days  more.  We  resolved, 
therefore,  not  to  stop,  but  to  eat  this  meal  comfortably 
on  the  camel's  back.  The  pack-saddle  was  extem- 
porized into   a  table,   cold  pheasant  was  served  from 

covering  up  all  faecal  matter.  All  the  way  from  the  Bokhariot  frontier, 
and  through  Khiva  to  the  Caspian,  I  did  not  once  see  faeces  lying  about. 
"  Earth -closets  "  were  everywhere  used,  and  I  do  not  remember  ever  to 
I  have  met  with  an  offensive  smell.  Even  out  in  the  desert,  mothers  did 
!  for  their  infant  children  what  they  were  too  young  to  do  for  themselves, 
'  and  the  Turkomans  had  thoroughly  adopted  the  spirit,  if  not  the  letter, 
-  of  Deut.  xxiii.  12-14. 


4i6  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  cradle  as  a  sideboard,  and  cold  tea  drunk  from  my 
enamelled  bottle.  We  had  besides,  venison,  bread 
biscuits,  apples,  and  pears,  all  which  may  read  very 
well,  and  savour  perchance  of  romance,  for  it  caused 
us  at  first  to  laugh,  but  in  reality  it  was  intensely 
disagreeable.  The  sand  blew  in  our  plates,  the  shak- 
ing was  enough  to  upset  one's  digestion  for  a  week, 
and  for  12  hours  matters  were  not  brightened  by  the 
prolonged  absence  of  the  two  deserters.  At  last  we 
saw  some  fresh  horse-tracks,  and  about  noon  came 
upon  our  men  near  Kazakhli. 

According  to  my  map  we  should  have  passed,  since 
leaving  Uzun  Kuyu,  two  pools  of  sweet  water.  Perhap 
it  w^as  at  the  latter  of  these  they  stopped  for  us,  since 
Rosy  had  kindled  a  fire,  and  he  muttered  some  sort  oi: 
excuse  that  they  had  gone  forward  to  prepare  for  us 
but  I  have  no  recollection  of  seeing  any  water  till  W( 
came  to  the  Kazakhli  wells,  two  in  number,  aboi 
120  feet  deep,  and  containing  water  with  specii 
gravity  of  102°,  and  saline,  but  such  as  both  camels  ai 
horses  drank.  We  did  not  linger  at  the  well,  thou| 
my  attention  was  attracted  to  a  gully,  widening  into? 
ravine,  running  away  therefrom,  having  cliffs  on  eithe 
side,  with  the  earth  near  the  surface  hanging  in  stalac 
tites,  and  the  bottom  descending  so  rapidly,  that  I  wa 
minded  to  ride  along  it,  to  see  whither  it  led  ;  but  th 
camels  were  started  in  another  direction,  and  I  followec 
meaning  to  advance  to  the  top  of  the  hill  and  loo 
down.  I  did  so,  and  shall  not  easily  forget  the  sigh 
for  it  amply  repaid  me  for  crossing  the  desert.  Th 
ruins  of  Kunia  Urgenj  had  been  interesting,  so  ha 
the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus  and  Sary  Kamish,  but  I  h 
heard  of  these  beforehand. 

Not  so  with  the  landscape  of  what  I  am  disposed 


FROM  SARY  KAMISH  TO  KAPLAN  KIR..  417 

christen  the  "  Bay  of  Kaplan  Kir,"  though  I  have  in 
my  notes  the  words  ''  Ku-yurt-nu-Kurrah,"  the  mean- 
ing of  which  I  have  forgotten.  "^ 

A  short  distance  beyond  the  well  Kazakhli  there 
suddenly  burst  upon  our  sight  an  enormous  bay,  or 
horse-shoe  depression,  apparently  of  the  sea,  bounded 
Dn  the  right  by  a  cliff,  trending  away  westward  for  30 
;Tiiles  to  the  well  Dirun,  or  Dirin,  and  on  the  left  for  a 
3^reater  distance  towards  the  south,  whilst  the  western 
walls  of  the  bay  were  formed  of  the  cliffs  Begendjalri 
Kir.  Within  this  depression  was  the  well  of  Kum- 
sebshem,  our  next  point  to  make  for,  and  23  miles 
Tom  Uzun  Kuyu.t 

But  what  struck  me  as  so  remarkable  were  the 
nanifest   tokens   of   the  locality   having   been  once   a 

-"  I  have  already  used  the  word  '*  Ust,"  or  East  Kaplan  Kir,  as  we 
ame  up  out  of  the  basin  of  Sary  Kamish.  The  place  we  had  now 
arrived  at  our  men  called  "  Kaplan  Kir,"  and  my  Russian  map  says, 
'Obryv  Kaplan  Kir,"  i.e.,  the  "steep  place  or  cliff"  of  Kaplan  Kir, 
vhich  word  seems  to  be  used,  as  by  Vambery,  further  south,  of  various 
)arts  of  the  cliffs  forming  the  edge  of  the  Ust  Urt,  or  elevated  plateau 
ying  between  the  Aral  and  the  Caspian,  and  which,  at  Uzun  Kuyu,  is 
2  miles  wide.  Across  this  plateau,  it  will  be  remembered,  we  were 
low  passing. 

t  To  Markozoff's  detachment,  when  on  the  march,  no  less  than  to 
ourselves,  the  precipice  of  Begendjalri  appeared  as  a  separate  ridge, 
r  precipice,  of  a  separate  plateau  from  that  of  Kaplan  Kir;  but  it 
umed  out  subsequently  that  Begendjalri  Kir  and  Kaplan  Kir  unite, 
•r,  at  least,  almost  touch,  leaving  a  strait  between,  and  form  the 
/astern  wall  of  the  Kum-sebshem  depression,  which  is,  therefore, 
othing  less  than  a  scoop  out  of  the  general  elevated  plain.  It  has  the 
hapeof  an  elongated  ellipse,  whose  western  end  is  compressed  to  a 
arrow  pass  3  miles  long,  having  at  its  western  extremity  the  well 
)irun.  The  longer  axis  of  this  ellipse,  with  a  direction  of  W.N.W.  to 
'>.S.E.  from  the  well  Dirun,  measures,  according  to  Markozoff,  from  2i2> 
>  2^"]  miles  in  length,  and  the  smaller  one,  traversing  the  well  Kum- 
ebshem,  from  13  to  17  miles.  Its  south-west  border,  Begendjalri, 
ecomes  gradually  lower,  and  at  last  sinks  in  the  sands  eastwards  ; 
ut  the  eastern  side,  Kaplan  Kir,  is  broken,  and  off  it  lies,  about  midway 
om  north  to  south,  and  6  miles  east  of  the  cliif,  the  well  Dakhli. 
VOL.  II.  27 


4iS  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL    ASIA. 

lake,  or  a  bay  of  the  sea,  though  now  completely  dried 
up.     One   may  occasionally   be  taken   to  an    English 
hill-top,  and  be  told  by  some  geological  friend  that  the 
prospect    before    you   was  once  under  water,   and,   ir 
deference  to  his  learning,  you  accept  the  information, 
albeit  that  trees  and  grass  and  corn  are  growing  or 
every  hand  ;  but  at  Kaplan  Kir,  when   I   peeped  ovei 
the  cliff,  as  one  might  do  at  Ramsgate,  I   saw  place.' 
hollowed  out  by  the  billows  in  the   face  of  the  lime 
stone,  and  the  marks  left  by  the  water-rills.     Nor  wa: 
this  all ;    for  the  chalk  was   worn  away  into  colossa 
spires,  columns,  and  minarets,  into  pillars  and  turrets 
and  buttresses  and  towers,  as  white  and  clean  as  if  th' 
tide  had  only  recently  gone  down.     There  were  cave 
and  grottoes,  and  coves  and  caverns  in  which,  by  th<^ 
aid  of  imagination,  one  could  see  the  fishes,  perhaps,  c 
a  former  geological  epoch  swimming  about  just  as  on 
sees    their    modern   types   in  the  rocky   tanks  of 
Brighton    Aquarium.     The  water  was   the  one  thi 
wanting.      I    will    not    venture    the    hyperbole    that! 
could  almost  "  smell  the  briny,"  or  trace  any  rema| 
of  sea-weed  ;  but  the  phenomenon  was  so  remarkal 
and  unlike  anything  I  had  seen  elsewhere  in  Euro] 
Asia,  or  America,  that,   like  Columbus  discovering 
new  world,  I  became,  in  my  little  way,  quite  excited. 
We  descended  into  the  bed  by  a  natural  ramp,  e 
steep  that  the  cradles  had  to  be  unoccupied,  and  oi 
horses  led  ;  and  when  we  reached  the  bottom,  about 
mile  from   Kazakhli,   and   skirted  the  northern  shor 
we  had  on  our  right  an  elevation  that  brought  to  n 
mind    Shakespeare's    Cliff  at    Dover,    whilst,    a    litt 
further    ahead,    rose   out   of    what   was  once    the 
another  St.    Michael's    Mount,   lying  off  the  coast 
Cornwall. 


FROM  SARY  KAAIISH  TO   KAPLAN  KIR.  419 

The  cliff  on  our  right,  rising  about  300  feet,  needed 
no  geologist  to  see  that  it  was  formed  of  three  sharply- 
defined  strata — the  uppermost  of  earth,  the  centre  of 
limestone,  and  the  lowest  of  sandy  clay.  The  face  of  the 
cliff  was  not  everywhere  uniform.  Here  and  there  were 
natural  caverns,  and  between  what  I  have  imagina- 
tively called  Shakespeare's  Cliff  and  St.  Michael's 
Mount,  huge  masses  of  the  upper  stratum  had  been 
hurled  below.  The  cliffs  had  a  well-defined  water-mark 
all  along  their  face,  above  which  they  were  generally 
inclined,  but  perpendicular  below  it.  The  sandy  plain, 
whereinto  we  had  descended,  was  what  the  Russians 
call  a  solonchak,  or  salt  steppe,  which  had  on  it  a  poor, 
scrubby  vegetation.* 

We  encamped  in  this  supposed  sea-bed,  where  the 
vegetation  was  so  scanty  and  distasteful  to  our  horses 
that  they  would  not  touch  it.  On  the  next  morning, 
at  8  o'clock,  we  came  to  the  wells  of  Kum-sebshem. 
Here  were  "twelve  wells  of  water,  "but  not  "threescore 
and  ten  palm  trees,"  and  we  "  encamped  there  by 
the  waters."  f  There  was  not  a  vestige  about  these 
wells  to  give  a  clue  to  their  age.  They  were  well 
built,  and  for  the  most  part  in  good  repair.  There 
was  a  little  grass  about  the  place,  and  the  water  was 
good,  so  that  whilst  the  men  were  watering  the  camels 
and  replenishing  the  barrels,  we  made  some  tea  ;  but 

*  The  prospect  brought  to  one's  mind  ''  The  sea  saw  it,  and  fled"  ; 
"  He  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry,  and  drieth  up  all  the  rivers  " 
(Psalm  cxiv.  3  ;  Nahum  i.  4), — a  fact  seen  here  on  a  large  scale.  All 
around  was  a  flat  plain,  marked  with  the  whitey  deposits  of  salt,  like 
those  we  had  seen  in  the  bed  of  Sary  Kamish ;  and  the  only  signs  of 
animal  life,  after  a  Jackdaw  who  paid  us  a  visit  at  the  well,  were  the 
chirping  of  a  chance  bird,  hills  thrown  up  by  Ants,  and  the  Marmots, 
which  undermined  "  the  parched  places  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  salt  land 
and  not  inhabited  "  (Jer.  xvii.  6). 

t  Exod.  xvi.  27. 


420  RUSSIA 2^^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  camels  were  not  all  unpacked,  which  proved  after- 
wards to  have  been  a  mistake.  These  wells  were  loo 
feet  higher,  according  to  my  aneroid,  than  the  place 
where  we  last  encamped,  but  we  marched  in  the  sea- 
bed another  4  miles,  and  then  at  1 1  o'clock  ascended 
300  feet  out  of  its  bed,  on  to  the  hill  Begendjalri  Kir, 
the  cliffs  running  from  N.W.  to  S.E. 

The  coming  out  of  the  bed  was  as  remarkable  as 
descending  into  it,  for  towards  the  top  of  the  ramp  the 
chalky  cliffs  were  worn  into  resemblance  to  a  chain  of 
snow  mountains,  that   I   fancifully  called  the  "  Bernese 
Oberland,"    with  crevasses   here  and  there,  and  well- 
marked    rifts,   caused    apparently    by    the    running    of 
water.      Here,  too,  jutting  out  beyond  a  promontory, 
was  another   ''  St.    Michael's    Mount."     On   reaching 
the  top,  I  turned  round  to  gaze  at  this  wonderful  land- 
scape.     Diotrephes  did   not   appreciate  the  scenery  a 
bit,  for  the  caravan  was  gone  on,  and  the  loneliness 
the  desert  had  given  him  a  strong  aversion  to  beinj 
left  behind,  or  getting  far  away  from  his  companion* 
I   made   him   stand,    however,    whilst    I    vainly   aske( 
myself  what  it  all  meant.      When  had  the  voice  goni 
forth  to  the  waters.  Be  dry  T^ 

And  what  waters  were  they  ?  salt  or  fresh  ?  A  bay 
the  Caspian,  or  the  remains  of  the  great  Central  Asian 
Sea,  that  geologists  talk  of  ?  These  are  questions  I  am 
incapable  of  answering.  I  can  only  say  that  this  Bay 
of  Kaplan  Kir  was  the  fourth  point  of  interest  in  my 
desert  journey,  and  from  its  entire  unlikeness  to  any- 
thing I  had  ever  seen,  it  reconciled  me  to  the  fatigues 
of  the  way,  and  made  me  thankful  to  have  been 
the  first  Englishman  to  gaze  upon  this  remarkable 
scene. 

*  Isa.  xliv.  2"], 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 

FR  OM  KA  PL  A  N  KIR  TO  KRA  SNO  VODSK. 

Road  to  well  of  Seikiz  Khan. — Improved  prospects,  but  low  spirits. — 
Search  of  Bible  for  illustrative  passages. — Lack  of  domestic  com- 
forts.—Revival  of  hope  at  sight  of  Caspian. — Russian  itinerary 
from  Iliali  to  Krasnovodsk. — The  pond  of  Porsu. — Gazelles. — The 
Kara-boghaz  and  its  geography. — A  sixteen  hours'  march. — 
Oriental  customs  illustrated.— Fauna  of  the  steppe. — The  land 
tortoise. — Last  night  on  the  camel's  back. — Mouldy  bread  and 
tattered  g-arments. — Arrival  at  Krasnovodsk. 


LEAVING  Kaplan  Kir,  we  next  passed  along  a 
level  elevation  for  about  7  miles,  and  then 
counted  to  the  highest  part  of  the  neighbouring  hills, 
:,alled  Begendjalri  Kir,  where  we  came  to  another  flat 
teppe,  without  bushes,  and  only  a  scrubby  vegetation, 
n  the  midst  of  which  we  encamped  at  sunset.  The 
Jirect  path  would  have  brought  us  along  the  hills  to 
lie  pool  Dungra,  of  bad,  bitter,  salt  water,  overgrown 
vith  reeds,  39  miles  from  Kum-sebshem.  But  this 
jcLth,  though  shorter,  was  said  to  be  trying  to  the 
:amels'  legs,  and,  rather  than  risk  breaking  them,  our 
nen,  starting  afresh  at  midnight,  turned  off  the  principal 
oad  about  13  miles  short  of  Dungra,  and  brought  us 
H^fore  sunrise  on  the  i8th  to  the  well  Seikiz  (or  eighth) 
\han,  so  named  after  the  present  Khivan  ruler.  Our 
;te  from  the  main  road  to  the  well,  where  we  drew 
citer,  was  4  miles  to  the  north-west ;   now  it  turned 


422  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

19  miles  towards  the  south-west  to  the  well  Tuar.  At 
10  o'clock  we  descended  200  feet  into  the  bed  of  a 
river,  or  sea,  with  banks  washed  into  various  forms, 
apparently  by  the  action  of  water.  This  brought  us  to 
a  plain,  bounded  by  distant  cliffs.  We  then  remounted 
to  a  higher  land,  250  feet  above  the  sea  level,  and 
camped,   hoping  on  the  morrow  to  attain  to  Tuar. 

In  certain  respects  our  journey  was  rather  more 
endurable  here  than  on  some  portions  of  the  way. 
The  route  was  not  quite  so  monotonous  and  lifeless, 
for  we  saw  several  game  birds,  and  among  them  what 
was  called  the  Wild  Hen.  It  is  rather  larger  than  a 
pigeon,  runs  very  fast,  and  is  shy.  They  get  them 
near  Krasnovodsk  in  the  rocks,  and  sell  them  from  8^. 
to  lod.  a  brace.  Marmots  abounded,  but  not  with  the 
squirrel-like  tails  we  had  seen  in  Bokhara  On  onf. 
occasion  we  stirred  up  a  solitary  Owl,  and  further  on 
saw  a  few  Jackdaws,  but  not  many  small  birds.  Once. 
too,  we  scared  from  her  form  a  frightened  Hare.  The 
weather,  moreover,  now  was  perfection.  My  pocket 
thermometer  in  the  sun  stood  at  75°,  and  the  tempera- 
ture was  sufficiently  warm  to  induce  me,  in  riding  by 
day,  to  throw  off  my  great  coat.  I  always  slept,  how- . 
ever,  in  the  cradle  in  my  furs,  and  was  not  much 
incommoded  by  cold,  though  my  sheepskin  hat  anc 
the  furs  about  my  face  were  unpleasantly  wet. 

But  with  all  this  I  am  bound  to  say  our  spirits  wen 
somewhat  low.  It  was  now  our  eleventh  day  sinct 
leaving  Kunia  Urgenj,  and  we  had  not  yet  come  ir 
sight  of  the  Caspian.  The  novelty  of  camel  travelling 
had  worn  off,  and  the  journey  promised  to  be  longe 
than  I  anticipated.  Things  moved,  as  I  thought,  S( 
slowly.  When  I  left  Samarkand,  or  soon  after,  ,1  founi 
that  1  had  exhausted,  or  nearly  so,  all  my  books  that 


FROAI  KAPLAN  KIR   TO  KRASNOVODSK  423 

brought  with  me    to    read.       Ordinarily  in    England, 
when   going  for  only  an   hour's  journey,    I    no   more 
think   of   starting    without    something    to    read    than 
without    my    purse,    and    I    wondered    how    I   should 
employ  my  thoughts  on   this   long,  slow  journey.      I 
cross-questioned  Tailly  severely  whether  some  means 
could   not  be  invented  by   which   I   might  gallop    on 
horseback  the  allotted  day's  journey,  and  have  my  tent 
put  up  so  as  to  do  some  writing  and  arrangement  of 
my   notes,   whilst  the  camels   were  walking    on    their 
leisurely  way.      But  he  said   a  horse  could  not  carry 
the   tent,   and  a  camel    could    not  keep  up   with    the 
horse,  so  that  he  could  contrive  nothing.      Preparation, 
therefore,  for  literary  work  seemed  out  of  the  question. 
The  idea  occurred   to   me,    however,  that  I    might 
I  glance  through  my  pocket- Bible,  and  mark  therein  all 
\  the  passages   on   which   light  or  illustration  could  be 
!  thrown  from  incidents  in  my   10  years'  travels.     The 
!  print  of  my  Bible  was  too  small,  and  the  shaking  of 
I  the  camel  too  great,  to  allow  of  my  doing  much  in  the 
:   cradle,  but   1  often  adopted  another  plan.      I  galloped 
\  forward   a  good  distance   in   front  of  the  caravan,    to 
some  herbage  if  possible,  that  Diotrephes  could  crop, 
t  and  then,  whilst  he  was  nibbling,  I  sat  reading  till  the 
I  caravan  had  come  up  and  passed,  and  was  nearly  out 
\   of  sight,    by   which   time   my  horse  was  impatient  to 
I   catch  it  up  again.      By  thus  economizing  my  time,  and 
I   using  up  odd  moments,   I   managed  to  glance  through 
i    the  Old  and   New  Testaments,   and    marked    therein 
\    more  than  500  passages. 

But  besides  the  weariness  of  mind  incident  to  such 

slow  travelling,  the  fatigue  of  body  was  not  small,  and 

j    the  lack  of  ordinary  domestic   comforts   began   to   be 

!    very  trying.     Our  clothes  had  not  been  off  for  a  long 


424  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

time — and  as  for  a  good  wash,  how  was  it  possible 
with  water  at  such  a  premium,  that  between  the  wells 
I  had  to  look  sharply  after  the  men,  or  they  refrained 
from  giving  enough  to  the  horses  ?  A  pint  and  a  half 
or  a  quart  of  water  in  my  india-rubber  basin  had  to  be 
sponged  over  my  face  and  neck  before  dinner,  then  to 
serve  for  the  hands,  and  my  ablutions  for  the  day  were 
over !  Sevier,  one  evening,  looked  at  the  matter 
philosophically,  and  calmly  debated  whether  under 
such  circumstances  it  was  worth  while  to  wash  at  all, 
which  certainly  our  men  did  not  do  the  whole  time  we 
were  with  them. 

Then  there  was  the  crawling  about  our  tent  on  all 
fours,  like  quadrupeds,  rather  than  standing  erect  as 
lords  of  creation,  to  say  nothing  of  soup  in  wooden 
bowls,  tea  made  out  of  brackish  water  that  occasionally 
curdled  the  cream,  and  sundry  other  inconveniences 
not  nice  to  mention.  These  things  had  to  be  en- 
countered before  lying  down,  after  which,  if  the  horses 
did  not  fight,  or  the  men  make  a  noise,  we  managed  to 
get  perhaps  four  or  five  hours'  sleep,  till  my  alarum 
warned  me  I  must  stir  up  the  men,  or  who  could  say 
when  we  should  start,  or  whether  we  should  not  have 
our  provisions  run  out  before  the  end  of  our  journey  ? 

A  revival  of  our  hopes  awaited  us  on  the  morrow. 
We  did  not  start  till  five  from  the  depression,  wherein 
is  situated  the  well  Tuar,  nor  did  we  take  water  there. 
It  was  found  by  the  Russian  doctor  and  engineer  to  be 
black,  though  sweet,  and  to  increase  the  thirst,  nor  did 
boiling  it,  or  the  addition  of  lemon  extract  improve  it. 
At  sunrise,  or  about  seven  o'clock,  we  mounted  the 
Tuar  hill,  and  so  emerged  from  the  marine  or  lacustrine 
bed  wherein  we  had  travelled.  We  then  ascended  the 
hill  Sary  Baba,  250  feet   higher,  when   lo !  we  espied 


I 


FROM  KAPLAN  KIR   TO  KRASNOVODSK  425 

he  blue  waters  of  the  Caspian  !  I  doubt  if  the  Greek 
oldiers,  returning  from  their  Asiatic  campaigns,  were 
nore  pleased  with  the  sight  of  the  Euxine  than  were  we 
»vith  the  Kara-boghaz  gulf,  and  like  them  we  shouted, 
The  Sea!  the  Sea!"  We  were  a  long  distance,  how- 
ver,  from  the  end  of  our  journey,  and,  on  looking  at 
ly  great  map,  I  doubted  if  we  should  get  to  Krasno- 
odsk  in  three  days  as  the  men  said  we  should, 
specially  as  the  Russian  doctor  and  engineer  before 
s,  on  reaching  Tuar  from  Iliali  through  Chary shly  to 
Oakhli,  had  taken  5  days  from  Tuar  to  Krasnovodsk.* 
lut  it  was  a  great  refreshment  to  see  the  Caspian. 

Our  road  now  continued  in  a  south-westerly  direction, 

•ver  hilly  ground ;  but  before  we  descended  from  the 

ill  Sary  Baba,  to  an  altitude  of  300  feet  above  the  sea, 

e  passed   a   Muhammadan   tomb  of   one  Arsariboa, 

lied   in  battle,   I  suppose  with  the  Russians.     There 

as    a    hero's    flag-pole    erected,    and   something    like 

•namentation   round  the  grave,  but  no  trace  of  any 

iiilding  near  it.      I   thought   it   more   like   a   Shaman 

uriat  than  a  Kirghese  Muhammadan  grave. 

About  noon,  with  the  thermometer  at  75*",  we  came 

Porsu,  called  also,  I   think,  Portokup,  19  miles  from 

uar,  and  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  Togus-tepe. 

lere  is  a  pond  of  rain-water,  which  the  Russian  doctor 

Their  itinerary  was  briefly  as  follows  : — Leaving  Iliali  on  the  26th 
ly  (O.S.),  they  stayed  two  days  with  guide.  28th  :  Took  5  skins,  each 
8  gallons,  of  Amu-daria  water  for  a  party  of  5  men,  8  camels,  and  3 
-ses,  and  set  out.  29th  :  By  7  a.m.  had  marched  in  all  2)?)  miles, 
ised  a  fort,  and  at  dusk  entered,  because  of  the  heat,  a  pass  with  a 
1.1  of  salt  water.  On  the  hills  were  sand  barkhans,  as  high  as  five- 
ried  houses  in  Petersburg.  30th  :  At  10  a.m.  came  to  another  fort, 
t:  Road  over  sands  and  hilly.  Came  to  a  pool  of  slime-covered 
:er,  making  tea  like  fatty  chocolate.  In  the  evening  mounted  hills. 
-e  ist :  A  well  of  good  water.     2nd  :  The  well  Charyshly,  and  the  dry 

of  the  Oxus.  Here  they  rested  till  the  morrow.  3rd :  Started  at 
.m.     4th  :    Road   over  hillocks  with   trees.      Mounted    Kaplan  Kir 


426  RUSSIAN   CENTRAL   ASIA. 

and  engineer  in  June  pronounced  good,  but  in  Novem- 
ber our  men  rejected  it.  The  pond  is  situated  in  a 
hollow,  approached  by  a  narrow  path,  down  which  the 
deer  descend  to  drink.  Murad,  knowing  this,  went 
foward,  thinking  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  any  thai 
might  be  at  the  bottom,  but  he  was  not  sharp  enough. 
We  saw  a  herd,  perhaps  a  score  in  number,  small,  and 
of  similar  species  to  the  one  we  had  caught,  which  was, 

I  believe,  the  ordinary  Persian  gazelle  ;  but   I  do  not 
think   we   saw  any  of  the  saiga  antilope,   a  native  oi 
these  regions.     Captain  Abbott  saw  the  saiga  furthei 
north,  and  describes  it  as  a  singular  animal ;  and  th- 
specimen,  shown  to  meat  the  Natural  History  Museun 
at  South   Kensington  by  Dr.  Gtinther,  does  not  beli 
the  description.      The  natives  call  both  kinds,  I  believ( 
"  Kaiky'  and  as  we  saw  the  little  creatures  boundin 
away  on  our   approach,  it  was  not  difficult  to  perceiv 
the  aptness  of  the  simile  which  described  the  Gaditt 
*'as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains."*     Of  W  il 
Asses  we  saw  none,   though  a  Wild    Boar  one  nigh 
approached  the  caravan,  and  startled  the  horses. 

Our  road  continued  for  many  hours,  on  the  19th,  i 
sight  of  the  Caspian,  and  at  3  o'clock  we  mounted  a  hii 
on  whose  top  my  aneroid  stood  at  650  feet  above  t? 
sea.  On  these  hills  we  camped,  and  from  thence  cou 
see  the  white  cliffs  of  a  bay,  and  other  hills  of  cha 
inland,  where  evidently  the  water  had  once  attain< 
to.  Over  some  of  these  we  had  traversed  up  ai 
down  as  if  crossing  arms  of  the  ocean. 

plateau.     The  air  dry.     Had  to  wet  the  mouth  every  five  minutes. 

II  p.m.  came  to  bitter  well  Dakhli.     5th  :  Stopped  at  bitter  well  Dung 
Road  hilly.     7th  :  Same  character  of   road.     8th  :  Without  water 
the  camels,   so  had  to  rest.     At  Tuar  found  water  black,  but  swc 
9th:  Saw  the  Caspian.     loth  :  Arrived  at  Demerdjan.    i  rth  :  Well  St 
1 2th:  Well  Sumaili.  13th  :  Well  Burmak  and  then  south  to  Krasnovod 

*  I  Chron.  xii.  8.  4 

f 


FROM  KAPLAN  KIR   TO  KRASNOVODSK  427 

This  "  Kara-boghaz,"  or  ''  Black  Gulf,"  has  certain 
points  of  geographical  interest.  It  is  an  immense 
oval,  with  an  area  of  6,000  square  miles,  bounded  on 
the  west  by  two  thin  strips  of  sand,  and  between  these 
there  runs  from  the  Caspian  a  narrow  strait  from  200 
to  800  yards  wide,  and  only  about  a  yard  deep.  The 
current  flows  through  at  the  rate  of  from  3  to  4  miles 
an  hour.  The  cause  of  the  current  is  that  the  surface 
j  of  the  bay  gives  off  so  much  by  evaporation  as  to 
need  continual  replenishing  from  the  Caspian.  Whilst 
3^iving  off  water  by  evaporation,  however,  the  salt 
-emains,  and  permeates  the  remaining  water  to  such  a 
degree  that  no  animal,  they  say,  can  live  in  it* 

At  an  hour  after  midnight  we  started  on  the  20th, 
md  marched  till  5  next  evening — 16  hours  without  a 
aalt,  at  the  end  of  which  our  horses,  not  to  say  our- 
selves, were  exceedingly  tired.  The  route  lay  over  a 
iteppe  country,  with  occasional  depressions,  and  the 
atter  part  was  not  without  anxiety,  for  Murad  lagged 
Dehind,  and  for  many  hours  was  out  of  sight,  so  that  I 
Degan  to  think  quite  seriously  what  legal  responsi- 
)ilities  I  might  be  involved  in  for  not  going  back  to 
;earch,  if  I  arrived  at  Krasnovodsk  without  him. 

The  fact  was,  he  had  loitered   behind   and  gone  to 

ileep,  having  probably  first  muddled  his  torpid  brains 

)y  long  whiffs  from  his  kalian   pipe.       This  smoking 

nstrument  usually  has  a   long   stem    from    the  gourd 

vhich  holds  the  water  ;  but  our  men  appeared  to  have 

*  Reclus  adds  that  fishes  drawn  in  by  the  current  become  blind  in 
ve  days,  and  that  seals,  which  used  formerly  to  visit  the  bay,  are 
een  no  longer.  He  further  gives  a  calculation  that  the  bed  of  the 
Kara-boghaz  receives  daily  350,000  tons  of  salt,  or  as  much  as  they 
Dnsume  in  all  Russia  in  six  months  ;  and  that  when,  by  storms  or  slow 
eposit,  the  strait  hereafter  shall  become  choked  up,  the  Kara-boghaz 
ill  quickly  diminish  in  extent,  leaving  its  former  shores  transformed 
ito  immense  fields  of  salt. 


428  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 

made  a  travelling  pipe  (such  as  could  be  slung  in  a  bag 
on  the  camel),  omitting  the  long  accessories.  At  first 
they  took  the  liberty  of  stopping  the  caravan,  in  order 
to  light  up  their  pipe  and  take  a  whiff,  "  turn  about." 

But  this  had  one  disagreeable  result  with  the  camelsji 
and  demoralized  them,  in  that,  rather  than  stand  still, 
they  took  it  into  their  heads  to  lie  down  suddenly, 
which  sometimes  snapped  the  ropes,  and  brought 
about  other  inconveniences.  Further,  when  I  was  in 
the  cradle,  my  nostrils  were  defiled  with  the  smell  of 
their  coarse,  common  tobacco,  which  I  abominate,  and 
I  bade  them  not  stop  the  caravan,  and  gave  orders 
that,  if  they  must  smoke,  the  lighting  of  the  pipe 
should  be  entrusted  to  one  of  the  two  men  who  wert 
not  leading  the  camels. 

It  consequently  often  fell  to  Murad's  lot ;  and  after 
the  others  had  taken  their  one  or  two  long  whiffs, 
Murad  would  take  the  kalian  and  lag  behind  to  fini 
the  pipe.  I  imagine  the  fumes  had  on  this  occasi 
soothed  him  into  40  winks,  from  which  he  did  n 
wake  apparently  for  some  hours,  though  at  last  ht 
sneaked  up  like  a  naughty  child,  as  we  came  to  a  halt 
and,  without  saying  a  word,  proceeded  to  put  up  tht 
tent.      No  doubt  he  was  very  tired,  like  the  rest  of  us 

I  had  by  this  time  come  to  the  conclusion  that  nevei 
before  in  my  life  had  I  been  so  weary  of  a  journey  a; 
this.  Crossing  America  by  railway  was  a  mere  baga 
telle  in  comparison,  nor  could  I  say  otherwise  even  0 
traversing  the  Siberian  expanse.  Our  last  pheasan 
had  been  eaten  the  night  before,  and  we  had  only  on' 
chicken  left.  Of  the  8  we  purchased,  2  died,  and  . 
were  lost,  stolen,  or  strayed.  One  or  two  *'  came  t* 
table  "  minus  a  leg,  sauced  with  the  excuse  that  it  h: 
been  maimed  on  the  way — the  truth  being,  I  suppoi 


I 


FROM  KAPLAN  KIR   TO  KRASNOVODSK         429 

hat  Murad  had  taken  the  absent  member  from  the 
30t.  One  night  he  told  Rosy  to  put  more  water  to 
he  soup.  "  For  then,  don't  you  see,"  said  he,  "  zue 
ihall  get  more  ?"  Our  butcher's  meat  had  long  since 
-anished.  The  men  had  eaten  it  all,  and  the  captured 
enison  I  tasted  only  once.  It  had  become  rather  too 
ligh,  though  why  I  know  not,  so  that  too  was  trans- 
erred  for  the  benefit  of  their  "braxy"  appetites,  as 
^ell  as  our  pickings,  and  the  teapot  with  sugar, 
ience,  by  comparison  with  their  sack  of  flour  and 
othing  else,  they  were  faring  sumptuously  every  day, 
nd  Murad's  not  wishing  to  hurry  was  understandable. 
Meanwhile  Sevier  and  I  were  ardently  longing  for 
rae  end  of  the  journey,  when  we  might  take  off  our 
clothes  again,  and  once  more  perform  some  very  neces- 
sary ablutions.  At  the  same  time  I  am  bound  to  say 
\  gained  an  idea  of  tent  life  and  Eastern  travel,  and 
» iw  exemplifications  of  Oriental  customs,  for  which,  as 
\  Bible  student,  I  shall  always  be  thankful.*  We  en- 
^  imped  on   the   20th   at   the  well  of  Demerdjan,  near 

'  '*  Thus,  over  how  much  land  we  passed  where  it  was  as  if  the  decree 

;>  id  been  pronounced,  "The  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  utterly 

i  oiled"   (Isa.  xxiv.  3).     ''The  whole  land  thereof  is  brimstone,  and 

f  ■-  It,  and  burning,  that  it  is  not  sown  nor  beareth,  nor  any  grass  groweth 

rerein"  (Deut.  xxix.  2t^.     I  could  never  before  understand  so  vividly 

:.^  i  expression  of  Moses  concerning  "  all  that  great  and  terrible  wilder- 

■  •  ss"  (Deut.  i.  19),  or  how,  in  the  desert,  "  the  soul  of  the  people  was 

ijch  discouraged  because    of  the  way"  (Numb.  xxi.  4).     Certainly, 

t  J e  passage  in  Hagar's  life,  when  she  wandered  in  the  wilderness  of 

i  ^'ersheba,  with  the  same  food  only  as  taken   by  our  men,  with  her 

'  vter-bottle  spent,  and  her  child  laid  down  to  die  (Gen.  xxi.  14,  15), 

I  "1  ght  have  happened  easily  enough  in  the  desert  we  crossed. 

•  3f  course,   I    had    always   been   taught    how    wrong  it  was  for  the 

laelites  to  murmur  in  the  wilderness,  and  to  long  after  the  flesh-pots 

(  Egypt,    the    cucumbers,  and    the    leeks    and  onions,   and   melons 

( umb.  xi.  5).     All  this  1  had  accepted  without  question  in  plentiful 

1  gland;  but  when,  in  the  Aralo-Caspian,  our  last  melon  was  gone,  I 

c  lid  not  help  thinking  that,  if  the  melons  of  Egypt  were  as   good  as 


I 


430  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

some  conical  hills  of  the  same  name.  At  this  place  \\ 
took  water  for  the  last  time,  and  found  it  so  salt  c 
to  curdle  our  Swiss  milk,  though  earlier  in  the  seasc 
it  is  said  to  be  slightly  bitter,  but  good.  Here  v 
struck  the  main  route  between  Krasnovodsk  ar 
Mangyshlak;  and  as  this  was  one  of  the  wells  at  whic 
Murad  had  once  been  robbed  of  a  camel,  he  suggest( 
that  someone  should  watch  against  the  Tekke  Turk 
mans  whilst  the  others  slept.* 

We  did  not  rest  long,  however,  for  at  one  o'clock 
the  morning  we  started  again,  and  continued  all  day  ( 
the  2 1  St,  till  sunset,  over  a  steppe  country  with  t 
accustomed  coarse  vegetation.  On  the  previous  d 
I  had  seen  the  cast  skin  of  a  hedgehog,  and  now  I  fou 
on  the  steppe  several  shells  of  tortoises.  The  lati 
were  interesting,  because  we  were  attempting  to  cai 
two  of  the  like  {Homopus  Horsfieldii,  Gray)  in  a  con 
tose  state  to  the  Zoological  Gardens  of  London. 

They    were    given    to    me    in    Tashkend    by 
Oshanin,    who  expected  them  to  sustain   the  jou 

those  from    Khiva,    their  longing  was  very   much  like  human  nat 
whether  B.C.  or  A.D. 

So,  again,  this  journey  made  me  familiar  with  more  incidents 
necessaries  of  travel  of  which  I  knew  before  only  by  reading. 
"■  the  camel's  furniture  "  upon  which  Rachel  sat  (Gen.  xxxi.  34) — g 
pack-saddles  which,  in  our  case,  the  animals  wore  as  we  did 
clothes,  without  their  being  taken  off.  The  action  of  one  of  Jose 
brethren,  who  opened  his  sack  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the 
(Gen.  xlii.  Z'j),  was  precisely  what  we  had  to  do  nightly  ;  and  after  se 
the  coarse  stuff  eaten  by  the  camels,  and  the  inferior  herbage  givt 
Central  Asian  cattle,  I  understood  better  than  before  the  prosp 
implied  in  Isa.  xxx.  24,  when  the  oxen  and  young  asses  were  tc 
clean  provender  which  had  been  winnowed  with  the  shovel  and  witl 
fan.  No  doubt  many  of  these  things  are  simple  enough  to  ^Ve^ 
readers  already,  and  they  do  not  perhaps  need  much  illustration,  j 
I  can  never  now  read  these  passages  without  my  thoughts  going  1 
to  my  journey. 

*  Reminding  one  of   "  those  that  are  delivered  from   the   nois 
archers  in  the  places  of  drawing  water  "  (Judges  v.  11). 


I 


FROM  KAPLAN  KIR   TO  IxRASNOVODSK.  431 

vvithout  food,  founding  his  opinion  concerning  the  extra- 
ordinary vitality  of  the  animal  upon  what  M.  Bogdanoff 
lad  previously  done  when  he  sent  a  tortoise  in  a 
)0x  by  slow  transport  at  the  end  of  May  from  Petro- 
\lexandrovsk  to  Petersburg.  The  box  went  to  Kazan 
)y  mistake,  and  did  not  reach  Petersburg  till  the 
niddle  of  November,  but  the  animal  was  alive  and 
veil,  having  eaten  nothing  apparently  for  7  months. 

In  the  present  case,  two  were  placed  in  a  box  with  a 

ittle  hay,  and  the  box  put  on  the  seat  of  the  tarantass. 

»Ve  constantly  heard   them  scratching,   as  if  desirous 

)f  making   their  winter   bed,  and  before   we   had   ad- 

anced  far  on  our  journey  they  appeared  to  have  gone 

o  sleep.     Crossing    the   desert    I    trembled    for   their 

lumbers,    for  the  shaking  they  were  getting   on  the 

amel  was  enough,  one  would  think,  to  wake  the  dead. 

4ow  long  they  lived  I  do  not  exactly  know,  since  it  was 

lot  till  we  looked  at  them  as  we  approached  Odessa 

hat  they  were  found  to  have  departed  this  life — victims, 

las!  of  the  spirit  of  enterprise,  and  I  had  no  spirit  of  an 

Icoholic  character  wherein  to  preserve  their  remains.* 

At  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  arrived  at  Suili, 

vith    1 1    deep   wells    of   bad,   bitter    water,  and    near 

*  An  officer  at  Samarkand  had  gravely  assured  me  that  it  would  be 

bsolutely  necessary  to  mix  "a  little  red  wine"  with  the  desert  water 

s  a  corrective  for  health's  sake  ;  but  I  did  nothing  of  the  kind.    I  have 

■  met  with  the  idea  that,  when  travelling  abroad,  it  is  advisable  to 

wine  in  drinking-water  as  a  precaution.     My  experience,  however, 

hich  may  go  for  what  it  is  worth,  is  quite  in  the  opposite  direction.     I 

ive  been  an  abstainer  from  alcoholic  drinks  for  about  a  quarter  of  a 

ntury.     In  the  summers  of  eight  years  I  must  have  travelled  from 

*■■  to  seventy  thousand   miles,  generally  rapidly,  round    the  world, 

igh  Central  Asia,  and  to  all  the  capitals  of  Europe  except  Oporto 

Madrid.     Ordinarily  I  have  used  no  filter,  nor  taken  any  special 

lutions  (Bokhara  excepted),  and,  I  am  thankful  to  say,  have  never 

'•red  in  consequence.     Judging,  therefore,  from  my  own  case,  my 

iiiion  is  that,  when  travelling,  persons  in  ordinary  health  need  not 

ar  to  drink  the  water  in  common  use. 


432  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

to  each  a  tank,  about  7  feet  long  by  4  wide,  hewn 
out  of  the  Hmestone.  Here,  too,  is  a  cemetery,  but 
we  did  not  stay,  hoping  to  get  to  Krasnovodsk  on  the 
morrow.  We  could  reach  that  place  by  one  of  four 
roads.  The  Russian  doctor  and  engineer  went  nearly 
due  west,  to  the  well  Burnak,  13  miles  north  of 
Krasnovodsk.  Our  men,  however,  chose,  I  think,  a 
road  of  their  own,  over  a  trackless  steppe. 

Approaching  the  Caspian,  our  guides  pointed  out  a 
shepherd's  tent,  or  hut,  put  together  in  the  clumsiest 
fashion,  in  which,  like  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem, 
they  spend  many  weeks,  day  and  night,  watching 
their  flocks.* 

By  sunset,  however,  we  had  seen  no  one.  We  = 
stopped  for  two  hours  to  eat,  but  did  not  sleep,  because - 
Sevier  thought  he  had  seen  that  the  steamer  left  foi 
Baku  on  the  evening  of  the  following  day.  So  we 
pushed  on,  the  night  being  unusually  temperate,  sc 
that  my  fur  clothing,  as  I  lay  in  the  cradle,  became 
inconveniently  warm.  About  2  o'clock  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  22nd  we  had  to  '*  turn  out  of  bed  "  whilst 
the  camels  descended  a  ramp  from  a  cliff  200  feel 
deep  into  the  plain,  and  afterwards,  an  hour  or  twc 
before  daylight,  our  men  stopped  for  fear  of  losing 
their  way. 

We  breakfasted  as  usual,  in  all  its  discomfort  anc 
awkwardness,  on  the  camel's  back  ;  and  as  our  breac 
was  now  24  days  old,  I  thought  we  could  adopt  the 
language  of  the  Gibeonites  to  Joshua  (ix.  12,  13) 
"  This  our  bread  we  took  hot  for  our  provision  out  o 
our  houses  on  the  day  we  came  forth  .  .  .  but  now 
behold,  it  is  dry  and  it  is  mouldy";  to  which  we  coulc 
also  add,  "  These  our  garments  .   .  .  are  become  ok 

•  Cant.  i.  8  ;  Luke  ii.  8. 


I 


FROM  KAPLAN  KIR    TO  KRASNOVODSK.         433 

by  reason  of  the  very  long  journey."  Both  were  true, 
and  the  latter  especially  of  Sevier,  concerning  whom 
I  must  tell  no  tales  ;  but  his  riding  all  the  way  on  a 
wooden  saddle  (now  preserved  for  coming  generations 
in  the  British  Museum)  had  played  terrible  havoc  with 
his  pantaloons,  so  that  I  doubt  if  any  dealer  in  "  old 
clo' "  would  have  bid  for  them  other  than  as  curiosities 
of  travel.  Neither  of  us,  thanks  to  the  toughening 
of  our  hides,  had  suffered  from  what  the  doctors  call 
"  abrasion  of  the  epidermis,"  which  was  more  to 
Sevier's  credit  than  mine,  since  it  was  his  first  attempt 
at  horsemanship. 

After  breakfast  on  this  eventful  morning,  I  was 
lying  idly  in  the  cradle,  when  two  natives  appeared, 
the  first  we  had  seen  for  1 2  days.  They  were  Turko- 
mans, but  apparently  not  robbers ;  and  whilst  I  was 
taking  stock  of  them  Sevier  bade  me  look  round.  I 
did  so,  and  there,  from  the  top  of  a  hill,  at  half-past  10 
o'clock,  I  looked  down  upon  Krasnovodsk.  My  sense 
of  relief  was  great,  and  if  ever  words  came  from  the 
heart,  it  was  then  as  I  exclaimed,  "  Thank  God  !" 

I  felt  that  we  had  something  to  thank  Him  for. 
We  had  travelled  in  safety  over  400  miles  of  country 
where  many  a  man  has  been  murdered  or  enslaved  ; 
at  the  mercy  of  our  native  attendants,  who  might 
easily  have  played  us  false  ;  unhindered  by  mishap  to 
man,  horse,  or  camel — save  in  the  case  of  Rosy — 
whilst,  in  my  own  case,  I  had  not  been  constrained  so 
much  as  to  open  my  pill-box.  But  with  all  that,  it 
had  been  the  most  trying  journey  of  my  life.  My 
horse  had  become  thin,  and  so  had  I  ;  and  thankful  as 
I  am  to  have  taken  the  journey  once,  I  wish,  unless 
;  duty  calls  thereto,  never  to  take  such  another. 

VOL.  II.  28 


CHAPTER   LXXIII. 

TURKMENIA. 

Turkmenia :  its  boundaries,  area,  and  surface. — Russian  maps  witl" 
new  frontier. — Revision  of  this  and  following  chapters  by  M 
Lessar.  —  The  Caspian  littoral.  —  The  Balkhan,  Kuren-dagh 
and  Kopet-dagh  mountains. — The  rivers  Atrak  and  Gurgan.- 
Meteorology,  flora,  and  fauna. — The  Turkomans  :  their  origin, 
physiology,  and  characteristics. — Turkoman  tribes  :  their  distribu- 
tion and  sub-divisions. — Habitations,  food,  and  occupations.— 
Turkoman  women. 

HAVING  brought  the  reader  across  the  northern 
portion  of  the  land  of  the  Turkomans,  I 
proceed  to  give  some  account  of  Turkmenia  as  s 
whole  ;  of  the  country,  that  is,  extending  from  the 
Caspian  to  the  Oxus,  except  Khiva.  Turkmenk 
is  bounded  on  the  north  by  a  straight  line  drawn  froff 
the  Caspian  at  Mertvy  Kultuk — that  is,  *'  Dead  "  (or 
as  it  has  been  lately  renamed,  Tsarevitch)  Bay — to « 
point  on  the  Khivan  frontier  midway  between  Kungrac^ 
and  the  Sea  of  Aral ;  whilst  on  the  south  it  toucheJ 
Persia  and  Afghanistan.  The  southern  frontier,  be 
ginning  at  the  mouth  of  the  Atrak,  proceeds  along 
that  river  to  Chat,  and  then  continues  eastwards 
between  the  Atrak  and  Sumbar  rivers  to  the  moun 
tains  50  miles  north-west  of  Askabad.  It  thei 
descends  to  the  south-east  along  the  mountains  t< 
Sarakhs. 


TURKMENIA.  435 

From  Sarakhs  the  southern  Turkmenian  boundary, 
though  it  has  never  been  surveyed,  has  been  drawn 
in  both  Russian  and  Enghsh  official  maps,  in  a  toler- 
ably straight  line,  to  Khoja  Saleh  on  the  Upper  Oxus. 
North  of  this  line  is  Turkmenia,  and  south  of  it 
Afghanistan.  This  frontier,  moreover,  has  in  a  mea- 
sure been  recognized  by  Russia,  since  her  foreign 
minister,  M.  de  Giers,  instructed  Prince  Lobanow 
to  endeavour  to  induce  the  British  Government  to 
assist  in  formally  and  definitely  laying  down  the  boun- 
dary "  from  Khoja  Saleh  to  the  Persian  frontier  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Sarakhs."*  England  agreed  to  the 
joint  Commission,  and  in  August,  1884,  some  of  her 
Commissioners  started  ;  but  a  Russian  map  had  been 
issued  by  Ilyin,  of  Petersburg,  at  least  four  months 
previously  (of  which  I  have  seen  a  copy  printed  in 
England,  dated  April,  1884),  pushing  the  boundary 
100  miles  further  south,  up  the  Heri  Rud,  to  the  35th 

*  Whilst  this  and  my  remaining  chapters  were  passing  through  the 
press,  I  had  the  privilege  of  making  the  acquaintance  of  M.  P. 
Lessar,  sent  as  Imperial  Russian  Commissioner  to  London  in  con- 
nection with  the  arrangement  of  the  Afghan  frontier  question.  Being 
very  desirous  of  writing  accurately  and  impartially,  I  made  bold  to  ask 
his  Excellency's  revision  of  my  four  chapters  on  Turkmenia,  and  to 
this,  notwithstanding  great  pressure  of  official  duties,  he  kindly 
consented.  His  remarks  are  not  numerous,  and  are  short.  I  have 
therefore  given  them  in  my  notes,  and  for  the  most  part  verbatim. 
Concerning  the  above  quotation  from  Central  Asian  Co7'responde?icey 
^o.  I  (1884),  p.  14,  his  Excellency  says: — "Only  maps,  designed  to 
explain  treaties,  can  serve  as  documents  to  determine  a  frontier. 
Others,  even  when  edited  by  official  departments,  are  not  always  made 
vith  the  necessary  attention,  and  with  sufficient  local  knowledge,  but 
)ften  on  the  basis  of  inexact  reconnaissances.  It  was  so  with  this 
ittle-known  country ;  the  frontier  on  the  official  English  map 
General  Walker's)  in  different  editions  being  differently  indicated.  In 
873  Sari-Yazi  and  Pul-i-Khatunare  shown  as  outside  of  Afghanistan." 
"Also,  approximate  expressions  {e.g.,  'in  the  neighbourhood  of 
»arakhs  ')  used  in  the  preliminary  negotiations  cannot  be  taken  as  the 
ecognition  of  any  frontier  line." 


436  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

parallel,  then  proceeding  about  20  miles  south  of 
Penjdeh,  by  a  curve  between  that  place  and  Meruchak 
on  the  Murgab,  and  afterwards  continuing  to  Khoja 
Saleh.  I  am  not  aware  that  this  map  carries  any 
official  authority  ;  but  another  map,  from  the  Military 
Topographical  Department  of  the  Russian  General 
Staff,  had  reached  England  by  the  beginning  of  March, 
1884,  with  the  frontier  similarly  altered.  This  latter 
map  is  dated  1883  ;  but,  on  close  inspection,  a  tiro 
may  see  that  the  old  frontier  has  been  erased  by 
hand,  and  the  new  substituted  frontier  lithographed. 

Straight  lines  from  Mertvy  Kultuk  to  Khoja  Saleh,. 
and  to  the  mouth  of  the  Atrak,  measure,  respectively, 
800  and  550  miles,  whilst  the  breadth  of  Turkmenia 
at  its  widest,  say  from  the  mouth  of  the  Atrak  to  the 
town  of  Khiva,  is  430  miles.  The  only  estimate  of  its 
area  I  have  met  with  is  that  of  Kouropatkin,  who 
mentions  9,000  German  (or  197,000  English)  square 
miles.  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  Turkmenia  is  about 
as  large  as  France.  M 

The  country,  as  a  whole,  consists  of  the  plains  in  the 
east  and  of  hills  in  the  west.  The  western  portion 
includes  the  elevation  in  the  north  called  the  Ust  Urt. 
and  in  the  south  the  mountain  chain  stretching  to  the 
south-east,  under  the  various  names  of  the  Great  anc 
Little  Balkhans,  the  Kuren-dagh  and  Kopet-dagh 
whilst  the  eastern  portion  is  entirely  flat,  the  lowest 
part  being  the  dry  bed  of  the  Oxus.  The  Chink,  01 
scarped  edge  of  the  Ust  Urt,  on  the  east,  west,  ai)C 
south,  looks,  when  seen  from  the  lowland,  as  if  rising 
as  many  think  it  once  did,  from  the  sea.  It  constitutes 
in  a  measure,  an  ethnological  line  of  limitation  betwe^^ 
the  Kirghese  and  the  Turkomans  (Grodekoff,  in  hit 
ethnological  map  of  Turkmenia,  makes  it  nearly  so)i 


TURKMENIA .  43  7 

the  Kirghese  not  passing  to  the  lowlands,  and  few  of 
the  Turkomans  ascending  to  the  highlands.  Hence 
some  would  call  the  Chink  the  northern  boundary  of 
Turkmenia. 

On  the  west  of  Turkmenia  is  the  Caspian  littoral, 
more  than  1,000  miles  long.* 

Extending  in  a  south-easterly  direction  from  Balkhan 
Bay  is  a  mountain  range  270  miles  long,  broken  in 
two  places,  and  first  by  the  old  bed  of  the  Oxus.  The 
part  of  the  range  between  this  first  break  and  the 
Caspian  is  called  the  Great  Balkhan.  The  second 
part,  situated  between  the  two  breaks,  is  known  as  the 
Little  Balkhan.  Beyond  the  second  break,  southwards 
to  half  the  entire  length  of  the  mountain  system,  the 
range  is  called  Kuren-  or  Kioren-dagh,  whilst  the 
most  southerly  part  is  called  the  Kopet-dagh,  or 
Daman-i-Kuh  (skirt  of  the  hills). f 

The    Kopet-dagh  is  joined  Trom   the   south  by  the 

*  The  northern  portion  of  this  Hne  is  Kaidak  Bay,  whose  eastern  coast 
is  walled  by  the  steep  declivities  of  the  Ust  Urt,  and  bounded  by  a 
margin  of  lowland  only  a  few  miles  wide.  Next  thereto  is  the  flat, 
sandy,  saline,  and  partly  reedy  shore  of  the  Buzachi  peninsula,  exten- 
ding to  the  high  projecting  spit  of  Cape  Karagan.  From  this  last 
point  the  shore  turns  south,  and  as  far  as  Karaboghaz  Gulf  it  is  com- 
posed of  limestone  rocks,  almost  washed  by  the  sea.  Gradually  declin- 
ing in  height  as  they  proceed  southwards,  these  rocks  merge  into  the 
sandy  steppe,  except  on  the  north  coast  of  Balkhan  Bay,  The  most 
southerly  portion  of  the  Caspian  littoral  at  the  estuaries  of  the  Atrak 
and  Gurgan  rivers  is  a  reed-grown  flat. 

t  A  recent  English  traveller  in  this  region,  Mr.  A.  Condie  Stephen, 
speaks  of  the  Great  Balkhan  as  the  most  imposing  in  appearance  of 
the  mountain  ranges  of  Turkmenia.  The  higher  portion  of  its  south- 
western face  is  precipitous,  the  crest  being  estimated  at  5,300  feet  above 
the  sea. 

From  25  to  30  miles  south  of  the  Great  Balkhans  lie  the  Little 
Balkhans,  a  low,  bleak  ridge,  not  mounting  higher  than  2,200  feet.  The 
Balkhan  mountains  have  a  length  of  about  130  miles,  and  are  rarely 
wider  than  30  miles.  They  are  composed  of  molluscular  limestone  and 
laminated  rock.     Springs  are  found  in  the  defiles,  but  the  little  grass 


438  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

ramifications  of  the  Elburz  range,  which  crosses  the 
north  of  Persia  and  Khorassan.  Between  the  northern 
spur  of  this  range,  the  Kopet-dagh,  and  the  Caspian, 
is  a  mountainous  triangle,  its  apex  being  the  point  of 
junction  of  the  Elburz  and  Kopet  ranges.  The  sides 
are  the  two  ranges  referred  to,  and  the  base  is  the 
eastern  coast  of  the  Caspian  from  Balkhan  Bay  to  the 
mouths  of  the  Atrak  and  Gurgan.  f 

The  lack  of  water  in  Turkmenia  is  very  marked. 
There  are  in  the  eastern  portion  certain  districts  of  1 30 
square  miles — about  as  large,  that  is,  as  Rutlandshire — 
possessing  only  one  well  of  fresh  water.  The  moun- 
tain systems  of  the  Kuren-dagh  and  Elburz  are  of 
considerable  extent,  but  give  rise  to  only  two  small 
rivers,    the    Atrak    and    Gurgan,    and    a  few   rivulets. 

that  grows  there  is  frequently  bitter.  There  are  cherr}''  and  fig  trees, 
barberry  bushes,  and  small  conifers  growing  up  to  30  feet  high. 

The  Kuren-dagh  has  an  average  height  of  from  1,500  to  2,000  feet, 
for  a  distance  of  about  50  miles,  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Kizil  Arvat, 
where  it  joins  the  other  range  called  the  Kopet-dagh.  Mr.  Stephen 
found  at  Kizil  Arvat  pieces  of  calcareous  rock,  such  as  abound  in  the 
Kopet-dagh,  composed  entirely  of  "  marine  shells,"  thereby  proving,  he 
observes,  the  submarine  origin  of  the  Central  Asian  desert.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  writer  in  the  journal de  St.  Peter sbourg,  5th- 17th  March, 
1876,  says  of  the  earthy  formation  about  Topiatan  in  the  Uzboi  that 
there  is  to  be  found  a  profusion  of  fresh-water  shells,  "which  no  one 
could  mistake  for  sea  shells." 

The  Kopet-dagh  is  about  40  miles  wide  at  its  commencement,  but 
narrows  towards  the  south.  It  presents  a  bolder  appearance  than  the 
Kuren-dagh.  Its  elevation  is  greater,  the  height  increasing  as  it 
extends,  like  a  wall,  southwards.  One  summit,  overlooking  the  Germat 
Valley,  has  been  estimated  at  betvyeen  7,000  and  8,000  feet  in  altitude, 
but  the  average  height  of  the  range  Mr.  Stephen  supposes  to  be  not 
more  than  from  3,000  to  4,000  feet. 

As  seen  from  the  Trans-Caspian  railway,  the  Little  Balkhans  and 
Kuren-dagh  are  bare  of  trees,  with  few  protuberances  or  abrupt 
declivities.  In  the  Kopet-dagh,  however,  soon  after  leaving  Kizil 
Arvat.  clumps  of  trees  are  observable  half-way  up  the  mountains.  The 
northern  slope  of  the  Kopet-dagh  Mr.  Condie  Stephen  thought  to  be 
from  30  to  35  degrees. 


TURKMENIA.  439 

The  Atrak  takes  its  rise  in  the  mountains  of  Handoo 
Kuh,  at  an  elevation  of  5,800  feet,  and,  flowing  in  a 
westerly  direction  for  190  miles,  reaches  the  Russian 
frontier  at  Chat,  or,  more  properly,  Chat-i-Atrak, 
where  the  Atrak  receives  its  one  affluent  from  the 
north,  the  Sumbar.  From  Chat  the  Atrak  runs  south- 
west, about  50  miles  in  a  deep  stream,  from  40  to  70 
feet  wide,  between  precipitous  banks  from  30  to  100 
feet  high,  to  Baiat-hadji,  the  stream  being  fordable 
only  at  a  few  places  by  horsemen  when  the  water  is 
low.* 

Below  Baiat-hadji  the  Atrak  resumes  a  westerly 
course,  and,  40  miles  beyond  the  ferry  Chelte  Alum, 
empties  itself  by  several  mouths  into  the  Hassan  Kuli 
Bay  of  the  Caspian. 

The  River  Gurgan,  130  miles  long,  runs  parallel  with 
the  Atrak  at  a  distance  of  30  or  40  miles,  and  between 

*  From  information  gathered  in  1874  by  General  Lomakin,  it  appeared 
that  from  Chat  the  bulk  of  the  Atrak  waters  were  formerly  made  to  flow 
to  the  north-west,  irrigating  the  country  to  the  Bugdaili  wells,  on  the 
road  towards  Krasnovodsk.  The  soil  may  still  be  cultivated  after  a 
little  spring  rain,  and  without  irrigation.  The  whole  of  the  mountain- 
ous triangle  alluded  to,  watered  by  the  Atrak  and  Gurgan,  abounds 
in  pasture  grounds  and  fertile  valleys.  In  this  region  are  extensive 
ruins  of  an  ancient  city  (Mestorian),  that  was  built  of  burnt  brick. 
There  are  several  minarets  among  the  ruins,  and  the  Turkomans  con- 
tinue to  use  the  bricks.  The  traces  of  numerous  canals  show  that  this 
deserted  country  once  teemed  with  life,  but  the  district  has  been  de- 
populated by  the  slaughter  or  captivity  of  its  inhabitants, 

t  A  great  many  canals  are  cut  from  this  lower  part  of  its  course,  but 

only  those  on  the  south  are  now  used  for  irrigation.     The  current  of  the 

Atrak  does  not  exceed  two  miles  an  hour,  and  its  water,  though  muddy, 

is  fresh,  except  at  its  mouth,  where,  when  the  river  is  shallow,  neither 

horses  nor  camels  will  drink  it,  because   the  saline  banks  impart  a 

bitter  salt  taste.     Small  Turkoman  boats  ply  for  a  few  miles  up  the 

Atrak,  in  which  are  taken  carp  and  sandre ;  and  on  the  shores  of  the 

I  Hassan  Kuli  Bay  is,  or  was,  a  collection  of  200  tents,  where  the  Turko- 

!  mans  build  their  flat-bottomed  boats.     Here,  too,  was  established,  in 

;  1835,  a  Russian  fishing  station. 


440  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

low  banks,  except  at  its  sources.  Its  breadth  is  about 
the  same  as  that  of  the  Atrak,  but  it  is  shallower  and 
fordable  in  many  places.  The  traces  of  a  large  wall 
of  burnt  brick  are  discernible  here  and  there  along  its 
right  bank.  This  is  Kizil  Alan,  said  to  have  been 
built  by  Alexander  the  Great. 

To  the  south  of  the  Gurgan,  and  form.ing  the  fron- 
tier of  the  Astrabad  province,  flows,  through  a  swampy, 
reed-grown  valley,  the  Kara-Su  river.  It  has  a  length 
of  40  miles. 

The  climate  of  Turkmenia  is  continental,  and  presents 
extremes  of  temperature  disproportioned  to  the  lati- 
tude of  the  country.  The  south  of  the  desert  is 
warmer  than  the  centre.  The  seasons  also  present 
remarkable  variations,  caused  by  the  winds.* 

These  differences  of  climate  produce  a  corre- 
sponding variety  of  vegetation.  Describing  his 
journey  from  Krasnovodsk,  Mr.  Condie  Stephen 
noticed,  before  reaching  Kizil  Arvat,  the  growth  of 
little  more  than  camel-thorn  and  saxaul.  From  Kizil 
Arvat  to  Geok  Tepe  the  same  continued,  with  the 
addition  of  willows,  wheat,  barley,  maize,  millet,  and 
melons  ;  whilst  beyond,  as  far  as  Gavars,  or  Gyaurs, 
he  adds  nut,  mulberry,  apricot,  and  peach  trees  ;  rice, 
cotton,  and  grapes. 

*  The  north-easterly  gales  cause  a  fall  in  the  temperature,  and,  beinj,' 
dry  and  violent,  they  raise  clouds  of  dust,  which,  impregnated  with 
saline  particles,  is  hurtful  to  the  eyes.  The  westerly  winds  from  the 
south  and  south-west,  blowing  from  the  Caspian,  render  the  air  damp, 
and,  in  September  and  October,  bring  clouds  with  heavy  and  continuous 
rains.  This  last  remark,  however,  applies  more  especially  to  the  parts 
south  of  the  mountains,  since  little  rain  or  snow  falls  further  north.  The 
winter  varies  a  good  deal.  In  1880-81  it  was  so  mild  that  the  besiegers 
of  Geok  Tepe  hardly  required  great-coats.  The  following  winter  was 
almost  Siberian,  the  Michailovsk  Gulf  being  frozen,  and  snow  on  the 
plain  lying  from  ^  to  3  feet  deep,  whilst  the  mountain  roads  were  for 
weeks  impassable.      M.  Lessar  observes  that  surveying  can  be  best 


TURKMEN/A.  441 

At  Krasnovodsk,  at  the  end  of  November,  I  pur- 
chased apples,  medlars,  and  sweet  lemons — the  last,  if 
not  all,  being  imported  from  Astrabad.  The  lemons 
were  very  insipid,  even  to  one  just  come  from  the 
desert,  but  the  medlars  were  good. 

Again,  the  country  between  the  Atrak  and  Gurgan 
grows  rice  and  cotton,  also  walnuts  and  lemons,  and 
even  the  sugar  cane. 

Amongst  the  fauna  of  Turkmenia  may  be  mentioned 
Wolves  and  Jackals,  and  in  the  reedy  marshes  water- 
fowl abound.  North  of  the  mountains  Mr.  Condie 
Stephen  observed  Eagles,  Vultures,  Hawks,  Bustards, 
Grey  Crows,  Pin-tailed  Grouse,  and  Larks  ;  besides 
Flamingoes  on  the  shores  of  the  Caspian.  The 
Tarantulas  are  large,  and  there  is  found  in  the  desert 
a  great  Lizard,  measuring  from  2  to  3  feet  long.  Mr. 
O'Donovan,  writing  to  me  before  I  started,  said,  ''  You 
ought,  of  course,  to  go  well  armed.  If  you  are  any- 
thing of  a  sportsman,  you  w^ill  find  plenty  of  amuse- 
ment on  the  slopes  of  the  mountains  between  Persia  and 
the  Turkoman   country  —  Partridge,   Fowl,   and  Wild 

done  during  September  and  October,  since  the  temperature  is  then  cool, 
and  the  sky  generally  clouded.  In  March  and  April  cold  nights  are 
prevalent.  The  most  abundant  rain  falls  early  in  spring,  at  which  time 
the  deserts  can  be  conveniently  traversed  in  all  directions.  M.  Lessar 
speaks,  I  presume,  of  the  region  about  Merv,  and  1  should  take  what 
he  says  of  autumn  to  hold  good  of  the  part  I  crossed  oetween  Petro- 
Alexandrovsk  and  Krasnovodsk.  In  1877,  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk, 
the  mean,  maximum,  and  minimum  temperatures  were  :  July,  82'' '4, 
^'^2i''2)-,  62'-4;  August,  'jf'2,  i03°'5,  57°7  ;  September,  69°-8,  99°*i, 
48°'o  ;  and  October,  $2°-t^,  "]()""],  28°*9  ;  wliilst  at  Krasnovodsk  for  the 
same  four  months  the  mean,  maximum,  and  minimum  temperatures 
registered:  July,  88°7,  99°-9,  79°'5  ;  August,  86°-4,  ioo°-9,  72°-5  ; 
September,  75°'2,  94°-5,  6i°'3  ;  and  October,  6i°-o,  79°*3,  50°-2.  I 
collected  meteorological  statistics  of  the  year  preceding  my  visit  from 
several  places  in  Central  Asia,  and  to  these  I  have  added  some  few 
others  for  the  purposes  of  comparison,  thus  :* — 

*  See  pages  442-3, 


442 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA 


Boar  abounding  in  almost  incredible  numbers,  as  well 
as  Antilopes,  Wild  Ass,  and  Leopard."  In  the  south, 
M.  Lessar  describes  the  ground  as  everywhere 
undermined  by  Porcupines  and  other  animals.  He 
mentions,  too,  as  of  frequent  occurrence.  White  Ant- 
hills. Along  the  line  of  railway  the  ants  attack  the 
timber-work,  though  they  have  not  yet  touched  the 
sleepers.     In  the  desert  there  is  almost  no  fauna,  not 

METEOROLOGY  OF  CENTRAL  ASIA, 


Barometer. 

Temperature. 

Relative 
Humidity. 

a 
u 

Rai 

imum. 
mum. 

c 

1 

J 

c 

.5 

'^ 

n              .S 

0 

'I 

is 

s 

!§ 

rt 

n 

S 

S?             ;            S 

s 

% 

^ 

s 

^ 

S 

■^> 

Akmolinsk     .     .     . 

28-859 

29-630       28-091 

35-06;  95-90 

-36-76 





6-9 

733-0 

752-6     7I3-S 

i-7 

355 

-38-2 

— 

— 

4-9 

^7-^.' 

Baku 

30-032 

30-627  j  29-402 

5S-46 

89-42 

23-72 

— 

— 

12-8 

762-8 

777-9  1  74^-S 

14-7 

31-9 

-4-6 

76 

25 

5-5 

326 

Marghilan      .     .     . 

— 

— 

— 

57-92 

104-36 

2-66 

— 

— 

— 

1-9 

— 

— 

— 

14-4  \   40-2 

-J63 

63 

t5 

46 

49- 

Penjakend      .     .     . 

26-772 

27-249 

26-398 

55-76  1  100-40 

050 

— 

13-3 

6800 

6g2-i  \  670-3 

73-2  I  380 

-n5 

5 

J4 

5-0 

339-^ 

Perovsk     .... 

— 

—     '     — 

49-10  1  102-38 

-17-86 

5-8 

— 

—     '     — 

95  !  39'^ 

-277 

65 

n 

5-0 

^48\ 

Petro-Alexandrovsk 

29-682 

30-445 :  29-095 

55-22  i  102-74 

-IO-66 

27. 

7S3'9 

7733  \  739-0 

^2-g  j  393 

-23-7 

55 

8 

4-J 

69-. 

Samarkand     .     .     . 

•27-552 

28-083  27-162 

58-10.  104-18 

3-02 

— 

— 

14-? 

6gg-8 

713-3     6Sg-g 

14-S  !  40-1 

-i&i 

62 

14 

J-6 

374-< 

Tashkend  .... 

28-449 

29-071    27-918 

55-66;  101-48 

-9-76 

— 

159 

7226 

738-4  \  7og-i 

13-1  :  38-6 

-23-2 

66 

n 

3-8 

404'. 

Vierny 

27-445 

28-079  1  26  949 

46-58:   96-44 

-11-74 

— 

25-3- 

6gri 

713-2  \  684-s 

cJv  i  35-8 

-243 

6g 

23 

4-7 

(>43-' 

Greenwich     .     .     . 

29-953 

30-670  i  28-745 

48-8   1   97-1 

12-7 

82 

6-8 

257: 

760-8 

779-0     730-1 

93     3(>-2 

-J0-7 

— 

— 

— 

6jjj 

Berlin 

29-808 

30-607    28-682 

47-1 

94-5 

-2-2 

— 

— 

— 

19-4: 

757-^ 

777-4     728-=; 

8-4 

34'7 

—  igo 

72 

— 

6-4 

494-: 

New  York     .     .     . 

29-921 

30702  ,  28 -945 

52-4 

lOIO 

-30 

77 

— 

36'2t 

760-0 

7798  t  735-2 

113 

383 

-ig-4 

— 

— 

— 

g2i'i 

Christiania     .     .     . 

29-741 

43-0 

85-5 

—  20 

— 

— 

— 

317: 

7SS-4 

—          — 

6-1 

29-7 

-i8-g 

78 

— 

6-4 

8o6'i 

Copenhagen  .     .     . 

29-890 

—          — 

43-7 

793 

4-5 

19-3. 

7S9-2 

~          ~ 

6'5  \   26-3 

~'53 

80 

" 

6-6 

490- 

N.B. — The  readings  of  the  Baro.meter  (corrected  to  the  temperature  0°  Centigrade 
and  Rai.nfall  in  inches  and  millimetres.  For  Cloud,  10  equals  a  completely  covere 
represented  by  100. 


TURKMENIA. 


443 


even  Wolves,  so  that  the  Turkomans  can  pasture  their 
sheep  without  fear  round  the  wells,  down  which  the 
few  birds  visible  fly  for  their  supply  of  water. 

Turkmenia  is  peopled  by  the  Kirghese  of  Man- 
gysh-lak,  the  garrisons  of  the  Russian  forts,  and  the 
Turkomans,  the  last  being  of  uncertain  origin.  Their 
ancestors  are  said  to  have  been  driven  from  Man- 
gysh-lak  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.      Ferrier 


PARED  WITH   THAT   OF   SOME   OTHER  PLACES. 

Number  of  Days  with 

Direction  of  Wind. 

■NT             U                C  T^      *1                  J    T*    ■    J      *1         rW, 

Number  of  Daily  and  In-daily  (Jbservaiions. 

V 

S  E 

^ 

1 

s 

^ 

;i 

'rt 

ai 

> 

0 

0 

cJ5 

N. 

N.E. 

E. 

S.E. 
27 

s. 

36 

s.w. 

w. 

N.W. 

Calm. 

_ 

__ 





14 

41 

34 

104 

44 

14 

49 

12 

2 

/2 

88 

83 

SO 

41 

121 

100 

81 

107 

311 

/J^ 

^0 

147 

— 

—  ' 

— 

— 

— 

— - 

95 

36 

3 

51 

31 

53 

5 

70 

21 

'8 

— 

9 

52 

97 

20 

283 

JO7 

8 

IS3 

9^ 

75c? 

^5 

211 

6^ 

— 

-  — 

— 

— 

-^ 

12  1     15 

9 

43 

52 

31 

46 

29 

128 

9 



8 

130 

go 

22 

3S 

43 

27 

128 

756 

9^ 

^-^S 

<?5 

3^A 

— 

-— 

— 

— 

— 

I 

12 

79 

26 

31 

94 

18 

— 

86 

?6 

-- 

7 

120 

103 

// 

4 

36 

239 

80 

9J 

282 

55 

— 

^5^^ 

- 



— 

— 

— 

40 

96 

50 

33 

23 

34 

32 

38 

19 

ftf 

— 

9 

97 

91 

13 

118 

286 

148 

97 

70 

70? 

9S 

113 

5c!>' 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

44  1     38 

18 

12 

6 

9 

29 

15 

194 

9 

— 

J 

'34 

61 

7 

131 

IJ2 

^i 

3S 

^9 

26 

<?c? 

^6 

S83 

— 

-^ 

— 

— 

— 

— 

II 

16 

18 

25 

27 

3* 

18 

12 

199 

5 

-- 

2 

158 

SI 

3S 

33 

48 

S6 

76 

81 

9^ 

54 

38 

597 

- 

— 

— 

26 

26 

I 

5 

3 

2 

2 

23 

278 

:o 

2 

^4 

i5(> 

S3 

S 

78 

78 

2 

IS 

c? 

5 

6 

70 

833 

~ 



28 

14 

18 

II 

69 

25 

31 

4 

165 

r4 

/ 

23 

103 

8g 

3i 

84 

41 

54 

JJ 

^06 

7J 

^f 

13 

^96 

6 

2 

8 

77 

139 

8 

39 

49 

34 

25 

41 

107 

38 

22 

10 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

iz8 

I4S 

lOI 

75 

7^^ 

j^^ 

IJ4 

66 

JO 

- 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

24 

39 

45 

55 

32 

68 

40 

55 

7 

8 
6 

s 

// 

39 

130 

'1 

72 

118 

i3(> 

166 

95 

203 

779 

765 

21 

: 

— 

37 

64 

54 

27 

64 

43 

12 

15 

49 

2 

6 

i6 

44 

143 

/ 

III 

193 

161 

c?0 

191 

7JO 

J6 

4S 

7^<? 

- 

— 

— 

— 

— 

28 

24 

36 

45 

53 

51 

40 

73 

15 

0 

9 

' 

48 

IS7 

4 

84 

72 

108 

^J^ 

/5<? 

^5^ 

121 

^79 

^^ 

eit)  are  given  in  inches  and  millimcircs.     Temperature  in  Fahrenheit  and  Centigrade  ; 
^E   HUMIDITY  is  given;   saturation,     or  as  much  vi'ater  as  the  air,  will    carry — beim; 


444  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL   ASIA, 

considers  that  the  Turkomans,  Uzbegs,  and  Kirghese 
are  of  common  origin  ;  but,  so  far  as  my  experience 
goes,  I  think  that  whilst  I  could  easily  distinguish  a 
Kirghese  by  his  broad  Mongol  face  from  either  of  the 
other  two,  I  could  not  easily  discern  between  a  Turko- 
man and  an  Uzbeg.* 

Of  the  numerous  divisions  and  sub-divisions  of  the 
Turkomans,  Petrusevitch  gives  a  long  account  ;  but 
Grodekoff,  having  sifted  previous  information  (which  he 
publishes  in  a  condensed  form),  gives  an  ethnological 
map  of  Turkmenia,  apportioning  the  country  to  lo 
groups,  with  a  total  1,170,000  souls,  f  The  Yomuds 
are  made  to  extend  from  Khiva  all  across  the  Ust  Urt 
south  of  the  route  I  travelled,  to  the  Caspian,  and 
southward  along  the  sea  -  board  to  Persia.  The 
Tekkes  extend  from  the  old  Oxus  bed  at  Igdy,  and 
from  Kizil  Arvat,  southwards  to  Afghanistan.  On  the 
Oxus  about  Khoja  Saleh  are  the  Ersaris,  whilst  south- 
of  Khoja  Saleh,  about  Andkhoi,  and  on  the  uppeif 
waters  of  the   Murgab,   both  in  Afghan  territory,  are 

*  In  appearance  the  Turkomans  are  usually  dark.  Some  few  are 
air,  and  others  even  sandy,  says  the  Baron  Benoist-Mechin,  but  T 
cannot  say  that  I  saw  any  of  the  last.  Blue  e)^es,  he  adds,  are  no« 
uncommon,  and  in  many  families,  especially  among  the  women,  on©^ 
discovers  the  pure  Turkish  type,  that  is,  verging  towards  the  Mongol. 
The  men  are  generall}^  tall,  robust,  fierce,  and  often  wild-looking. 
They  are,  he  says,  exceedingly  brave,  and  a  life  of  plunder  is  the  one 
that  suits  them.  They  are  true  to  their  word,  and  their  guest  is 
sacred  till  he  leaves  their  tent,  and  then  they  murder  him  if  it  suits 
them.  When  not  engaged  in  plunder  they  are  extremely  idle,  lying 
about  their  tents  playing  chess,  at  which  they  are  skilful,  or  gossiping, 
till  a  fresh  opportunity  of  pillage  excites  them  to  action.  By  way  ol 
contrast  I  may  add  that  two  days  before  writing  these  words,  I  received 
a  communication  from  Tiflis,  quoting  a  letter  from  an  American  doctor, 
now  in  Khiva,  who  says  of  the  Turkomans  he  had  met,  "  For  fair  and 
kindly  dealing  I  have  met  with  no  such  people  in  the  East." 

t  Yomuds,  150,000;  Emrali,  50.000 ;  Sakar,  15,000;  Tekke,  300,000; 
Ersari,  150,000;  Goklan,  31,000  ;  Alieli,  250,000  (?) ;  Chaudor,  86,000  ; 
Sar)'k,  65,000;  and  Salor,  12,500. 


TURKMENIA.  445 

the  Aliells  and  the  Saryks.*  The  Salors  are  scattered 
along  the  Murgab  in  small  settlements  from  Penjdeh 
to  beyond  Merv.f 

With  the  Yomuds  I  came  into  personal  contact, 
both  in  Khiva  and  at  Krasnovodsk.  In  fact,  my 
limited  experience  of  Turkoman  life  was  drawn  prin- 
cipally from  them,  and  the  few  others  I  met  in  Khiva 
or  on  the  Oxus. 

Without  reference  to  their  particular  tribe,  all  Turko- 
mans are  included  in  two  classes — the  CJwmur,  or  settled, 
and  the  CJiarva,  or  nomads.  The  two  classes  consort 
amicably,  a  father  sometimes  being  one,  and  his  son  the 
other,  or  the  same  man  sometimes  becomes  a  nomad 
when  prosperous,  and  a  settler  when  impoverished. 

Their  habitation  is  almost  always  the  tent,  which 
closely  resembles  that  of  the  Kirghese.  I  noticed, 
however,  in  the  Krasnovodsk  aul  I  visited,  or  rather 
oba  (for  this  is  the  Turkoman  word  for  a  collection  of 
tents),  that  the  reed  matting  the  Kirghese  place  round 
the  tent  inside,  the  Turkomans  placed  outside,  and 
wainscoted  the  interior  with  a  piece  of  striped  cloth 
or  carpet.      Further,   this   matting  was  bound  on  the 

*  This  distribution  of  the  Turkomans  indicates,  to  a  certain  extent, 
their  gravitation  to  the  various  states  around  them,  though  some  are 
in  a  greater  degree  of  dependence  than  others.  The  Ersari  are 
dependent  on  Bokhara,  and  Russia  claims  the  allegiance  of  about  nine- 
•  tenths  of  the  Yomuds  ;  but  Khiva  holds  sway  over  a  few  of  them  also, 
and  some  of  the  Chaudors,  whilst  the  allegiance  of  the  Yomuds  in 
the  extreme  south  with  that  of  the  Goklans  is  claimed  by  Persia. 
Petrusevitch  gives  the  Goklans  4,000  tents,  and  says  they  pay  a  yearly 
tribute  to  the  Shah  of  6,000  tiunans,  or,  say,  £2,^00.  The  most  inde- 
pendent were  the  Tekkes,  recently  conquered  and  incorporated  by 
Russia,  and  of  whom  I  shall  speak  hereafter. 

t  M.  Lessar  here  writes  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Saryks  live  on  the  middle  waters  of  the  Murgab  in  only  two 
places  :  Penj-deh  and  Yul-utan,  the  distance  between  them  being 
inhabited.  There  are  no  Salors  on  the  Murgab.  In  1857  they  were 
driven  away  by  the  Saryks,  and  migrated  to  Zur-abad  in  Persia." 


446 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


exterior  with  broad  bands,  some  of  velvet  about  9 
inches  wide.  These  bands  are  handsomely  worked, 
so  that  I  saw  them  cut  up  for  chair-backs  and  other 
furniture  in  the  drawing-room  of  the  Governor's  house 
at  Petro-Alexandrovsk.  I  tried  to  get  a  piece  at 
Krasnovodsk,  but  could  only  find  a  soiled  second-hand 
specimen,  and  that  very  dear. 

The  usual  food  of  the  Turkoman  is  unleavened 
bread,  the  dough  being  kneaded  in  a  wooden  trough 
or  upon  a  dried  skin,  and  then  baked  on  the  hearth  by 
covering  it  up  in  wood  embers,  the  simplest,  surely,  of 


TURKOMAN    TENTS    NEAR   KRASNOVODSK    ON    THE   SHORE  OF   THE   CASPIAN. 

all  methods  of  cooking,  and  such  as  I  saw  in  full  forc< 
amongst  my  attendants,  crossing  from  Khiva.  The 
Turkomans  also  eat  meal  with  oil  or  clarified  butter, 
and  I  saw  in  preparation  another  kind  of  food  called 
yarma,  consisting  of  bruised  wheat  and  sour  milk.* 
Melons  are  said  to  be  the  staple  food  of  the  Tekkes  ; 
pilau  and  soup  on  special  occasions,  f 

*  The  wheat  was  bruised  in  a  stone  mortar  with  a  stone  pestle.  I  had 
never  seen  corn  thus  treated,  but  it  seemed  to  me  to  illustrate  Prov. 
xxvii.  22,  "Though  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  among  wheat 
with  a  pestle  "  ;  and,  perhaps,  Isa.  xxviii.  28,  "  Bread  corn  is  bruised." 

t  M.  Lessar  tells  me  the  Turkomans  do  not  eat  fish  from  the 
Murgab  and  Tejend,  supposing  that  it  causes  fever. 


TURKMENIA.  447 

The  dress  of  the  Turkoman  is  like  that  of  the 
Uzbegs.  Women  being  kept  less  in  seclusion  than 
amongst  the  Uzbegs,  I  was  able  to  examine  their 
jewellery,  which  was  for  the  most  part  of  silver.  Their 
bracelets  were  in  the  shape  of  the  letter  C,  2  inches 
wide,  and  perhaps  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  weighing, 
I  suppose,  up  to  half  a  pound.  Some  wore  in  the  ears 
gold  rings,  3  inches  in  diameter,  for  which  they  asked 
as  much  as  ^10,  but  I  did  not  observe  any  worn  in 
the  nose.  I  bought  of  them  some  studs  of  native 
workmanship,  a  finger-ring,  and  a  child's  anklet. 

The  women  showed  us  amulets  worn  round  the  neck, 
and  valued  in  some  cases  up  to  ^20.  I  observed  a 
charm  similar  in  character  tied  round  the  neck  of  the 
Turkoman  camel  we  hired. 

Besides  the  ornaments  just  mentioned  I  noticed 
silver  tengas  sewed  in  rows  on  babies'  caps,  and  one 
young  mother  wore  her  hair  in  long  braids  behind, 
with  dangling  ornaments  attached,  whose  tinkling 
could  be  heard  as  she  moved  about. 

As  to  the  occupation  of  the  settled  Turkomans,  they 
nearly  all  engage  in  agriculture,  and  some  few  in 
sericulture.  Those  I  saw  at  Krasnovodsk  were 
chiefly  fishermen,  but  some  were  engaged  in  the 
transport  of  goods  by  caravan.  The  carpets  and  felts 
made  by  the  Turkoman  women  are  well  known.  I  saw 
some  of  the  latter  in  various  stages  of  manufacture.  In 
one  house  in  Krasnovodsk,  tufts  of  coloured  wool  were 
strewed  over  a  floor  of  reeds,  previous  to  being  wetted 
and  pressed,  and  in  a  tent  were  three  women  kneeling, 
and  pressing  simultaneously  upon  a  bundle  of  felt  they 
rolled  to  and  fro  over  matting,  whereon  loose  wool 
was  laid,  which,  being  wetted,  stuck  to  and  thickened 
the  roll  as  it  passed  over. 


448  RUSSIAN^  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

I  thought  the  women  better-looking  than  their 
Kirghese  sisters,  their  cheek-bones  not  being  sc 
wide  and  prominent,  and  their  features  more  European. 
Of  course  they  are  uneducated.  In  the  last  tent  wt 
visited  on  the  Khivan  side,  the  young  wife  reminded 
me  of  one  of  the  native  women  of  the  Caucasus,  who 
when  I  entered  her  room,  stood  behind  a  pillar,  hiding 
herself  like  a  shy  child. 

I    was   desirous   of  examining  a  bundle  of  trinkets 
dangling  at   the  back   of  my   Turkoman   hostess,  bu 
she  appeared  afraid   of  my  doing  so  ;  and  when  he; 
husband  playfully  held  her  by  her  tresses,  she  began  t( 
cry  and  struggled  away.      Presently,  when  she  enteret 
our  tent,  I  noticed  she  was  crying  again,  and,  askim 
the  cause,  found  myself  the  unintentional  offender, 
had  observed  on  her  child's  cap  two    Khivan  tengas 
said  to   be  old.     These    I    bought  of  the  husband  a 
coins,  at  the  price  he   asked,    and   they  were  cut  ofl 
Hence  her  tears.      I  could  hardly  suppose  her  numis 
matic   sensibilities  wounded,   and    I    therefore  offere< 
her  more  money,  whereupon  her  tears  dried,  and  sh 
cheered  up  like  a  pacified  child.      I  purchased  in  thi 
tent  a  pair  of  silver  earrings,  which  they  said  were  ( 
genuine  Turkoman  workmanship.     The  charm  on  th 
baby's  cap  they  would  not  sell,  saying  that  the  chil 
would  be  ill  without  it ! 

Having  now  glanced  at  the  northern  portion  < 
Turkmenia,  with  its  Yomud  inhabitants,  I  shall  proce< 
to  what  I  have  to  say  of  the  southern  portion,  peoph 
chiefly  by  the  Tekkes. 


CHAPTER    LXXIV. 

THE  TURKMENIAN  OASES. 

Oases  of  Akhal,  Attek,  Tejend,  and  Merv. — The  Akhal  oasis  :  its 
dimensions,  settlements,  and  history. — The  Attek  settlements, 
history,  and  hydrography. — The  Tejend  oasis.—  The  Heri  Rud 
from  Herat  to  Sarakhs,  and  below. — The  Merv  oasis. — The  Mur- 
gab  from  Penjdeh. — Unknown  country  between  the  Murgab  and 
Heri  Rud. — The  desert  around  Merv,  and  its  historical  associa- 
tions.— Merv  in  the  times  of  Burnes,  Abbott,  Shakespear,  and 
Wolff. — List  of  Central  Asian  travellers  from  the  13th  to  the  19th 
centuries. 

1"^HE  southern  portion  of  Turkmenia,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  four  oases,  consists  of  a  desert.  These 
3ases  are  those  of  Akhal,   Attek,   Tejend,  and  Merv. 

The  Akhal  oasis  is  a  long,  narrow  tract  of  country, 
ying  between  the  Kopet-dagh  mountains  and  a  range 
Df  undulating  sand-hills.  Locally  the  region  goes  by 
:he  name  of  Arkatch.  It  is  somewhat  bare,  though 
ntersected  by  1 7  perennial  streams,  varying  in  breadth 
Vom  2  to  18  feet,  and  running  from  the  Kuren-dagh. 
ts  length  is  about  170  miles,  its  breadth  14  in  the 
:entre,  but  diminishing  towards  the  extremities.  The 
\khal  area  is  estimated  at  3,000  square  miles,  or  about 
he  extent  of  North  Wales. 

A  series  of  native  forts  and  strongholds,  43  in 
lumber,  with  about  50  villages  or  settlements,  are 
:stablished  along  the  valley  from   Kizil  Arvat  at  the 

VOL.  IT.  29 


450  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

northern  end  to  Gavars,  or  Giaurs,  in  the  south.  The 
inhabited  points,  each  in  the  form  of  a  square,  sur- 
rounded by  a  small  rampart  with  moat,  and  environed 
by  gardens  and  cultivated  fields,  are  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  rivulets.  About  30  miles  from  Kizil 
Arvat,  to  the  south-east,  is  Bami,  and,  70  miles  further, 
midway  in  the  oasis,  is  Geok  Tepe.  This  was 
formerly  the  capital,  or,  at  least,  the  rallying  point 
for  the  Turkomans  of  the  Akhal. 

About   50   miles    further   south    is    Askhabad,    the 
Russian  capital.      From  hence  to  Geok  Tepe  is  the 
part  of  the  oasis  best  adapted  for  cultivation,  and  here 
are    many   gardens.      Within    20   miles  of  Askhabad 
are  Annau  with  200,  and  Gavars  with  600,  dwellings. 
Petrusevitch   estimates   the   population    of  the    Akhal 
at    30,000    tents.       Petrusevitch    informs    us,    on    the 
authority  of  the  Governors  of  Budjnurd  and  Kuchan 
that   Akhal   was    occupied   by  the   Tekkes  about  170 
years  ago,  during  the  reign  of  Shah  Tamasp,  and  tha 
up  to  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  they  kep 
within  the  limits  of  this  oasis.     The  increase  of  popii 
lation,    and    the    impossibility    of  spreading    into    tl 
desert,  seeing  that  all  depended  upon  the  water  suppl 
from  the  mountains,  forced  the  Akhal  Tekkes  to  seel 
fresh  lands  to  settle  upon.     Accordingly,  in  about  th 
third    decade    of  the   present    century,    about    10,00 
families  of  them,   under  Oraz   Khan,  migrated  to  th 
lower  course  of  the  Heri   Rud  river,   about  50  mik 
east  of  Gavars.      There    they    erected    the    fort   (  : 
Tejend,    from    which    the    course    of   the     Heri    Ru  \ 
below  Sarakhs  was  renamed  Tejend-  or  Tajand-dari;  I 

The    second    oasis    I    have    mentioned,    called 
Attek,    or    mountain    base,    extends    from    Gavars 
Sarakhs.     The  present  Sarakhs  is  a  Persian   fortrd 


THE  TURKMENIAN  OASES.  451 

on    the    west    bank    of   the    river,   and    was    intended 
originally    to    dominate    the    neighbouring    Salor    and 
Merv'  Turkomans.      It  is  surrounded  with  a  clay  wall 
merely,   and   contains   600  or   700  soldiers,   who  pass 
their  time,  according  to    the    Baron    Benoist-Mechin, 
sleeping    and   drinking.      The   fort   stands   in  a  plain 
far  away  from  the  mountains,  and  the  Baron  speaks  of 
its  having  no  raison  d'etre  for  the  Persians  now,  since 
it  is  surrounded  by  a  Turkoman  population.      Nearly 
opposite,  but  three  and  a  half  miles  distant  on  the  east 
of  the  river,   are  the  ruins  of  Old   Sarakhs.      In   this 
neighbourhood,    M.    Lessar  says,   are   the   lands   best 
adapted  for  cultivation  along  the  whole  course  of  the 
Heri    Rud.      Beginning,    however,   our  description  of 
the  Attek  at  the  north,  we  have  Baba-durmaz,  47  miles 
from    Askhabad,    and    on    the    Russian    frontier.      M. 
Lessar   speaks    of    this    place    as    uninhabited.     Only 
two    points,    he    says,    in    the    Attek,    Luftabad    and 
Shilgian,  are  peopled  by  Shiite   Persians,  subjects  of 
the  Shah.     The  other  points  are  occupied  by  Turko- 
mans ;  but  all  this  population,  according  to   M.  Lessar, 
s  of  very  recent  origin.* 

*  In  the  middle  of   the   last  century   a  portion  of  the  Akhal  was 
)ccupied  by  the  Emrali  tribe,  and  the  country  towards  the  south-east, 
Deluding  the   neighbourhood   of  Geok  Tepe  and  Askhabad,    formed 
he  camping-grounds  of  the  Alieli  tribe.     The  Tekkes  had  at  that  time 
n  driven  from  Mangyshlak  to  Kizil  Arvat,  and  commenced  despoiling 
inhabitants   of   the   Akhal    country,    these    hostile   relations  con- 
nuing  for  about  150  years,  until  the  Tekkes  gained  the  supremacy, 
nearly  in  the  present  century  the  Kardashli  tribe  retreated  to  Khiva, 
Emrali  to  Mehna  and  Chacha,  the  Alieli  to  the  northern  frontier  of 
^'^hanistan,  and  the  remainder  to  Kiiren  and  Abiverd.     About  half  a 
itury  ago,  Allah    Kuli,  Khan  of  Khiva,  took  away  the  Alielis  and 
-mralis  to  Khiva,  whence  they  returned  in  1855  to  their  old  camping- 
rounds  ;  but  the  Persians  drove  them  back,  and  it  was  only  in  1873, 
fter  the  Khivan  campaign,  that  the  present  inhabitants  settled  in  the 
vttek,  and  built  the  new  Kakha  fort.     The  migration  of  the  Tekkes  to 
le  Attek  has  taken  place  also  within  the  last  few  years. 


452  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Attek  live  chiefly  in  mud  huts, 
but  to  some  extent  in  tents.  Formerly  each  settle- 
ment consisted  of  a  fort,  or  "  kala,"  within  whose  walls 
stood  the  mud  huts  of  the  inhabitants  ;  tents  were 
pitched  outside  the  fort,  and  these,  when  in  danger, 
were  removed  into  the  kala.  At  present,  at  Chacha, 
all  the  new  buildings  are  of  clay,  and  the  number  of 
tents  decreases  with  the  pacification  of  the  country.* 

As  regards  the  important  question  of  water  in  the 
Attek,  the  quantity  is  limited,  and  the  streams  are 
wide  apart.  There  is  also  in  this  oasis  another  disad- 
vantage, in  that  considerable  portions  of  the  streams 
are  in  the  territory  of  the  Persians,  who  are  thus  able 
to  cut  off  the  water  from  the  Turkomans,  f 

Along  the  whole  extent  of  the  Attek  there  is  a 
population  of  about  7,000  Alieli  and  Tekke  Turko- 
mans. It  is  only  at  Kliren  and  Kakha  that  there  is 
a  settled  population.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  Attek 
are  engaged   in   agriculture   and  horticulture.      Great 

*  M.  Lessar  says  :  "  Here,  as  also  in  Akhal,  a  watch-tower  was,  a 
short  time  ago,  the  necessar}^  appurtenance  of  every  field.  The  towers 
are  either  round  or  square,  with  a  small  aperture  at  the  base  sufl"' 
ciently  large  to  admit  the  passage  of  the  human  body.  When  robber 
appeared  on  the  scene,  the  people  working  in  the  fields  crawled  into  tb 
tower,  and,  closing  the  entrance  with  heavy  stones,  remained  there  tii 
the  marauders  disappeared. 

t  The  following  are  the  watered  and  inhabited  places  of  the  Attek 
At  Baba-Durmaz  the  water,  though  slightly  salt,  is  good  for  drinkiiv 
purposes.  At  Artyk,  11  miles  further  south,  are  20  tents.  Luftaba' 
and  Kiiren,  3  miles  from  Artyk,  and  the  succeeding  settlements  as  fr. 
as  Kakha,  are  supplied  with  water  from  the  Rud-Khan,  or  Rudba 
river,  which  takes  its  rise  in  the  Allah-Akbar  mountains,  and  is  th 
finest  river  in  the  oasis.  Here  water  is  abundant.  Between  Luftaba 
and  Kakha  are  about  500  tents.  Kakha,  with  650  tents,  is  the  large- 
settlement  in  the  oasis.  Dushak,  14  miles  beyond,  has  160  tents 
Mehna,  29  miles  further,  has  130  tents;  Chacha,  11  miles  beyond,;^ 
huts.  These  last  two  settlements,  M.  Lessar  says,  suffer  much  fr 
the  Persians  who  deprived  them  of  water.  From  Chacha  to  Sara! 
a  distance  of  ^y  miles,  there  is  no  water. 


THE  TURKMENIAN  OASES.  453 

poverty  prevails,  and  no  trade  originates  there,  whilst 
the  bazaars  of  Luftabad  and  Kakha  are  more  than 
sufficient  for  the  whole  of  the  Attek.  No  great 
increase  of  the  inhabitants  can  be  expected,  because 
the  Attek  cannot  supply  the  means  of  existence  for  a 
dense  population,  and  there  is  no  inducement  for  further 
migration  thither  of  the  Merv  and  Tejend  Tekkes. 

The  third  oasis  I  have  named  is  that  of  the  Tejend, 
on  the  lower  Heri  Rud.  That  river  rises  in  the 
mountains  near  Kabul,  waters  the  Herat  plain,  passes 
the  Afghan  fortress  Chorian,  or  Ghorian,  to  Kusan, 
and  thence  onwards  to  Sarakhs  forms  the  boundary 
between  Afghanistan  and  Persia.  On  the  parallel  of 
Mashad  the  Heri  Rud  is  joined  by  the  Kashaf  from  the 
west,  and  near  the  confluence  is  Pul-i-khatun,  up  to 
which  point  Russian  troops  penetrated  in  1884.  After 
a  course  of  about  250  miles  the  river  forces  a  channel 
through  the  mountains  south  of  Sarakhs.  Beyond  this 
point  the  Heri  Rud  receives  the  name  of  Tejend,  runs 
into  the  Turkoman  desert,  and  is  lost,  on  the  parallel 
of  Askhabad,  in  the  swamps  and  lakes  formed  by 
the  spring  floods.  For  a  few  miles  below  Sarakhs 
both  banks  are  Turkoman.  The  settlements  of  the 
Tekkes  along  the  Tejend  are  concentrated  north 
of  Karybent,  and  in  the  direction  of  Alaman  Chungul. 

The  slopes  of  the  aforesaid  mountains  are  dotted 
over  with  pistachio-trees,  and  the  mulberry  is 
occasionally  met  with,  whilst  the  edges  of  the  river 
are  in  some  spots  covered  with  almost  impenetrable 
willow  bushes  and  reeds.  Grass,  M.  Lessar  says,  is 
abundant  everywhere  and  of  good  quality,  and  the 
water  of  the  Heri  Rud,  though  not  clear,  is  wholesome. 

'  At   Daulatabad,    10   miles   above   Sarakhs,  the  river  divides  into 
.  eral  branches,  in  consequence  of  which  in  the  dry  season  the  water 


454  JRUSSIAK  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

We  come  now  to  the  Merv  oasis,  situated  east  of  the 
Tejend  towards  the  end  of  the  River  Murgab.  This 
river  rises  in  the  Safed  Koh  or  White  Mountains  in 
Afghanistan,  and  has  a  course-  of  about  200  miles,  run- 
ning parallel  with,  and  at  a  distance  of  120  or  140  miles 
from,  the  Tejend.  At  Penjdeh,  or  Panjdeh,  about  1 20 
miles  north  of  Herat,  where  the  Kushk,  or  Kuk,  falls 
into  the  Murgab,  the  river  is,  in  December,  a  deep 
stream  of  pure  water  about  60  feet  wide,  flowing  in  a 
channel,  worn  to  the  depth  of  30  feet  into  the  clay  soil. 
The  valley  at  Penjdeh  is  about  9  miles  wide,  but  nar- 
rows to  three-quarters  of  a  mile  at  Yulutan.  Here  the 
stream,  50  yards  wide,  is  deep,  and  flows  at  about  five 
miles  an  hour.  The  valley  is  bounded  by  sandy  hills, 
rising  to  600  feet  above  the  river  level.  These  hills 
gradually  broaden  out  and  sink  into  the  plain  of 
Merv. 

The  valley  of  the  Murgab  from  Penjdeh  to  Yulutan 

does  not  reach  Sarakhs.  Canals,  however,  are  brought  thus  far,  and 
even  7  or  8  miles  beyond.  Below  Sarakhs  the  river  flows  on  in  one 
stream,  from  100  to  150  feet  broad,  the  water  being  high  from  January 
to  March.  O' Donovan  swam  the  stream  in  February,  at  a  place  north 
of  Kangali-Guzar.  Lieutenant  Alikhanoff,  when  travelling  as  a 
merchant,  crossed  the  Tejend  at  Karybentdam,  where,  in  the  middle  of 
February,  the  river  had  a  breadth  of  70,  and  a  depth  of  5^  feet.  During 
six  weeks  caravans  can  cross  the  stream  only  at  Alaman-Chungul,  tc 
which  point  the  Tejend  proper  does  not  reach,  the  water  being  con- 
ducted there  and  beyond  by  canals.  In  April  the  stream  at  man) 
points  is  not  more  than  4  feet  deep,  and  in  June  and  July  it  may  bi 
crossed  anywhere,  when  the  steepness  of  the  banks  permit.  The  rive 
inundates  the  country  only  when  the  dam  above  Herat  is  destroyed 
In  summer  the  Tejend  ceases  to  have  any  current,  and  may  be  said  tc 
consist  mostly  of  long  lakes,  fed,  in  the  opinion  of  the  natives,  b; 
springs,  or  perhaps  by  subterranean  prolongations  of  some  of  th' 
streams  that  flow  from  the  Persian  mountains  towards,  though  none  S' 
far  as,  the  Tejend.  This  opinion  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  wate 
in  these  lakes  is  cold,  and  does  not  dry  up  in  the  hottest  summer,  whicl 
would  hardly  be  the  case  if  they  were  mere  accumulations  of  wate 
in  deep  holes  of  the  river  bed. 


THE  TURKMENIAN  OASES.  455 

was  once  a  well-populated  district,  as  is  shown  by  its 
now  ruined  vineyards  and  deserted  fields.  Abbott  and 
Shakespear,  about  1840,  travelled  from  Herat  to  Merv 
along  the  Kushk  and  Murgab  ;  but  the  country  be- 
tween the  Murgab  and  Heri  Rud  was  unknown  to 
science  till,  in  1882-3-4,  M.  Lessar  travelled  there.* 

Along  the  Upper  Murgab  are  the  Saryk  settlements 
of  Bala  Murgab  and  Penjdeh.  Further  south  the 
Afghan  Djemshidi  and  Teimurs  occupy  the  slopes  of 
the  Paropamisus.  West  of  the  Murgab  to  the  Heri 
Rud  there  is  scarcely  a  single  inhabited  point,  and  all  the 
forts  along  the  Kushk  are  in  ruins.  Even  among  the 
neighbouring  natives  this  intermediate  district  is  known 
only  to  the  ''  Sirdars,''  or  leaders  of  robber-bands,  and 
neither  caravans  nor  travellers  have  for  a  long  time 
risked  venturing  into  this  district,  from  fear  of  encoun- 
tering Saryk  or  Merv  raiders. 

So  recently  as  1883,  the  Baron  Benoist-Mechin,  in 
proceeding  from  Merv  to  Sarakhs,  speaks  of  the 
approach  to  the  Tejend  as  the  most  dangerous  part  of 
the  route,  by  reason  of  robbers,  and  how  he  camped  a 
few  miles  from  the  spot  where  an  engineer  and  four  of 
his  Cossack  escort  had  been  recently  murdered. 

All  around  the  Merv  oasis  is  desert,  which  long 
served  better  than  fortifications  to  protect  the  plunder- 
ing Turkomans  from  retribution,  whether  from  Persia, 
Afghanistan,  Bokhara,  or  Khiva.  This  surrounding 
desert,  however,  varies  in  its  nature.  That  to  the 
north,  north-west,  and  east,  is  sandy  and  arid  ;  but  the 
south,  as  I  have  said,  is  a  tract  of  a  different  kind, 
which  shows  traces  of  irrigation  in  the  remote  past,  one 
canal  in  particular,  the  Kara-i-ab,  extending  40  miles 
I  in  the  direction  of  the  Tejend.     This  tract  of  country 

"  Proceedings  of  tke  Royal  Geog7^a;phical  Society,  January,  1883. 


456  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

has  been  celebrated  in  Eastern  history  as  a  fertile  land.* 
No  less  than  four  towns  have  existed  at  different 
epochs  known  as  Merv,  and  the  remains  of  each  were 
said  by  Conolly  to  be  distinguishable.  When  Abbott 
visited  Merv  in  1840,  it  consisted  of  a  hundred  mud 
huts,  wherein  lived  a  few  Khivan  officials.  The  village 
belonged  to  the  Saryk  Turkomans  ;  but  they  were 
driven  further  up  the  Murgab  by  the  Tekkes,  who 
began  to  settle  in  the  Merv  country  about  1830.  The 
Tekkes  destroyed  these  mud  huts,  and  in  i860  they 
commenced  to  build   a  large  fortress,  Kaushid    Khan 

*  It  is  at  Merv,  Balkh,  and  Seistan,  that  Iranian  history  begins.  The 
Zendavesta  says,  "  Mouru,  the  strong  and  pure,"  was  the  third  land  of 
profusion  "which  I,Ormuzd,have  created."  I  observed  that  Turkomans, 
with  whom  I  came  in  contact,  spoke  of  Merv  as  "  Mowr."  Merv  was  a 
flourishing  city  in  the  ancient  province  of  Margiana,  comprised  in  tht 
empire  of  the  Parthians.  Alexander  passed  through  Margiana,  and 
Antiochus,  son  of  Seleucus  Nicator,  ruled  on  the  Murgab.  In  420  A.D, 
the  archbishopric  of  Merv  was  made  a  metropolitan  See.  Two  centurie; 
and  a  half  later,  the  Arabs  captured  Merv,  at  which  time,  says  Colone 
Stewart,  the  Salor  and  Saryk  Turkomans  were  in  the  land.  From  Mer 
as  their  capital,  the  lieutenants  of  the  Khalifs  ruled  Khorassan. 

Mokanna,  the  veiled  prophet  of  Khorassan,  began  to  promulgate  hi 
doctrines  a  century  later  at  Merv,  whence  he  fled  to  Bokhara,  whicl 
khanate  in  903  became  the  dominant  state  in  Central  Asia,  and  tl 
mistress  withal  of  Merv.  In  the  eleventh  century,  the  town  was  su 
rounded,  by  princes  of  the  Seljuk  dynasty,  with  stately  palaces,  grovi' 
and  gardens.  The  tomb  of  Sunjur  Shah,  who  in  the  twelfth  centu. 
conquered  all  the  country  between  the  Oxus  and  Jaxartes,  still  remain 
there  in  ruins.  In  the  next  century,  Tului,  the  son  of  Jinghiz  Kha: 
twice  took  Merv,  and  put  to  death,  it  is  said,  700,000  inhabitants.  Th 
was  the  fourth  time  that  the  city  had  been  desolated. 

In  1505  the  Uzbegs  occupied  the  place,  but  were  conquered  five  yea 
later  by  the  Persians.  Two  and  a  half  centuries  afterwards,  howevc 
the  Emir  of  Bokhara  killed  the  Persian  governor,  and  again  the  Uzbe.i. 
gained  the  ascendency.  They  razed  the  town  of  Merv  to  the  groun< 
destroyed  its  dam,  and,  in  1794,  deported  40,000  of  the  people  ' 
Bokhara.  From  this  time,  properly  speaking,  there  has  been  no  sue 
city  as  Merv,  and  what  few  buildings  there  were,  served  under 
Bokhariots  as  a  place  of  banishment  for  criminals. 

Merv  was  taken  next  by  Muhammad  Rahim  (1806-26),  who  plac 
there  a  few  Khivans,  considering  it  an  advantageous  point  whence 


7 HE  TURKMENIAN  OASES.  457 

Kala,  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  most  westerly  branch 
of    the   jMurgab,   a    walled   enclosure  to  contain,    the 

f'  Tekkes  said,  50,000  tents.  Accordingly,  when  Merv 
is  now  spoken  of,  Kaushid  Khan  Kala  is  meant 
thereby. 

I  have  mentioned  the  name  of  Abbott  as  visiting 
Merv  in  1840.  Another  Englishman,  Alexander 
Barnes,  had  preceded  him  in  1832,  not  to  mention 
Dr.  Wolff's  first  visit  in  the  previous  year.  In  the 
same  year  as  Abbott,  Shakespear  passed  through 
Merv,  travelling  from  Herat  to  Khiva,  and  in  1843 
Sir  Taylour  Thompson  visited  the  place  on  his  way 
to  Khiva.  In  1844  Dr.  Wolff  a  second  time  went 
there  on  his  journey  to  and  from  Bokhara,  but  after 
this  no  Englishman  went  to  the  place  for  nearly  40 
years.*     An  unfortunate  Frenchman,  De  Blocqueville, 

attack  the  Persians,  and  to  keep  in  subordination  the  Turkomans.  It 
was  then  seized  by  the  Emir  Nasr-UUah  of  Bokhara,  but  he  did  not  hold 
it  long,  and  the  Khivans  once  more  made  themselves  its  masters. 
In  order  to  eject  them  the  Bokhariots  incited  the  Turkomans  to  attack 
the  Khivans,  which  the  Turkomans  did,  and  in  1846  massacred  the 
greater  portion  of  their  rulers. 

After  this  date  the  Khan  of  Khiva  frequently  led  his  soldiers  across 
the  desert,  and  laid  waste  the  fields  and  pastures  about  Merv,  but  not 
to  much  purpose.  The  last  expedition  of  Muhammad-Emin  to  Merv 
and  Sarakhs,  in  1855,  ended  in  his  total  defeat,  and  the  exhibition  of  his 
head  as  a  trophy  at  Teheran.  After  this,  in  1861,  a  Persian  army,  led 
by  Hamza-Mirza,  came  against  the  enclosure  now  called  Merv,  but  the 
Tekkes  drove  back  the  Persians  with  immense  loss. 

*  It  may  perhaps  be  of  use  if  I  add  a  list  of  the  travellers  to  Central 
Asia  up  to  1850,  which  I  have  found  in  a  translation  from  the  Russian 
of  a  narrative  of  the  military  expedition  to  Khiva  in  1839,  ^^  ^^^^  being 
much  fuller  than  any  I  have  seen  elsewhere,  and  containing  many 
names  quite  unknown,  I  believe,  in  English  literature. 

During  the  r3th,  14th  and  15th  centuries  occur  the  following  records 
of  travels : — Desborough  Cooley  ( '  *  Histoire  gener.  de  Voyages, ' '  Traduct. 
Fran9.)  5  Abel  Remusat  ("  Memoire  sur  les  Relations  des  Princes 
Chretiens  avec  les  Empereurs  Mongols  ");  and  Averve  ("  Notices  sur  les 
Anciens  Voyages  en  Tartarie,")  an  unknown  Englishman  in  1243,  and 
the  following  monks  :  Benedict,  Lawrence,  John  Planicarpin,  Aszelin, 


k 


458  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

was  taken  there  as  prisoner  about  twenty  years  ago. 
Several  Europeans,  however,  have  been  there  in  the 
present  decade,  and  recently  the  eyes  of  all  Europe 
have  been  attracted   to    Merv   in  consequence  of  its 

St.  Quentin,  Alexander,  Albert,  Guichard,  Longjourel,  1245  to  1267 
the  monk  Andrew,  1248;  Ruisbruque,  1253  ;  Nicholas  and  Matthev 
Paolo,  1250 — 60;  Marco  Paolo,  1271 — 1295  ;  Highton(?),  1254:  Ricok 
de  Montecroce,  1290  ;  John  de  Montecroce,  1288  to  1307  ;  Odesic( 
Mateneci,  1317  ;  John  de  Caro,  1330  ;  Jourdan  Cataliani,  1330;  Pasca 
de  Victoria  and  Juan  de  Mariniolli,  i339 — 53  ;  Francesco  Pegoletta 
1335  ;  Mandeviile,  1322  to  1355  ;  Arigo,  1374  ;  Gomez  de  Satomajoi 
and  Herman  Sanitz,  1393  ;  Gonzales  de  Clavijo,  1403  ;  Schiltberger 
1395  to  1427;  Conti,  1424  to  1449;  Joseph  Barbaro,  1471  ;  Ambrosi 
Contarini,  1473  :   Bartem,  1502  to  1508. 

In  the  1 6th  and  17th  centuries  occur  the  following  : — Jenkinson  ani 
Johnson  in  1558  ;  Jenkinson  in  1561  ;  Aldcock  and  Chiny  (?)  in  1564 
Edwards  and  Johnson,  1565  ;  Edwards  and  Chapman,  1568  ;  Borough 
Edwards,  TurnbuU,  Talboys,  and  Hasasde,  from  1579  to  1581  ;  Nirberr 
(?),  1582  ;  Kichel,  1585  to  1589  ;  Kakasch  and  Dectander,  1602  ;  Bene 
diet  Goes,  1603  >  Tesseiro,  1604  ;  Stell  and  Crofter,  1615  ;  Posere,  1621 
Garcia  Silva,  1621  ;  Piestro  de  Lavalli,  1614  to  1626  ;  Olearius,  Krusiue 
and  Herbert,  1628  to  1641  ;  Mandeilo  and  Fleming,  1636  to  1638;  Joh 
de  Lucca,  1637;  Anderson,  1644  to  1650;  Tavernier,  1645  to  1670 
Shardan,  1666,  1669,  and  1673  to  1677;  Heidenfeldt,  1680;  Struiss 
1645  to  1670;  and  Kempfer,   1684, 

Among  those  who  visited  Central  Asia  in  the  i8th  and  19th  centuries 
and  the  accounts  of  whose  travels  are  more  or  less  known,  are  : — Meyer 
1703;  Truschinski,  1713;  Bucholtz,  1714  to  1717 ;  Volynski,  1718 
Beneveni,  1718;  Werden,  Soimonoff,  and  Prince  Urusof,  1719;  LiV 
haref,  1720;  Soimonoff,  1722;  Harber,  1722  and  1723;  Bruce,  1723 
Soimonoff  and  Dolmatof,  1726;  Dubrovin,  1729;  Harber,  1731  ;  Tev 
kelef,  1731;  Urgumef,  1732;  Miller,  1734;  Kushelef,  1735;  Millei 
1739;  Thompson,  1740;  Moravin,  1741  ;  Gladishef,  1742;  Millei 
1743;  Elton,  1743;  Lerche,  1747;  Reigelmann,  1750;  Rukavkin  an 
Maksulof,  1753  ;  military  expedition,  1767  ;  Gordayef,  Tokmachef,  an 
Panin,  1764;  military  expedition,  1767;  Pallas  and  Kraft,  1769;  Gme 
lin,  1770;  military  expedition,  1771  ;  Lovitch  and  Inokhdusef,  1769! 
1771  ;  Islenief,  Lepekhin,  Rytchkof,  Falck,  and  Sokolof,  1771  ;  militai 
expedition,  1774;  Tchernishof,  1780;  Efremof,  1774-1782  ;  Noino 
187 1  ;  military  expedition,  1784,  1785,  and  1790  ;  Herman,  1790;  Siv«r 
1791  ;  Blankenagel,  1793;  Chevkin,  1794;  Snegiref,  1795;  Idaiic 
1796;  Pospelof  and  Burnashof,  t8oo  ;  Gaverdooski,  1803;  Telckerz.i 
1805;  Klaproth,  1807;  Kolodkin,  1809— 1817  ;  Nazarof,  1813;  Kisl 
evski,  1806  to  1815  ;  expedition  to  Svinsovi  Mountains,  1814  to  181 


THE  TURKMENIAN  OASES.  459 

ticorporation  by  Russia.  This  brings  us,  however, 
0  a  new  chapter  in  the  history  of  Turkmenia,  once 
iiore  conquered  by  a  European  power. 

Jystrinski,  Zavialof,  Meushenin,  Losef,  and  Leshof,  1817  ;  Bumashof, 
818;  Muravief,  1819;  Negri,  Meyendorf,  and  Eversmann,  1820;  Siberian 
.ine  Surveys,  1820  to  1830;  Levshin,  1820  to  1822;  Muravief,  1821  ; 
?erg,  1822  ;  Bronevski,  Grigorief,  and  Gorski,  1823  ;  Jemchujnikof, 
823  and  1824;  Berg,  Lemm,  and  Eversmann,  1825  and  1826;  Tafayef  and 
Tagmin,  1825;  Bassargin,  1825,  1824,  1825;  Eichwaed  and  Ladyjinsk, 
826;  Meyer,  1826;  Engelhardt and  Helmersen,  1826;  Reconnaissance 
rom  Semiarsk  Outpost  to  River  Chu,  1827  ;  Helmersen  and  Hofmann, 
828  ;  Humboldt  and  Rose,  1826  ;  Survey  of  Orenburg  region,  1830  to 
850;  Lenz,  Larin,  and  Karelin,  1830;  Parrot,  1831  ;  Karelin,  from  1831 
0  1832  ;  Fedorof,  1832  to  1837  '■>  Helmersen,  1833  ;  Reconnaissance  of 
erritory  of  Siberian  Kirghese,  1832  to  1841  ;  Habel,  Vasilief,  and 
3emaisons,  1834;  Sozi  and  Vitkevitch,  1835;  Lessing,  1833  to  1836; 
ielmersen,  1835  ;  Karelin,  Telkner,  andBlaramberg,  1836;  Caspian  expe- 
lition,  i836and  1837;  HomerdeHell,  i836to  1840;  Jacob Khanikof,  1836 
0  1840;  survey  of  territory  of  Inner  Kirghese  Horde,  1836  to  1839; 
vlansurof  and  Danilefski.  1837;  Vitkevitch,  1837  ^^^  1838;  Lehmann, 
838  ;  Eversmann,  Leman,  Bodisco,'Shirkof,  Nicholas  Khanikof,  Khiva 
■xpedition,  and  Vasilief,  1839;  Kovalefski  and  Herrngrosz,  1839  and 
840;  Reichenberg,  1840;  Romanof,  Blaramberg  and  Nikiforof,  1840; 
Butenef,  Leman,  and  Nickanyof,  1840  and  1841  ;  Karelin,  1840  to  1842  ; 
Oal,  1832  to  1841  ;  Danilefski  and  Basiner,  1841  and  1842  ;  Gentz  and 
>chrenck,  1840  to  1844  ;  Murchison,  1841  ;  Sokolof,  1842  ;  Ivanin  and 
^eraan,  1846;  Jerebtsof,  1847;  Butakof,  1848  and  1849;  surveying 
jorps,  1850. 


CHAPTER  LXXV. 

THE  R  US  SI  AN  AD  VANCE  TO  MER  V. 

Russo-Turkoman  relations  from  17 13. — Russian  forts  on  the  Caspia 
seaboard. — Opposition  from  Kirghese  and  Turkomans. — Russi: 
advance  to  Kizil  Arvat  andChikishliar. — Failures  under  Markozoif. 
Pacification  of  Yomud  Turkomans  by  Lomakin. — Lomakin's  defea 
by  the  Akhal  Tekkes. — Skobeleff's  campaign  and  capture  of  Get 
Tepe.^ — -Turkmenia  visited  by  political  agents,  private  adventurer 
and  a  journalist. — Journeys  of  Marsh,  Napier,  Macgregor,  But 
and  Petrusevitch. — O' Donovan's  ride  to  Merv,  and  extracts  fr 
his  private  correspondence. — Journeys  in  disguise  of  Stewai 
Khorassan  and  Alikhanoff  to  Merv. — Benoist-Mechin's  joi 
from  Khiva  to  Merv. 

I  PURPOSE  to  give  in  this  chapter  a  brief  accoi 
of  the  Russian  approach  to  Merv,  and  of  rec( 
travel  thither.  The  Russians  first  entered  ii 
relations  with  the  Turkomans  during  the  reign  f 
Peter  the  Great,  when,  in  1713,  these  nomads  offerc 
to  aid  the  Russians  in  occupying  the  lands  along  th 
Oxus,  where  the  Tsar  expected  to  find  gold.  Tw 
years  later  the  Kalmuk  Khan,  Ayuk,  after  coercin 
the  Turkomans  into  obedience,  acknowledged  himse 
a  vassal  of  Russia;  but  it  was  not  till  1803  ^hat  tb, 
Abdal  tribe  of  Turkomans  were  granted  a  docume 
taking  them  under  Russian  protection.  In  1811  t.1 
deputations,  representing  6,000  families,  repaired 
Astrakhan,  seeking  Russian  protection.     Similar  ov< 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  461 

tures  were  repeated  in  181 3,  1820,  1837,  and  1840, 
and,  16  years  later,  the  Turkomans  of  Alexander  Bai 
asked  the  Russians  to  establish  a  fortress  on  their 
coast,  offering  even  to  build  it  themselves.  More 
recently,  however,  says  M.  Veniukoff,  the  Turko- 
mans endeavoured  to  frustrate  all  attempts  of  the 
Russians  to  establish  themselves  on  the  east  coast  of 
the  Caspian. 

The  first  Russian  forts  erected  in  Turkmenia  were 
on  Cape  Karagan,  in  the  Bekhtyv  Bay,  and  on  the 
Krasnovodsk  spit,  in  171 5- 16- 17,  but  they  were  all 
abandoned  after  the  failure  of  Bekovitch's  expedition 
to  Khiva.  Officers  were  sent,  in  18 19  and  182 1,  to 
choose  a  site  for  a  fort,  but  the  next  Russian  military 
settlement  was  not  founded  until  1833,  in  Mertvy 
Kultuk  (now  Tsarevitch  Bay),  and  called  Novo 
Aiexandrovsk.  It  was  to  this  spot  Abbott  and  Shake- 
spear  travelled  in  1840,  but  the  fort  was  abandoned 
6  years  later,  and  a  new  one  erected  on  the  Man- 
gyshlak peninsula. 

In  1859  a  large  reconnoitring  force  was  sent  to  the 
east  coast  under  Dandevil,  but  was  attacked  by 
Turkomans,  so  that  the  survey  of  the  Balkhans  could 
not  be  carried  out.  A  site  was  selected,  however,  at 
Krasnovodsk  for  a  new  fort,  after  which  Dandevil 
proceeded  south  by  vessel  to  Ashurada  and  to  Hassan 
Kuli  Bay,  where  he  bombarded  a  Turkoman  settle- 
ment. He  also  stormed  and  took  Chikishliar,  but 
made  no  lodgment  on  that  part  of  the  coast. 

Ten  years  later  a  Russian  expedition  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  stone  fort  in  Krasnovodsk  Bay, 
and  in  the  following  year  established  3  military  posi- 
tions somewhat  further  south.  The  invaders  were 
then  able  to  push  an  expedition    130  miles  inland  to 


462  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Kizil  Arvat,  and  in  the  following  year  to  effect  twc 
reconnaissances  towards  Sary  Kamish,  after  which,  in 
1 87 1,  Chikishliar,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Atrak,  was 
occupied,  and  made  the  principal  head-quarters  of  the 
Trans-Caspian  forces. 

The  Russians  had  now  planted  themselves  at  four 
points  in  the  country  of  the  Turkomans, — namely, 
Mangyshlak,  Krasnovodsk,  Chikishliar,  and  on  the 
island  of  Ashurada  in  Astrabad  Bay,  but  not  entirely 
without  opposition.  In  1870  the  Kirghese  of  Man- 
gyshlak besieged  the  invaders  there,  and  next  year 
the  Turkomans  attacked  Michailovsk  further  south. 
In  retaliation  for  this  latter  the  Russians  pushed 
across  the  desert  and  destroyed  the  fortress  of  Kizil 
Arvat.  In  the  autumn  of  1871  Colonel  Markozoff 
descended  to  Chikishliar,  with  a  view  of  collecting 
camels  for  the  projected  occupation  of  Khiva,  but  the^ 
Turkomans  opposed  him,  and  dammed  up  the  Rive 
Atrak. 

In    1872,    therefore,  a  joint  expedition   was  undei 
taken  against  the  Akhal  Tekkes.     One  party  advance 
under    Stolietoff  from   Krasnovodsk    to    Kizil    Arvai 
and  the  other  under  Markozoff  up  the  Atrak  to  Khoj 
or  Kodsh  Kala,  somewhat  furthers  outh.     The  Turk( 
mans  fled,  and  the  Russians  invaded  the  Akhal  oasis 
as  far  as  Beurma,  burning  tents  and  seizing  sheep  ;  and 
after  this  Markozoff  marched  north  to   Igdy,  but  was 
driven  by  the  Tekkes  back  to  Krasnovodsk. 

The  next  year,  1873,  was  memorable  for  the  taking 
of  Khiva.  One  Russian  detachment,  it  may  be  re- 
membered, marched  from  Mangyshlak,  and  reached  il 
destination.  The  other,  under  Markozoff",  was  to  stJ 
from  Chikishliar,  and  pass  through  Kizil  Arvat  an^ 
Igdy  ;  but,  before  setting  out,   Markozoff,  on  accoui 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  463 

of  the  incessant  raids  of  the  Persian  Turkomans, 
crossed  the  Atrak,  thereby  invading  Persian  territory, 
and  punished  them.  He  then  set  out  for  Khiva,  but 
his  troops  were  overcome  by  heat  and  fatigue,  and, 
harassed  by  the  Turkomans,  had  to  retreat.  In  the 
following  autumn  the  Steppe  was  formed  into  a 
military  district,  to  be  governed  from  the  Caucasus, 
and  Lomakin  was  appointed  first  Governor-General  of 
the  Trans-Caspian.  The  district  then  lay  north  and 
south  between  Tsarevitch  Bay  and  the  Atrak,  and  ex- 
tended eastwards  to  the  possessions  of  Khiva,  if  indeed 
the  whole  arrangement  were  not  an  invasion  of  Khivan 
territory  ;  for  the  Khan  remonstrated  against  the 
foundation  of  the  Krasnovodsk  fort  as  an  infringement 
of  his  rights. 

In    1874   and    the    following    year    Colonel    Ivanoff 
fought    with   the    Turkomans    of    Khiva,    and    routed 
some  Merv  Tekkes  who  approached  Pitniak.      Mean- 
while Lomakin  was  negotiating,  but  not  successfully, 
with  Sofi    Khan,   the    ruler  of    Kizil    Arvat,    for   the 
establishment    of    Russian    authority    in    the    Akhal. 
Lomakin  next  determined  to  reconnoitre   the  ancient 
bed  of  the  Oxus  from  the  Caspian  to   Sary  Kamish. 
He  succeeded  as  far  as   Igdy,  but  had  then  to  return, 
I  receiving,  however,  on  the  road,  expressions  of  friend- 
\  liness  from  the  Caspian   Turkomans,  the   Yomuds   of 
;  che  Atrak,  who  agreed  to   help  the    Russians  and  to 
;^  watch  their  marauding  neighbours  the  Tekkes. 
'i      The  following  year  the  Tekkes  informed  the  Yomuds 
\  that,  if  they  entered  into  vassal  relations  with  the  Rus- 
I  sians,  they  should  be  exterminated,  whereupon  Lomakin, 
%.  :o  protect  his  allies,  sent  a  small  detachment  to  establish 
%  tself  at  Kizil  Arvat,  but  the  Tekkes  drove  it  back.* 

i      *  To  this  M.  Lessar  writes  : — "  The  Tekkes  never  drove  them  back. 


l» 


464  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

In  1877  Lomakin  set  out  with  a  stronger  detach 
ment  for  the  same  purpose,  but  the  Russians  wen 
again  repulsed,  to  attempt  next  year  to  reach  th( 
Akhal  by  a  new  road  ;  for  Lomakin  now  made  his  wa) 
up  the  Atrak  and  the  Sumbar  as  far  as  Kodsh  Kala 
where  he  entrenched  himself.  So  fiercely  was  he 
besieged,  however,  by  the  Tekkes,  that  he  had  once 
more  to  retire,  and  Russian  prestige  in  the  Akhal  sank 
almost  to  zero. 

It  was  determined,  however,  that  the  contest  shoulc 
be  renewed  in  1879,  and  another  campaign  was  begun  . 
under  Generals  Lazareff  and  Lomakin.  Lazareff  died 
early  in  the  campaign  at  Chat,  whereupon  Lomakin 
assumed  command,  and  marched  into  the  Akhal  coun- 
try as  far  as  Denghil  Tepe,  which  he  besieged,  firing 
upon  men,  women,  and' children,  for  many  hours  ;  but 
he  was  so  successfully  withstood  that  the  besieger, 
had  to  retreat,  and  Lomakin  was  superseded  in  com- 
mand of  the  army  by  General  Tergoukasoff,  and 
the  administration  of  the  Trans-Caspian  province 
the  following  year  by  General  Petrusevitch. 

In  1880  Tergoukasoff  resigned  his  command,  ai 
was  succeeded  by  General  Muravieff ;  but  in  the  montl 
of  May  there  came  to  Chikishliar,  as  commander  ol 
the  active  army  across  the  Caspian,  General  Skobelefl 
who,  whilst  Petrusevitch  was  preparing  a  railway 
inland  from  Krasnovodsk,  reconnoitred  the  Akhal  as 
far  as  Geok  Tepe.  This  fortress,  he  considered,  could 
be  taken  only  by  a  regular  siege. 

Extensive  preparations  were  accordingly  made,  and. 
in  December,  Skobeleff  for  the  second  time  came  to 
the  neighbourhood  of  Geok  Tepe.     A  second   recon- 

but  the  detachment  went  there  each  time  to  punish  the  trih--    md, 
having  so  done,  returned." 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  465 

naissance  showed  the  Tekkes  to  be  gathered  in  force 
at  Yangi  Kala,  Denghll  Tepe,  and  Geok  Tepe,  within 
about  a  mile  of  each  other.  The  Russians  were  from 
8,000  to  10,000  strong,  and  the  Tekkes,  it  is  said, 
about  30,000 — but  the  latter,  of  course,  badly  armed 
and  totally  unaccustomed  to  European  strategy.  The 
invaders  drove  the  foe  from  the  first  two  positions, 
and  appear  to  have  been  left  to  occupy  the  third. 
Victory  was  not  gained,  however,  with  the  ease  of 
battles  in  Turkistan,  for,  in  capturing  Geok  Tepe,  the 
Russians  lost  more  men,  Mr.  Marvin  estimates,  than 
in  all  the  previous  sieges  in  Central  Asia  since  1853. 
However  this  may  be,  the  terror  inspired  throughout 
the  land  by  the  taking  of  Geok  Tepe,  in  1881,  had 
act  died  away  when  I  approached  the  Turkomans  in 
1882.  Of  this  I  had  proof  when  on  the  Oxus  ;  for 
vvhen  I  asked  some  Turkomans  if  it  would  be  safe  to 
:ross  their  Steppe,  they  replied  that  the  Russians  had 
^iven  the  Tekkes  such  a  thrashing  that  probably 
vve  should  not  be  meddled  with;  and  the  prediction 
jroved  true,  for,  as  I  have  said  of  the  Turkomans  near 
Khiva  who  shot   at  our  luggage  drivers,  when  dared 

0  take  the  goods,  with  the  warning  that  they  were 
>^ussian,  they  decamped.  As  for  our  route  further 
)n,  we  were  subsequently  told  that,  since  the  fall  of 
jeok  Tepe,  the  Turkomans  had  left  the  northern 
)art  of  their  country  and  gone  further  south.  Beyond 
.11  doubt,  therefore,  it  was  owing  to  the  success  of  the 
Russian  arms  that  we  kept  our  property  and  travelled 

1  safety  across  Turkmenia. 

This  brings  me  to  the  mention  of  other  travellers, 
v'ho  have  entered  or  aproached  the  country  during  the 
•ast  12  years.  The  Russian  encroachments  in  Turk- 
lenia  attracted  to  its  vicinity  at  least  three  classes  of 

VOL.  II.  30 


466  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

travellers — political  agents,  private  adventurers,  and 
newspaper  correspondents.  Captain  Marsh,  in  1872, 
rode  through  Khorassan  from  the  Caspian  to  the 
Indus,  and  afterwards  told  his  story  in  "A  Ride 
through  Islam."  In  the  following  year,  a  visit  was 
made  to  the  Perso-Turkoman  frontier  by  Colonel 
Valentine  Baker,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Gill  and 
Captain  Clayton.  They  failed,  however,  in  reaching 
either  Merv  or  Herat,  but  visited  the  upper  waters  of 
the  Atrak,  as  described  in  Baker's  "Clouds  in  the  East.' 

The  foregoing  were  private  travellers,  but  in  1874 
Khorassan  was  visited  by  Captain  the  Hon.  G. 
Napier,  who  made  his  way  to  Kalat-i-Nadiri,  on  th( 
Perso-Turkoman  frontier,  and  thence  travelled  up  t( 
Astrabad.  Afterwards  he  returned  to  Teheran,  and 
wrote  his  secret  and  confidential  report  for  the  English 
Government,  by  whom  he  had  been  sent.  He  made 
a  second  journey  in  1876. 

In  1875  another  English  ofificer.  Colonel  C.  M, 
Macgregor,  set  out  upon  his  own  responsibility,  think 
ing  to  ride  from  India  to  Russia  through  Afghanistan 
but  he  was  forbidden  to  do  so  by  his  Government,  anc 
when  he  had  gone  round  by  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  anc 
approached  to  within  5  miles  of  Herat,  he  was  thena 
sent  back  to  Persia.  He  was  next  on  the  point  0! 
starting  for  Merv  when  he  received  orders  fron 
Teheran  prohibiting  his  leaving  Persian  territory,  Sf 
that  his  account  was  confined  to  a  ''Journey  througl 
Khorassan." 

In  the  spring  of  1876,  Captain  F.  W.  H.  Butlei 
spent  his  leave  on  the  Perso-Turkoman  frontier,  dis 
guised  as  a  Chinaman.  On  returning  to  India,  an< 
informing  the  Government  of  what  he  had  done^ 
Lord    Lytton,    in    the    following    year,    sent    him    t( 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  467 

ascertain  the  condition  of  things  at  Merv.      He  wrote 
a  report  for  the  Government,  concerning  which,  how 
ever,  very  Httle    that  is    trustworthy    has   been   made 
public. 

The  years  1876  and  1878  saw  a  Russian  explorer  in 
Turkmenia,  and  on  the  Persian  frontier,  in  the  person 
of  General  Petrusevitch,  in  whose  report  are  amply 
described  the  parts  of  Turkmenia  between  the  Uzboi 
and  Persia,  and  also  the  north-eastern  provinces  of 
Khorassan. 

Thus  far  it  will  be  seen  that  all  the  English 
travellers  I  have  mentioned  were  military  officers, 
who  hovered  about  the  border,  but  not  one  of  whom 
penetrated  into  Turkmenia.  The  honour  of  doing 
this  first,  of  late  years,  was  reserved  for  a  brave 
civilian,  in  the  person  of  Mr.  O' Donovan,  who,  in 
1 88 1,  boldly  rode  into  Merv,  under  circumstances  that 
excited  no  little  admiration.  As  correspondent  of  the 
Daily  News,  he  had  started  from  the  Caucasus  to 
accompany  the  Russian  expedition  against  the  Akhal 
Tekkes  ;  but  upon  the  death  of  Lazareff,  Turgoukasoff 
objected  to  his  presence,  and  he  withdrew  into  Persian 
territory  at  Astrabad.  Nor  upon  Skobeleff's  advent 
to  power  could  O' Donovan  obtain  the  needed  per- 
mission. Upon  this  he  set  off  to  watch  the  Russian 
operations  from  the  enemy's  side ;  but,  failing  to  get 
into  Geok  Tepe,  he  determined,  at  all  costs,  to  enter 
Merv. 

He  set  out  from  Mehna  on  28th  February,  the 
journey  involving  a  ride  of  120  miles  in  24  hours,  and 
on  his  arrival  he  was  treated,  first  with  suspicion  as  a 
spy,  then  with  honour  as  a  guest,  next  with  confidence 
as  a  doctor,  and  lastly  with  respect  as  a  chief.  After 
five    months'    residence,   though  secretly  watched,  he 


468  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

succeeded  in  making  his  escape,  and  was  the  first  Euro- 
pean to  describe  in  detail  "  The  Merv  Oasis."  His 
book  was  not  ready,  I  think,  when  I  left  England,  nor 
did  I  ever  meet  Mr.  O' Donovan;  but  as  I  intended 
myself,  if  possible,  to  go  to  Merv,  I  wrote  to  ask  him 
for  useful  hints.  He  has  since  perished  with  the  army 
of  Hicks  Pasha  in  the  Soudan  ;  but  his  reply  is  before 
me,  and  I  take  pleasure  in  recording  the  kindness  with 
which  he  sent  me  a  letter  of  three  sheets  answering 
my  questions.* 

O' Donovan  was   an   Irishman.     The  next  traveller 

*  Some  parts  of  his  letter  are  of  sufficient  general  interest  to  warrant 
my  printing  them.  He  wrote  from  "  Dinard,  He  et  Vilaine,  France, 
17th  June,  1882,"  and  said: — 

"  The  journey  from  the  Caspian  to  Samarkand  had  best  be  com- 
menced by  rail  from  Krasnovodsk.  The  railroad  is  completed,  I  think, 
as  far  as  Yengi  Sheher,  in  the  Akhal  Tekke.  Then  you  can  procure 
horses  and  camels,  and  proceed  either  through  Merv  or  Bokhara.  J 
would  recommend  the  route  through  Merv,  especially  if  you  car 
establish  yourself  in  the  good  graces  of  the  Russians,  who  by  this  tim( 
are  doubtless  all-powerful  in  that  district.  At  this  crisis,  however,  yoi 
will  find  it  very  difficult  to  persuade  the  Russians  that  your  mission  ha 
nothing  to  do  with  politics. 

"  Between  the  eastern  terminal  of  the  Trans-Caspian  railway  a; 
Samarkand  I  know  of  no  way  of  travelling  except  by  horses  ai 
camels.  The  people  of  the  country,  excepting  when  travelling 
caravans,  generally  prefer  horses.  The  only  difficult  piece  of  grou 
you  will  have  to  cross,  if  you  proceed  by  way  of  Merv,  is  that  betweei 
the  Tejend  and  Murgab  rivers,  owing  to  its  being  in  summer  a  water 
less  district.  During  the  rainy  season  there  will  be  abundance  (■ 
water — too  much  of  it  sometimes. 

"  A  ;propos  of  water,  it  would  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  as  soon  a 
you  get  eastward  of  Merv,  and  especially  at  Bokhara,  it  is  absolute) 
necessary  to  avoid  drinking  water  from  tanks  or  rain-pools,  withoi: 
first  causing  it  to  be  boiled,  for  in  such  waters  the  germs  of  th 
Ris/ita,  or  guinea- worm,  invariably  abound  ...  A  large  percentag 
of  the  members  of  caravans  coming  from  Bokhara  are  infected  in  thi 
way.  .  .  . 

"  The  language  spoken  by  the  people  inhabiting  the  district  betwee 
the  Caspian,  Merv,  and  the  Oxus  is  primitive  Turkish,  bearing  th 
same  relation  to  the  modern  Osmanli  spoken  at  Constantinople  th: 
the  language  of  Chaucer  does  to  our  latter-day  English.     Should  yo 

I 


a: 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  469 

to  be  mentioned  is  a  Scotchman,  with  whom  I  have  the 
privilege  of  being  acquainted.  I  mean  Colonel  Stewart, 
of  the  5th  Punjaub  Infantry,  who  took  upon  himself 
in  1880  to  visit  the  Turkoman  frontier;  and,  that  he 
might  mix  freely  among  the  people,  assumed  the  dis- 
guise of  an  i\rmenian  horse-dealer  of  Calcutta.  In 
the  bazaar  at  Muhammabad  he  chanced  to  meet 
O' Donovan,  who  told  him  he  "  spoke  English  won- 
derfully well  for  an  Armenian,"  but  did  not  detect  his 
dissimulation  ;  nor  was  it  until  some  time  afterwards, 
Colonel  Stewart  told  me,  that  he  made  himself  known 

be  acquainted  with  Constantinople  Turkish,  you  will  acquire  the 
Turkish  of  Central  Asia  in  a  very  short  time.  If  you  have  anyone  with 
you  who  can  speak  Persian,  you  will  get  on  well  enough  with  the  better 
classes  of  the  community.  Among  the  nomadic  peoples,  however, 
Turkish  will  be  absolutely  necessary.   .  .  . 

"When  I  was  at  Merv,  I  bought  from  a  Jewish  merchant  of  the 
place,  named  Matthi,  a  copy  of  the  New  Testament*  printed  by  one  of 
the  Bible  Societies  in  the  language  of  the  nomadic  Turkomans — 
Jagatai  Tatar.  I  believe  you  can  get  any  number  of  them  in  London, 
for  it  was  there  that  the  copy  1  saw  was  printed.  For  general  distribu- 
tion in  Central  Asia,  the  Scriptures  printed  in  the  Turkish  of  Azerbaijan 
(West  Caspian  provinces),  and  which  resembles  as  nearly  as  possible 
the  language  of  Bokhara,  would  be  requisite.! 

"  The  dangers  of  travel  in  Central  Asia  have  been,  since  the  time  I 
travelled  there,  immensely  lessened  by  the  Russian  advance.  They 
consisted  principally  of  the  attacks  upon  the  caravans  crossing  between 

*  O' Donovan's  mention  of  the  sale  of  the  Scriptures  by  a  Jew  is  noteworthy,  for 

Colonel  Stewart  told  me  that,  whilst  on  the  Turkoman  border,  he  met  with  a  Jew 

who  was  not  only  selling  the  New  Testament,  but  had  read  it,  and  to  such  purpose 

that,  quite  apart  from  Christian  teaching,  he  had  become  convinced  that  Jesus  was  the 

^'  ssiah,  and  he  asked  Colonel  Stewart  for  directions  as  to  how  he  might  carry  out 

desire  to  become  a  Christian — an  incident  from  which  I  drew  hope  that  the  reading 

.  my  distributed  Bibles,  though  unaccompanied  by  human  teaching,  will,  with  God's 

'essing,  produce  like  fruits. 

+  Mr.  O'Donovan  is,  I  think,  not  quite  accurate  in  some  of  his  remarks  about  the 
iptures.  The  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew,  known  as  Bassett's  version,  has  been 
lied  in  Jagatai  Tatar,  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  but  the 
nainder  of  the  New  Testament  has  not  yet  been  translated,  and  I  have  heard 
•'inng  elsewhere  to  lead  me  to  suppose  that  the  Turkish  of  Azerbaijan  would  be 
■er  for  the  khanates  than  Jagatai.  In  fact,  Dr.  Vanorden,  writing  from  Khiva, 
aks  of  the  Kirghese  New  Testament  he  met  with  there  as  "about  the  same  as  the 
•pie  speak  in  Khiva."  Again,  "The  language  spoken  here,  though  Turkish,  is 
te  different  from  that  spoken  in  the  Caucasus." 


\ 


470  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

to  the  brave  correspondent.  The  Colonel  watched 
the  course  of  events  till  ten  days  before  the  fall  ot 
Geok  Tepe,  and  then  returned.  Not,  however,  in 
his  case  to  have  altogether  unacknowledged  his 
self-imposed  mission,  for  it  was  shortly  after  deter- 
mined by  the  Government  to  send  him  back  tc 
Khorassan  as  an  accredited  agent,  "the  only  English 
pioneer  in  Central  Asia,"  Mr.  Marvin  says,  "who 
has  been  rewarded  with  any  official  recognition  o 
his  services."  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  he  adds,  as 
a  rule,  well  rewards  her  explorers.     I  know  not  no^^ 

Krasnovodsk  and  Khiva  or  Bokhara  by  the  Akhal  or  Merv  Turkomans 
In  travelling  by  caravan  at  present,  however,  I  should  say  there  was  m 
danger.  Small  parties  of  nomadic  shepherds,  who  occasionally  tak 
to  the  road,  as  chance  offers,  do  not  dare  to  attack  any  considerabi 
number. 

"  As  I  presume  your  principal  travelling  will  be  done  in  company 
with  caravans,  you  must  regulate  your  speed  according  to  that  of  lade 
camels.  In  summer  the  caravans  almost  always  halt  during  the  entir 
day,  commencing  their  march  at  sunset,  and  continuing  up  to  a  coupl 
of  hours  after  sunrise.  I  think  you  will  find  from  25  to  35  miles  a  da 
a  safe  average  to  count  upon,  especially  the  lower  number  of  miles 
for,  every  three  or  four  days,  the  caravan  bashi  halts  for  an  entire  2 
hours,  with  a  view  of  allowing  the  camels  and  travellers  on  foot,  < 
whom  there  are  always  many,  to  repose. 

"  The  cost  of  travelling  will  vary  immensely  in  the  localities  throug 
which  you  will  pass.     It  will  be  dearer  to  march  with  a  caravan  than  : 
you  travel  alone  with  your  servants,  for  the  demand  occasioned  by  th 
arrival  of  a  large  number  of  animals  sends  up  the  price  of  forage  ver 
considerably.     At  Astrabad  the  food  of  each  horse  cost  me  2  francs 
day.     At  Meshed  it  was  i^,  in  Dereghez  i  franc,  and  in  Merv  but  hal 
a  franc.     For  a  fowl  you  pay  on  the  average  about  i  franc,  and  th 
price  oi  ;pilati,  2lW^  yaghuiirt  {or  coagulated  milk)  is  very  small  indeed 
but  varies  immensely.     The  wages  of  a  servant — board  wages — are  4 
francs  per  month.     This  is  good  pay,  and  for  it  you  ought  to  find 
man  well  able  to  cook,  and   superintend  your  affairs  generally. 
groom  need   not    cost    you   more  than  25    to  30    a    month.     With 
horses  and  2  servants,  your  ordinary  expenses  should  not  exceed  10,  0 
at  most  12  francs  a  day;  but  you  will  find  at  the  end  of  12  month* 
between  being  cheated  by  your  servants,  and  making  presents  to  Iocs 
dignitaries,  20s.  per  diem  will  be  a  satisfactory  average." 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  ^yi 

how  far  these  remarks  are  correct,  but  I  remember  that 
M.  Ujfalvy  draws  a  contrast  between  the  liberality  of 
Russia  towards  her  explorers  compared  with  his  own 
Government  in  France. 

Colonel  Stewart  returned  to  Khorassan  in  1883, 
after  reading  a  paper  at  the  Geographical  Society 
upon  "  The  Country  of  the  Tekke  Turkomans."  He 
is  appointed  on  the  Afghan  Frontier  Commission. 

The  appointment  of  Governor  bestowed  on  the  next 
traveller  to  Merv  seems  rather  to  illustrate  the  alleged 
liberality  of  Russia  towards  her  explorers.  It  was 
natural  enough,  after  O' Donovan's  adventure,  that  the 
Russians  should  wish  to  go  to  Merv  too  ;  whereupon, 
in  February,  1882,  a  caravan  was  despatched,  under 
Kosikh,  a  trader  representing  the  firm  of  Koushin  and 
Co.,  of  Moscow,  with  Lieutenant  Alikhanoff  disguised 
as  his  clerk  and  interpreter,  and  Ensign  Sokoloff  as 
another  clerk — a  similar  plan,  it  will  be  observed,  to 
that  enjoined  by  Peter  the  Great,  when  ordering  a 
party  to  proceed  to  Yarkand,  to  find  out  and  seize  the 
gold  mines  ;  or,  again,  like  their  plan  in  sending  Vali- 
khanoff,  disguised  as  a  Khokand  merchant,  with  a 
caravan  to  Kashgar,  in  1859.  In  AlikhanofT's  case  a 
Russianized  Khivan  was  sent  on  before,  secretly  to 
arrange  for  the  reception  of  the  caravan,  the  arrival 
of  which  caused  a  sensation ;  but  the  people  were 
assured  that  its  objects  were  purely  commercial,  gifts 
were  distributed,  and  permission  was  obtained  for  the 
caravan  to  remain  a  few  weeks  in  the  oasis. 

During  this  period  the  officers  took  advantage  of 
ejvery  opportunity  to  examine  the  situation  and  survey 
the  fortress  of  Kaushid-Khan.  The  Tekkes,  however, 
were  suspicious,  and  the  reports  of  their  plots  to  murder 
the    Russians  caused  the    trader    to    wish  to    depart, 


472  liUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA, 

leaving  his  goods  on  credit  with  the  Tekkes.  The 
whole  party  then  returned  to  Askhabad,  and  the  public 
knew  nothing  of  the  affair  till,  months  afterwards, 
Alikhanoff  published  his  adventures  in  the  Moscow 
Gazette. 

Alikhanoff  was  followed  a  few  months  later  by 
another  disguised  officer,  Lieutenant  Naziroff,  of  whose 
successful  ride  from  Askhabad  through  Merv  to  Charjui 
1  first  heard  on  the  20th  September,  at  the  dinner- 
table  of  the  Governor-General  at  Tashkend.  I  had 
asked  about  the  possibility  of  my  proceeding  from 
Charjui  to  Merv,  but  the  Russian  authorities  said  it 
would  be  madness  for  me  to  attempt  it,  for  that  they 
regarded  the  journey  just  accomplished  by  Naziroff, 
who  was  an  Asiatic  speaking  the  language,  as  no  small 
feat,  and  that  they  had  no  means  of  guaranteeing  my 
safety  beyond  Charjui. 

This  information  was  volunteered  to  me  in  Tasl 
kend  without  reserve,  and  further  particulars  wei 
given  me  at  Samarkand,  when  writing  notes.* 

Besides  these  last  two  officers,   it  appears  that 
Lessar  also  went  to  Merv,  and  from  thence  to  Khivi 
and  back  again  to  Kizil  Arvat.f     This  brings  me 

*  A  portion  of  a  private  letter  from  a  high  functionary  to  another 
of  nearly  equal  rank  was  read  to  me,  and  to  this  effect :  "  You 
know  that  Naziroff  passed  safely  from  Meshed  through  Merv  to  Bo- 
khara in  native  costume,  and,  knowing  the  language  and  customs,  went 
with  a  caravan  together  with  Turkoman  pilgrims  returning  from 
Mecca.  There  were  many,  and  from  different  districts.  Not  knowing 
that  he  was  a  Russian  officer,  they  were  open  with  him,  and  told  him 
that  they  would  like  to  be  in  the  Zarafshan  province,  where  the  authori- 
ties cared  for  the  people,  entered  into  their  needs,  and  do  not  wroi 
them  ;  but  they  did  not  make  the  same  remark  about  the  other  pr 
vinces." 

t  Since  1  wrote  thus,  M.  Lessar  has  told  me  that  he  went  openly  j 
Russian  uniform  in  August  and  November,  1882,  and  was  both  tim^ 
well  received  by  the  Mervis.     From  Merv  he  went  to  the  Amu-dar 


THE  RUSSIAN  ADVANCE  TO  MERV.  473 

the  last  two  Europeans  who  visited  Merv  during  its 
independence. 

More  than  once  I  have  referred  to  two  French 
travellers,  M.  de  Mailly-Chalon  and  the  Baron  Benoist- 
Mechin,  who  had  made  a  remarkable  journey  from 
Japan  through  Southern  Manchuria  to  Vladivostock, 
and  then  proceeded  by  the  Siberian  post-route  to 
Tomsk,  whence,  striking  south,  they  had  reached 
Vierny,  and  were,  at  the  time  of  our  arrival  there,  in 
the  Thian  Shan  mountains.  They  afterwards  pro- 
ceeded to  Samarkand,  which  they  left  to  follow  our 
track,  three  months  later,  to  Khiva.* 

At  Khiva  they  stayed  two-and-fifty  days,  hoping  for 
some  way  of  proceeding  direct  to  Merv.  For  a  long 
time  the  General  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  would  not  take 
the  responsibility  of  giving  them  permission  to  go, 
until  by  a  lucky  opportunity  there  came  an  embassy  of 
Merv  Tekkes  under  Kara-Kul-Khan  to  meet  General 
Chernaieff  at  Khiva,  and  to  ask  him  to  send  a  dele- 
gated Khivan  to  govern  the  turbulent  Tekkes.  The 
French  travellers  eagerly  seized  this  unexpected  oppor- 
tunity, and,  with  the  consent  of  the  Russians,  proceeded 
with  the  returning  embassy,  t 

near  Charjui,  to  Khiva,  and  thence  to  Durun  in  Akhal  (pubUshed  in 
\}ii^  Proceedings  of  the  Ricssian  Geographical  Society,  3ir\d.  in  Peter- 
mann's  Mittheilungen).  On  comparing  notes  as  fellow-travellers  over 
the  same  steppe,  I  found  that  M.  Lessar's  journeys  had  been  more 
arduous  than  mine ;  for  that,  whilst  my  party  had  never  more  than 
three  days'  journey  without  coming  to  a  well,  M.  Lessar  sometimes 
went  five  days  and  six,  so  that  in  one  case,  if  not  more,  his  horses  died. 

*  Proof-sheets  of  the  Baron's  communication  addressed  to  the  Geogra- 
phical Society  of  Paris,  on  21st  March,  1884,  respecting  their  journey 
from  Samarkand,  are  before  me.  From  them  I  gather  that  their  reception 
in  Bokhara  was  as  kind  as  ours,  but  they  were  not  so  fortunate  as  we  in 
being  able  to  descend  the  Amu  by  boat,  because  the  river  was  frozen, 
and  they  had  to  journey  by  horses  for  10  days,  first  on  the  west  bank  to 
lldjik,  and  then  on  the  opposite  bank  to  Petro-Alexandrovsk. 

t  The   caravan   consisted   of  about  85   camels   and    150   horsemen. 


474  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

The  length  of  their  route  the  Baron  states  as  37c 
miles,  but  observes  that  there  is  a  route  followed  some 
times  by  couriers  and  camel  caravans,  shorter  by  9^ 
miles.  Of  the  two  routes,  Abbott  followed  the  shorter 
and  Shakespear  and  Taylour  Thompson  the  longer,  ii 
1840  and  1842,  since  which  time  probably  no  European 
except  M.  Lessar  and  the  two  Frenchmen,  has  been  ove  \ 
either.  Our  travellers  stayed  in  Merv  for  three  weeks 
and  then  passed  on,  leaving  the  oasis  that  has  so  oftei  1 
changed  masters,  to  begin  a  new  period  of  its  history 
and,  from  having  belonged  to  an  Alexander  more  thai 
2,000  years  ago,  to  pass  to  another  Alexander  in  th« 
person  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia. 

Leaving  Khiva  on  the  5th  of  May  by  Pitniak,  they  followed  the  wet 
bank  of  the  Amu  comfortably,  to  a  spot  called  Kougar-chin,  or  Kurgar 
chin,  within  about  30  miles  of  Kabakli.  Then  began  the  difficult  pai 
of  their  journey,  when  on  the  12th  May  they  struck  into  the  desert,  anc 
after  42  hours,  had  ridden  75  miles  to  the  well  Chelganak ;  their  wa 
lying  over  undulating  sandhills  covered  with  saxaul,  and  scanty  thi 
grass  which  grows  in  spring.  On  this  the  Turkoman  horses  were  sup 
ported  almost  entirely  during  the  journey.  The  well,  80  feet  dee 
had  brackish  water,  and  not  sufficient  in  quantity  without  dig^ 
deeper.  At  length,  on  the  i6th,  they  resumed  the  journey,  the  h.i 
being  almost  insupportable,  and  the  chief  declaring  that  it  was  absolut^ 
necessary,  on  account  of  the  horses,  to  get  to  the  next  well,  Chashmi 
as  quickly  as  possible.  This  involved  crossing  two  tongues  of  sz 
each  2  or  3  miles  wide,  in  which  the  horses  sank  to  the  houghs.  Th 
stage  was  accomplished  in  2"]  hours,  a  distance,  the  Baron  says,  of  n 
kilometres ;  but  this  looks  like  a  mistake,  since  it  would  involve  a  carr 
van  of  camels  doing  68  miles  in  zy  hours,  which,  I  take  it,  is  out  of  th 
question.  The  distance  on  my  Russian  map  does  not  exceed  25  mile 
This  well  was  situated  at  the  extremity  of  the  bed  of  the  Murgab,  ac 
further  south  wells  increased  in  number,  and  vegetation  became  moi 
general.  Traces  appeared  of  former  cultivation,  and  on  the  21st  < 
May,  after  17  days'  journey,  they  entered  Merv. 


CHAPTER     LXXVI. 

MERV  AS  ANNEXED. 

The  fortress  of  Kaushid  Khan. — Irrigation  and  vegetation  of  the  oasis. 
— MervTekkes:  their  number,  divisions,  and  distribution,  with  agricul- 
ture, manufactures,  and  trade. — Their  religious  and  moral  character- 
istics.— Their  lawlessness  at  home  and  atrocities  abroad. — Persian 
slaves. — Submission  of  Mervis  to  Russia. — Explanations  of  the  Mos- 
cow Gazette. — Suspicions  of  Russian  intrigue. — Dependence  of  Merv 
on  Khiva. — Signs,  in  1883,  of  coming  submission. — Partial  opposition 
to  Russian  rule. — The  present  situation. 

THE  journeys  of  O' Donovan,  Alikhanoff,  and 
others  have  served  to  remove  many  false  im- 
pressions, and  to  give  us  a  fair  idea  of  Merv  as  it  is, 
namely,  a  huge  fortress,  called  Kaushid  Khan  Kala. 

The  *' Kala "  forms,  as  Benoist-Mechin  says,  "a 
truncated  cone,"  of  which  the  base  is  wanting,  for  it 
is  finished  only  upon  three  sides.  In  those  sides, 
moreover,  are  numerous  breaches.* 

The  fort,  built  in  a  loop  of  the  river,  is  protected  on 

*  The  history  of  this  is  that  when,  in  1873  and  subsequently,  the 
Russians  were  supposed  to  be  coming,  the  divisions  of  Turkomans  were 
summoned  in  haste,  each  to  perform  a  certain  part ;  but  the  Saryks,  to 
whom  the  fourth  side  was  allotted,  did  not  answer  the  summons  before 
the  fear  of  invasion  was  over. 

The  enclosure  is  about  2  miles  long  by  i  mile  wide  at  the  bazaar. 
The  length  of  the  walls  Alikhanoff  gives  as  about  3  miles,  and  he  speaks 
of  the  profile  as  frightful,  the  earthwork  being  80  feet  thick  at  base, 
tapering  to  30  feet  at  summit,  and  35  feet  high.     There  is  no  regular 


476  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

two  sides  by  the  Murgab,  which  here  is  50  paces 
wide.  The  depth  in  some  places  reaches  23  feet,  but 
in  others  horses  can  ford  it.* 

The  Merv  country,  AHkhanoff  says,  is  not  a  natural 
oasis,  but  the  soil  and  vegetation  are  the  same  as 
from  the  Attek  to  the  Oxus.  The  entire  expanse,  he 
says,  excluding,  of  course,  the  sandy  patches,  might  be 
made  to  have  the  same  aspect  as  Merv,  if  watered. 
In  fact,  canals  exist  on  all  sides,  showing  that  at  one 
time  the  land,  which  now  is  a  waste,  was  cultivated.! 

The  ground  is  very  fertile,  and  is  covered  with  crops 
of  wheat,  sorghum,  sesame,  rice,  cotton,  and  barley. 
The  gardens  produce  abundance  of  melons,  which  are 
considered  good  enough  to  be  exported  to  Deregez, 
and  even  to  Mashad,  where  rich  people  send  them  to 
one  another  as  presents.  The  Merv  gardens  some- 
times swarm  with  red  beetles,  called  kekene;  these,  like 

ditch,  but  inside  and  out  is  a  broad  and  shallow  excavation,  formed  b; 
digging  away  the  earth  for  the  wall.     There  are  in  all  8  openings 
gates.     It  was  constructed  mainly  to  afford  shelter  to  the  surround! 
population  in  the  event  of  an  enemy  appearing. 

*  Benoist-Mechin  gives  the  width  of  the  river  as  from  80  to  100  pac 
near  the  fortress,  and  nowhere  fordable  (I  suppose  in  spring).  Th 
were,  until  recently,  3  bridges,  but  only  one  now  remains.  AcroS? 
the  river,  where  it  enters  the  oasis,  Kaushid  Khan  built  a  dam 
Here  the  stream,  80  yards  wide,  is  not  fordable,  the  water  being  raised 
to  make  it  flow  over  the  adjoining  country,  giving  a  difference  of  level 
between  the  Upper  and  Lower  Murgab  of  7  feet.  This  dam,  called 
Kaushid  Khan  bent,  diverts  the  water  among  the  two  sections  of  the  oasis 
by  means  of  two  main  canals,  the  Otamish  and  the  Tokhtamish.  The 
small  remainder  of  the  water  flows  along  the  natural  channel,  whilst 
each  of  the  two  canals  distributes  water  through  about  50  leadin. 
arteries,  and  these  in  turn  feed  hundreds  of  smaller  leats. 

t  Like  the  Khivan  oasis,  that  of  Merv  consists  of  a  clayey  plain, 
intersected  here  and  there  by  sands.  It  is  about  40  miles  broad  am' 
long,  with  an  area  consequently  of  1,600  square  miles,  or  the  size  of  th 
county  of  Kent.  The  river  divides  the  expanse  in  two  almost  equal 
parts,  north-east  and  south-west.  The  whole  of  the  land  between  the 
canals  is  surrounded  by  clay  walls.  Merv  is  far  from  being  as  well 
cultivated  as  Khiva,  for  the  Tekkes  are  both  unskilful  and  idle. 


I 
1 


MER V  AS  ANNEXED.  477 

locusts,  destroy  the  entire  melon  crop.  It  was  so  in 
1 88 1.  There  is  also  a  disease  called  sheei^e,  which 
causes  the  plant  to  wither.  The  fruits  grown  at  Merv 
are  apricots,  grapes,  and  mulberries. 

Alikhanoff  estimates  the  number  of  the  Mervis  at 
46,000  kibitkas,  or  230,000  souls.  Of  this  number 
36,000  tents  belong  to  the  Tekkes,  whom  Kaushid 
Khan  brought  with  him  from  Sarakhs  to  conquer  the 
oasis.  As  conquerors  they  exercised  authority  over 
the  land  and  canals.  The  remaining  10,000  tents 
consist  of  casual  arrivals  from  the  Akhal  tribe,  the 
Saryks,  Salors,  Ersaris,  and  others,  with  26  Jewish 
families.  All  this  remnant,  except  the  Jews,  who 
only  trade,  hire  land  and  water  from  the  sovereign 
tribe. 

The  Merv  Tekkes  are  divided  into  the  Otamish, 
formed  of  the  two  clans  Sitchmaz  and  Bakshi,  and  the 
Tokhtamish,  formed  of  the  Vekil  and  th"e  Beg.* 

About  6,000  tents  of  the  Beg  tribe.  Colonel  Stewart 
says,  are  generally  pitched  near  Kaushid  Khan  Kala, 
where  each  chief  has  a  guest-house  of  mud  or  sun- 
burnt brick,  but  they  themselves  live  either  in  tents  or. 
In  places  where  reeds  are  plentiful,  in  reed  or  mat  huts, 
similar,  I  suppose,  to  those  I  saw  on  the  banks  of  the 
Oxus,  and  which  can  be  carried  away  on  camels. 
They  struck  me  as  the  poorest  of  habitations,  and 
Inferior  by  many  degrees  to  a  felt  tent.  The  semi- 
settled  population  generally  is  disposed  around   Merv 

*  The  Otamish  occupy  the  south-west,  and  the  Tokhtamish  the 
remainder.  These  clans  are  further  subdivided  into  17  branches.  The 
Saryks  are  divided  into  those  of  Yulutan  and  Penjdeh,  the  latter 
declaring  themselves  Afghan  subjects,  and  foes  of  those  of  Yulutan 
M.  Lessar  says  : — "  Foes  of  the  Tekkes  of  Merv,  but  not  of  the  Saryks 
Yulutan"],  who  number,  according  to  some,  about  4,000  tents,  but 
i^etrusevitch  says  6,500,  or  13,000  in  all.  The  Salors  are  mingled 
among  the  Tekkes. 


478  RUSSIA  A'    CENTRAL  ASIA. 

at  a  distance  of  about  a  day's  ride  in  groups  of  two  oi 
three  hundred  tents. 

The  principal  occupations  of  the  people  are  agricul 
ture  and  cattle  rearing,  omitting  plunder,  which  unti 
recently  was  the  chief  pursuit  of  the  Turkomans.* 

A  few  artisans  are  to  be  found,  such  as  smiths 
bootmakers,  saddlers,  and  silver  workers,  but,  sayh 
Alikhanoff,  they  are  all  inferior  workmen.  Colone 
Stewart,  on  the  contrary,  says  they  make  very  good  gun 
powder,  and  are  clever  in  manufacturing  false  Persiar 
money,  with  which  they  flood  the  bazaar  in  Muham 
madabad.  Both  authors  agree,  however,  respecting 
the  carpets  of  the  Turkoman  women.  They  an 
similar,  the  Colonel  says,  to  the  ancient  Persian  carpet 
that  fetch  so  high  a  price,  and  cannot  now  be  made  ii 
Persia  (though  I  have  seen  some  good  ones  in  tht 
Colonel's  own  collection).  He  adds  that  their  felts,  ai 
the  rough  cloth  they  manufacture  from  sheep's  woe 
are  far  superior  to  any  made  in  Persia,  and  they  ah 
weave  a  thick  material  of  the  appearance  of  alpac 
that  is  costly.  In  fact,  he  declares  everything  tl 
Turkomans  make,  except  their  coinage,  is  good. 

On   Tuesdays  and   Saturdays  a  market  is  held 
Merv  in  the  square  between  the  fortress  and  the  riv< 
where  7,000  or  8,000  men  assemble,  but  no  women. f 

The  Turkomans  are   Muhammadans  of  the   Sunn 

*  The  population  owns  242  flocks,  or  about  160,000  sheep,  and  2) 
herds,  or,  say,  7,800  camels,  to  which  Alikhanoff  adds  11,500  horses— 
that  is,  one  to  every  four  tents — 25,000  donkeys,  and  46,000  cattle. 

With  regard  to  agriculture,  he  adds  that  two-thirds  of  the  populatioi 
sow  a  tchooval  (250  lbs.)  of  wheat  to  every  tent.  Wheat  yields  20-fold 
and  sorghum  from  200  to  300-fold.  The  people  use  large  quantities  0 
sesame  oil  with  their  food,  but  half  the  seed  whence  it  is  expressed  ii 
brought  from  the  Tejend  and  Attek.  Cotton  is  exported  to  the  exten^ 
of  100  camel-loads,  but  silk  is  only  slightly  cultivated. 

t  The  crowd  circulate  about  roofless  enclosures,  wherein,  on  the  bar( 


I 


MER V  AS  A NNEXED.  479 

division,  but  are  guided  more  by  custom  than  by  the 
precepts  of  the  Koran,  unless  it  be  the  injunction 
which  enjoins  war  upon  Kafirs.  The  Persians  being 
Shias  are  regarded  as  foes,  which  fits  in  with  the  Turko- 
mans' love  of  taking  them  into  slavery.  When  Shias, 
however,  are  not  to  be  had,  they  sometimes  take 
Sunnis,  and  torture  them  into  saying,  in  the  presence 
of  witnesses,  that  they  are  Shias,  and  then  enslave 
them.  Also  they  give  a  portion  of  their  spoils  for 
religious  purposes.  The  ishans,  or  priests,  are  few, 
and  have  little  influence.  Mr.  Condie  Stephen  was 
shown  a  Turkoman  place  of  worship,  about  15  feet 
long,  at  Annau,  but  I  do  not  remember  reading  of 
another.  Near  the  fort  at  Merv,  however,  is  a  boys' 
school,  with  five  or  six  houses  for  the  mullah 
teachers. 

Alikhanoff  certainly  does  not  give  the  Mervis  a 
good  character.  In  addition  to  their  being  pilferers 
and  thieves,  he  says  they  are  liars  and  gluttons.  ''No 
matter  how  much  sugar  and  how  many  biscuits  are 
served  up  with  the  tea,  whatever  is  left  is  carried  off 
in  the  visitor's  pocket  without  any  ceremony."  I  am 
I  little  surprised  at  his  making  this  last  remark, 
because,  as  I  passed  through  Bokhara,  it  was  ex- 
pected that  my  servants  should  take  away  all  that  was 
left,  and  they  had  looked  forward  to  it  as  their  per- 
quisite, so  that  when  taking  refreshment  with  Alikhanoff 
:he  Mervis  would  seem  to  have  followed  local  usage. 

^Tound,  traders  expose  Moscow  chintz,  Persian  sugar,  opium,  green 
ea,  dried  melons,  tobacco,  Bokhariot  samovars,  and  cotton,  but, 
,'xcept  a  few  carpets,  little  that  is  of  home-make  or  valuable.  Here 
rade  the  Jews,  who  are  treated  better  than  in  Bokhara,  each  for  a  con- 
'ideration  being  taken  under  the  protection  of  some  powerful  Turkoman, 
^ostenko  gives  the  following  prices  of  produce  in  Merv :  A  batman 
\\  poods,  or  45  lbs.  Eng.)  of  flour  costs  5^?.,  or,  say,  \s.  per  cwt.  ; 
N-heat  \od.  ;  millet  lod.  ;  rice  t^s.  ;  a  sheep  Si". ;  and  a  cow  i8j-. 


48o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

The  same  writer  adds  :  "  They  are  frightfully 
envious  ;  they  have  no  notion  of  decency  or  shame ; 
and,  finally,  among  all  the  Turkomans  there  is  not  a 
people  so  unattractive  in  every  respect,  morally,  as  the 
Tekkes  of  Merv.  Further,  the  licence  of  individual 
will  is  carried  to  an  extreme.  Perpetual  quarrels  exist 
between  the  branches  of  the  various  clans,  and  there 
is  an  utter  absence  of  any  organization  to  keep  a 
check  upon  disorder." 

This  brings  me  to  speak  of  their  government,  con- 
cerning which  a  short  and  easy  method  would  be  t^ 
say,  "  They  have  none."  They  acknowledge  nc 
authority,  and  every  Turkoman  is  supposed  to  be  fret- 
All  that  they  respect  is  force  and  deb,  or  custom,  anc 
in  bowing  to  custom  each  tries  to  forward  his  own 
interests  without  regard  to  those  of  the  community 
The  common  welfare  makes  them  combine  to 
certain  extent  for  the  regulation  of  the  water  supplj 
and  also  in  time  of  war.  Each  clan  is  divided  inj 
families,  that  elect  a  person  called  a  khetkhot 
who  acts  representatively,  says  Colonel  Stewart, 
matters  of  policy,  though  only  according  to  d 
wishes  of  the  clan.  Merv  has  about  two  dozen  kk 
khodas. 

In  some  of  the  clans  one  family  has  rendered  itsel 
more  powerful  than  the  others.  Such  is  the  family  o 
Kaushid  Khan,  and  such  was  the  family  of  Nur  Verd 
among  the  Vekil  clan.  In  times  of  danger  the  khet 
khodas  elect  some  person,  who,  by  family  inHuenct 
and  resoluteness  of  will,  obtains  paramount  powej 
for  a  time.  About  1868  Nur  Verdi  Khan  enjoyec 
absolute  power  in  the  Akhal,  till,  wearied  with  tl 
incessant  dissensions  of  his  people,  he  abdicated  ai 
retired  to  Merv.      He  was  the  leader  of  the  resistan( 


MER V  AS  A NNEXED.  48 1 

against  Lomakin  in  1879,  but  died  in  the  winter  of 
that  year,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Makhdum 
KuH  Khan.  Makhdum  KuH  Khan  was  another 
instance  of  supreme  power  vested  for  a  time  by 
the  Akhal  Tekkes  in  an  individual.  Thus,  in  a 
certain  fashion,  the  people  might  be  said  to  have 
elected  for  themselves  aksakals  and  khans.  Some  of 
these  could  exercise  influence,  but  they  could  not 
enforce  the  execution  of  any  regulation. 

Without  laws  at  home,  the  Merv  Tekkes  were  many 
degrees    worse    than    lawless    in    their  forays  abroad. 
Previous  to  the  establishment  of  Russian  settlements 
on  the  Caspian  the  Turkomans  were  complete  masters 
of  the   Steppe,   and   attacked,    not   merely  individuals 
and    caravans,   but    entire  villages   on   the   borders   of 
Bokhara,  Khiva,  and  especially  North-Eastern  Persia 
Northern  Khorassan  was  devastated  by  them,  and  on 
the  east  side    of   the    Heri    Rud    alone,    out    of  460 
villages,    less    than     20    now    remain.      So    recently 
as    1878    an    immense    body    of    Merv    Tekkes    ap- 
proached within  5  miles  of  Mashad,  that  has  a  popula- 
tion of  70,000,  and  laid  waste  a  village  of  500  families. 
On  such  occasions  the  raiders  take  away  as  many  men 
and   women  as  suits  them  to  keep  or  sell  for  slaves, 
ind  the  rest  they  usually  kill,  or  sometimes  maim  by 
cutting  off  hands  or  feet.     The  cattle  are  driven  away, 
md  everything  else  of  value  is  carried  off. 

Colonel  Stewart  says,  "  No  one  in  England  has  any 
:onception  of  the .  fearful  -sufferings  of  the  slave  trade 
hat  has  been  carried  on  by  the  Turkomans."  He 
)elieves  the  number  of  slaves  in  Bokhara,  Khiva,  and 
I  urkmenia  itself,  a  few  years  since  amounted  to  more 
han  100,000.  I  observe  the  Baron  Benoist-Mechin 
stimates,  on  what  he  considers  good  information,  that 

VOL.  II.  3  I 


482  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

within   the  last  40  years  the   Turkomans  took    awa\ 
from  Persia  about  200,000  captives/'' 

Such,  then,  was  Merv,  and  such  the  character  01 
its  people  when  Russia,  by  the  conquest  of  the  Akhal, 
became  its  near  neighbour.  The  steppe  was  so  unsafe 
between  Mashad  and  Charjui  that  a  caravan  could  noi 
travel  without  a  military  escort,  and  the  raids  o; 
Persia  continued,  to  say  nothing  of  the  pillage  o 
Turkomans  under  Russian  protection.  According!} 
there  was  no  lack  of  seers  who  prophesied  that  Russi, 
must  sooner  or  later  take  Merv.  As  I  passed  througl 
Central  Asia  I  did  not  hear  much  about  it  among  th' 
Russians,  but  the  Khan  of  Khiva  seemed  to  think  so. 

By  the  journeys  of  Alikhanoff,  Lessar,  and  Nazirofi 
it  will  have  been  seen  that  the  Russians  had  becom 
acquainted,  through  practised  eyes,  with  the  route 
converging  upon  Merv  from  the  three  Russian  mili 
tary  centres  of  Askhabad,  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  an* 
Samarkand.  This  reminds  one,  of  course,  of  tl 
attack  upon  Khiva  concurrently  from  north,  east,  a^ 
west,  but  I  am  not  aware  that  any  active  preparati( 
for  war  had  begun,  or  that  the  capture  of  the  oi 
had  been  determined  upon  ;  but  if  it  had,  the  Russia 
were  spared  the  trouble  of  fighting,  and  England 

♦  The  sufferings  of  the  slaves,  says  Colonel  Stewart,  while  beir 
carried  off  are  terrible,  as  they  are  lashed  on  a  horse's  back  behii 
their  captors,  and  allowed  little  rest  till  they  reach  the  oba.  Then  thi 
are  heavily  ironed,  a  ring  being  passed  round  the  neck  and  one  rour 
each  leg.  From  these  rings  there  are  chains  fastening  the  le^ 
together,  and  a  long  chain  from  the  neck  ring,  which  is  fastened  to 
tent  peg.  The  Colonel  saw  prisoners  fastened  in  this  Turkoman  mann 
at  Muhammadabad.  Alikhanoff,  in  1882,  found  Persian  captives 
Merv,  who  had  been  kept  in  chains  since  i860,  with  the  hope  thatfrien 
would  ransom  them.  The  Baron  Benoist-Mechin,  on  the  other  har 
in  the  following  year,  saw  none  in  chains.  He  says,  however,  til 
affirmed  that  in  the  previous  year  a  thousand  slaves  were  chained  eve 
evening,  and  that  there  remained  20,000  slaves  throughout  the  oasis, 


I 


MER V  AS  A NNEXED.  483 

suddenly  surprised  in  1884  with  the  information  that 
the  Tekkes  of  Merv  had  spontaneously  given  them- 
selves up  to  be  subjects  of  the  Tsar  ! 

The  Russian  Official  Messenger,  February  2nd  (14th), 
published  the  following  telegram,  addressed  to  the 
Emperor  by  General  Komaroff,  chief  of  the  Trans- 
Caspian  region,  dated  31st  January  (O.S.)  : — 

"  I  am  happy  to  inform  your  Majesty  that  an  assembly  held  this  day  at 
Askhabad,  of  the  Khans  of  the  four  Turkoman  tribes  of  Merv,  each  one 
of  them  representing  2,000  tents,  declared  themselves  unconditionally 
subjects  of  your  Majesty,  confirming  the  same  upon  solemn  oath  taken 
on  behalf  of  their  own  selves,  and  on  behalf  of  all  the  people  of  Merv. 
This  decision,  according  to  the  statement  of  the  Khans  and  delegates, 
was  arrived  at  by  the  Turkomans  of  Merv,  because  they  were  assured 
of  their  incapability  of  governing  themselves,  and  were  convinced  that 
3''our  Majesty's  powerful  government  could  alone  establish  and  main- 
tain" order  in  Merv,  and  ensure  its  prosperity." 

So  much  for  the  telegram.     The  Moscow  Gazette  of 
February  27th  (March  loth)  thus  explains  the  circum- 
\  stances  of  the  submission  : — 

•      "  Captain  Alikhanoff,  charged  with  a  communication  to  the  elders  of 

'  Merv  from  the  officer  commanding  in  the  Trans-Caspian  region,  onarriv- 

\  ng  at  Merv,   estabhshed  himself  in  the  tent  of  Yusuf  Khan.     Yusuf 

j'  ^an  (aged  17)  is  the  younger  brother  of  Makhdum  Kuli  Khan,  who 

ought  with  Tykma  Sardar  in  defence  of  Geok  Tepe.      The  meeting  at 

vhich  it  was  resolved  to  offer  the  allegiance  of  the  Mervis  to  Russia  was 

leld  in  the  dwelling  of  Yusuf  Khan's  mother, 

"The  population  of  Merv  consists  of  two  tribes,  sub-divided  into  four 

ranches.     The  Khans  of  these  four  branches  joined  in  the  deputation. 

^he  oasis  of  Merv  is  divided  into  24  sections  of  canals ;  each  of  these 

ections  has  2,000  tents,  and  these  sections  were  represented  on  the  depu- 

ition  by  24  elders.    The  deputation  was  thus  a  thoroughly  representative 

ne.     The  deputies,  28  in  number,  proceeded  with  Captain  Alikhanoff 

)  Kolibend,  on  the  Tejend  river,  where  a  Russian  detachment  under 

blonel  Muratofif  was  encamped.     The  petition  of  the  people  of  Merv 

)  be  included  among  the  subjects  of  his  Imperial  Majesty  was  here 

resented.     It  was  written  in  the  Tatar  dialect,  on  an  immense  sheet 

parchment  (the  size  of  a  newspaper  sheet),  and  was  signed  by  all  the 

iputies.      Accompanied  by   Colonel  Muratoff,    the    deputies    [were] 

arched  to  Askhabad,  reaching  the  Russian  head-quarters  on  the  25th 


i 


484  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

Januaty  (o.s.)    They  presented  a  fine  spectacle  in  their  gorgeously  bro- 
caded robes. 

"The  oath  of  allegiance  was  administered  to  them  on  the  31st 
of  January  (o.s.)  All  the  superior  officers  in  the  Trans-Caspian  region 
were  assembled  at  the  residence  of  the  chief  commanding  officer.  .  . 
A  Tekke  Mullah  from  Geok  Tepe  came  upon  the  scene  with  the  Koran, 
when  the  24  {sic)  Turkoman  deputies  ceremoniously  entered  the  hall. 
General  Komaroff  greeted  them,  and  addressed  the  Turkomans,  who 
were  offering  their  allegiance,  in  glowing  terms.  The  oath  was  adminis- 
tered to  the  Khans  according  to  law,  the  deed  was  drawn  up,  and  the 
signatures  were  appended.  All  the  documents  referring  to  the  annexa- 
tion of  Merv  have  been  brought  to  St.  Petersburg." 

According  to  information  subsequently  furnished 
by  the  English  and  Indian  newspapers,*  the  course 
of  events  is  represented  somewhat  as  follows :  In 
November,  1883,  the  Persians  on  the  border,  suffering 
from  the  raids  of  the  Mervis  (some  put  it  vice  vei'soi) 
asked  help  of  the  Governor,  Komaroff,  who  sent  troops 
to  intimidate  the  Mervis,  but  with  orders  to  stop  short 
of  Merv  by  100  miles,  whilst  Alikhanoff,  with  a  small 
guard,  went  on  to  Merv,  with  a  letter  to  one  of  the 
Khans.  Alikhanoff  is  said  then  to  have  recommended 
the  submission  of  the  alarmed  Mervis,  naming  as  terms 
that  they  should  renounce  slavery  in  future,  liberate 
their  slaves,  and  give  up  their  Persian  booty.  To  this 
they  are  said  to  have  agreed,  and  to  have  liberated, 
among  others,  'i^']  Russian  subjects.  Further,  a  number 
of  representatives  accompanied  Alikhanoff  on  his  return 
journey,  and  gave  in  their  submission. 

Some  weeks  afterwards,  according  to  Indian  news. 
and    before     the     representatives     had     returned,    < 
Turkoman  who  had  been   at  Merv   says  that  certair 
Khans,  Baba  and  Kajjar,  did  not  acquiesce  in  the  sub  J 
mission,  and  that  when  the  Russians  again  approachec  \ 

*  See  Jtmes  for  loth  March,  3rd  April,  and  12th  May,  1884  ;   Stan 
dard,  8th  March  ;  Moniiiig  Post,  24th  April  ;  and  Pwjieer  Mail,  \\ 
May,  1884.  X^ 


MER V  AS  A NNEXED.  485 

(to  take  possession  ?)  they  halted,  as  before,  at  a  dis- 
tance, and  induced  the  two  malcontents  to  appear. 
To  Baba  Khan  they  gave  a  khalat  and  600  tomans 
(^275),  and  offered  the  like  to  Kajjar  Khan,  who 
would  not  accept,  but  summoned  his  tribe,  and,  in  a 
skirmish  with  the  Russians,  lost  three  or  four  men 
before  they  were  dispersed,  when  further  opposition 
was  seen  to  be  useless. 

These  accounts  have  given  rise  to  the  suspicion  that 
Alikhanoff  summoned  the  chiefs,  and  by  mendaciously 
representing  the  Tajand  force  to  be  the  advanced 
guard  of  a  great  army,  induced  them  to  proceed  to 
Askhabad  and  submit  ;  or,  in  milder  words,  that  the 
elders  of  Merv  were  coerced,  cajoled,  and  menaced  into 
submission  rather  than  that  the  people  of  Merv  made  a 
voluntary  offer  of  allegiance  to  Russia — that  the  thing 
in  fact  was  planned  by  the   Russian  authorities. 

I  cannot  deny  there  are  some  grounds  for  this 
suspicion,  and,  in  the  absence  of  fuller  information, 
it  is  a  weak  point  in  Russia's  armour  that  we  are  not 
told  the  contents  of  the  letter  that  Alikhanoff  carried. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  against  Russia 
does  not  appear  to  me  conclusive.  If  any  other  testi- 
mony has  been  given  that  Alikhanoff  coerced,  deceived, 
cajoled,  or  menaced — it  has  escaped  me.  It  has  been 
said  that  from  the  fact  that  no  niaslakhat  or  niedjliss 
was  convened  at  Merv,  it  may  be  denied  that  the 
elders  thereof  acted  in  a  representative  capacity. 
But  is  this  inference  quite  safe  ?  Because,  in  the 
scanty  information  that  has  reached  us,  we  are  not  told 
of  a  meeting  having  been  convened,  are  we  justified  in 
assuming  that  none  was  held  '^.  or,  supposing  that  no 
meeting  were  held,  and  in  the  face  of  Colonel  Stewart's 
information  that   ''  these  families  have   each   a  person 


486  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

called  a  Khetkhoda,  who  acts  for  the  family  in  matters 
of  policy,"  are  we  justified  in  taking  for  granted  that 
the  24  elders  and  4  Khans  were  not  acting  in  a 
representative  capacity  ? 

I  suspend  my  judgment,  however,  on  another  ground, 
inasmuch  as  it  seems  to  me  that  the  submission  of  the 
Mervis  was  precisely  what  might  have  been  expected. 
Coming  events  had  been  casting  numerous  shadows 
before  them.  I  have  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  that, 
ever  since  the  reign  of  Peter  the  Great,  certain  clans  or 
families  of  Turkomans  have  from  time  to  time  seen  iff 
to  be  to  their  advantage  to  place  themselves  under 
Russian  authority.  Internal  dissensions  caused  the 
Kirghese  to  do  the  same,  till  one  horde  after  another 
was  absorbed.  So  with  the  Turkomans,  amongst 
whom  all  writers  agree  in  saying  there  was  neither  law 
nor  order,  and  consequently  no  security  for  right  against 
might.  Before  Russia  conquered  Khiva,  the  Mervis 
were,  to  a  certain  extent,  under  the  Khan  ;  and  they 
evidently  tried  to  cling  to  Khiva  to  the  last. 

In  one  of  my  interviews  with   the  Khan,  his  High- 
ness asked  me  to  whom  Herat  belonged. 

I  replied,  "To  Afghanistan." 

Then  he  asked  whether  Merv  belonged  to  Russia  or 
to  England. 

I  said  that  it  belonged  to  neither,  but  was  supposed 
to  be  independent. 

"Once,"  he  said,  "it  was  independent,  but  the 
Khivans  took  it  60  years  ago,"  and  it  was  only  on  the 
coming  of  the  Russians  that  their  allegiance  had  been 
disturbed,  but  that  lately  the  Mervis  had  sent  to  him 
wishing  to  pay  taxes,  and  he  had  sent  a  man  to  receiv^ 
them.  Accordingly  he  argued  that  Merv  belonged 
him,    and    as    he    belonged     to    Russia,   Merv    mu* 


AIERV  AS  ANNEXED.  487 

belong  to  Russia  too.  This  was  a  logical  sequence, 
from  which  there  was  no  escaping,  and,  therefore,  I 
laughingly  replied  that  if  his  Majesty  had  no  objection 
I  had  none. 

A  few  days  later  we  met  an  intelligent  native,  who 
confirmed,  in  a  measure,  the  foregoing  by  saying  that 
two  years  previously  (1880)  a  hundred  men  from  Merv 
came  to  the  Khan  asking  him  to  rule  them.  The 
Khan  received  them,  and  gave  them  presents,  and, 
like  a  good  vassal,  sent  them  on  to  the  Russian 
authorities  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  by  whom  they  were 
also  well  received.  The  deputation  then,  returning  to 
Khiva,  showed  their  true  character  by  robbing  the  Sart 
inhabitants  and  making  off  In  the  following  year 
they  deputed  others  to  ask  pardon ;  and  before  this  the 
Khan  had  sent  a  representative,  but  up  to  the  time  of 
our  conversation  the  Mervis  had  paid  no  taxes. 

This  was  at  the  beginning  of  November,  1882,  and 
I  now  learn  from  the  paper  of  the  Baron  Benoist- 
Mechin,  that  at  the  beginning  of  May — ^just  six  months 
afterwards — another  embassy  came  from  Merv  under 
Kara-Kul-Khan,  chief  of  the  Begs.  This  chief,  says 
the  Baron,  had  heard  of  the  intended  coming  of  General 
Chernaieff  to  Khiva,  and  had  set  out  to  meet  him.  He 
wished  to  obtain  from  him  a  delegated  Khivan  to 
govern  the  turbulent  Tekkes.  The  envoy  was  ap- 
pointed, and  the  two  Frenchmen  travelled  with  him 
to  Merv.     And  what  was  his  reception  ? 

The  Baron  says  :  "Kara-Kul-Khan  was,  at  the  time 
of  our  stay  at  Merv,  the  strongest  and  most  renowned 
chief  in  the  country.  He  had  acquired  great  notoriety 
by  his  forays  and  his  expeditions  before  becoming  a 
political  chief  His  raids  were  celebrated  in  all  the 
steppe,    and  even    Khiva  had   seen   him    beneath   her 


488  J^USSIAN   CENTRAL  ASIA. 

walls.  In  spite  of  the  popularity  he  enjoyed,  however, 
he  was  far  from  obtaining  from  his  people  absolute 
obedience  ;  and  when  Kara-Kul-Khan  wished  to  instal 
their  newly-imported  governor  from  Khiva,  he  saw  well 
that  this  fresh  attempt  at  government  would  quickly 
share  the  fate  of  others.  Discouraged,  and  In  despair, 
he  came  to  tell  us  he  saw  well  that  nothing 
but  Russian  bayonets  would  bring  such  a  turbulent 
population  to  reason,  and  went  so  far  as  to  speak  ok 
his  countrymen  as  robbers  and  brigands. 

"  This  conversation,  among  others  we  had  with  him 
and  with  other  Turkomans,  witnessed  to  so  great  a 
laxity  in  the  existing  state  of  things,  and  to  such  a 
lack  of  any  government  whatever,  that,  after  our 
arrival,  in  the  month  of  July,  we  did  not  hesitate  to 
wTlte  to  General  Chernaieff,  It  seemed  to  us  that  the 
Merv  oasis  would  submit  without  fighting  at  no  distant 
date."  Within  six  months  It  had  come  to  pass,  and 
the  Baron  adds,  ''  The  event,  happening  more  quickly 
than  we  supposed,  has  shown  us  to  be  right." 

In  face,  then,  of  these  considerations,  I  see  no  need 
for  Russian  coercion  or  duplicity;  nor  do  I  see  much 
to  be  surprised  at  if,  in  marching  to  take  possession, 
the  troops  were  attacked.* 

It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  there  were  no  dis- 
sentients In  Merv.  At  the  taking  of  Tashkend,  one 
party  promised  to  open  the  gates  to  the  invaders,  but 
another  party  opposed  them.     Even  in  the  little  town 

*  Private  information  from  an  officer  who  was  present  has  reached 
me  (but  at  second  or  third  hand),  that  the  Russians  approached  Merv 
with  about  600  troops,  and  that  every  night  the  Turkomans  hovered 
round  and  harassed  them  to  such  a  degree  that  the  soldiers,  wearied 
with  being  kept  so  on  the  alert,  began  to  talk  of  going  back.  But  one 
night  the  Turkomans  did  attack  the  Russians,  who  fired  a  volley  and 
emptied  50  saddles,  after  which  the  Turkomans  troubled  no  more  ! 


I 


MERV  AS  ANNEXED.  489 

of  Hazret  the  inhabitants  shut  their  gates  against 
their  own  returning  warriors,  and  in  favour  of  the 
invaders.  So,  again,  I  was  told  by  one  native  that  had 
the  Emir  died  during  his  recent  illness,  the  Bokhariots 
were  ready  to  welcome  the  Russians  ;  but  on  speaking 
to  another  native,  he  said,  "  No,  they  should  fight." 
And  thus  it  may  very  well  have  been  at  Merv,  though 
I  offer  this  only  as  a  suggested  corroboration  of  the 
newspaper  accounts,  together  with  certain  considera- 
tions that  have  not  been  made  public  so  fully  before. 
Whether  my  suggestions  are  right,  time  perhaps  will 
show."* 

Meanwhile  the  Russians  are  beyond  Merv,  and  a 
question  of  interest  is — What  next  ?  Will  Russia 
conquer  India  ?  There  are  in  England  some  wise 
heads  who  think  she  will  attempt  it,  and  their 
opinions  are  not  to  be  lightly  treated.  W^hen  look- 
ng  at  the  question  from  the  Upper  Oxus,  and  the 
possibility  of  an  invasion  of  Afghanistan  from  Samar- 
kand, the  undertaking  presented  itself  to  my  mind  as 
attended  with  colossal  difficulties,  suggested  in  part 
by  my  own  little  experience  in  crossing  the  desert. 
But  if  the  approach  be  from  the  Caspian,  these  diffi- 
:ulties  vanish  now  that  the  Russians  are  masters  of 
Merv,  and  the  country  between  it  and  Herat  carefully 
surveyed.  There  is  already  a  railway  from  the  Caspian 
to  Kizil  Arvat,  and  there  is  no  reason  of  a  physical 
nature  why  it  should  not  be  continued  on  shortest 
notice    to    Sarakhs.      M.    Lessar    says    there    is    no 

As  a  final  note  M.  Lessar  adds: — "I  have  made   remarks  about 

:ain  facts,  and  in  no  wise  touched  upon  the  poHtical  side  of  the 

question.      I  think  it,  however,   indispensable  to  say  that  with  many 

:hings  in  the  four  chapters   (Ixxiii.-lxxvi.)   I  disagree,  especially  with 

regard  to  the  occupation  of  Merv. 

{Signed)   "  P.  LESSAR, 

"  loth  March,  1885." 


490  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

serious  ascent  along  the  whole  of  the  route  he  surveyed 
Indeed,  all  the  way  from  Askhabad  to  Sarakhs  there  are 
only  some  seven  miles  of  road  "  where,  in  constructing 
the  railway,  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  use  of  the 
shovel,"  and  then  only  because  of  a  few  sand  hillocks, 
which  occur  midway  between  Annau  and  Gavars. 

The  distance  from  the  Caspian  to  Kizil  Arvat  is 
144  miles,  and  the  railway  cost,  M.  Marvin  says, 
^648,000.  From  Kizil  Arvat  to  Askhabad  is  135 
miles  more,  and  from  thence  to  Sarakhs,  according  tc 
M.  Lessar,  an  additional  186  miles,  beyond  which  it 
is  only  200  miles  of  easy  country  to  Herat.  Th 
cost  of  continuing  the  line  to  Sarakhs,  M.  Marvin 
estimates  at  about  a  million  and  a  quarter  of  money, 
and  nearly  another  million  to  Herat;  in  all,  ^2,192,000. 
In  other  words,  the  length  of  the  extension  to  Sarakhs 
would  be  the  distance  from  London  to  Penzance,  and 
its  cost  not  so  much,  I  presume,  as  was  required  for 
making  the  line  from  London  to  Brighton. 

The   railway,   however,  is   needed   for  nothing  but 
strategical   purposes,    and  need  not   be   considered  at 
present    if    Russia    is    content    to    remain    at    Mer\" 
There  she  has  abundant  scope  for  what  she  consider 
her  mission  of  civilization.     Nor  is  this  a  mere  emptx 
expression.     After  seeing  Bokhara  and   Khiva  under 
Asiatic  rulers,  and  Tashkend  and   Samarkand   under 
Europeans,    I    should  be  false   to  my  convictions  if  I 
withheld  my  opinion  that  the  natives  have  been  gainer 
by  Russian  conquest.     Hence,  now  that  Merv  is  an 
nexed,  if  there  are  any  who  would  rather  see  it  reven 
to  its  old  condition  of  lawlessness,  slavery,  and  blood,  1 
confess  I  am  not  one  of  the  number  ;  but  what  may  b 
the  bearing  of  this  upon  political  questions,  I  leave  to 
others  more  competent  to  decide. 


CHAPTER   LXXVII. 

FROM  KRA SNO  VQDSK  HOMEWARDS. 

Descent  into  Krasnovodsk. — Hospitality  of  the  Commandant. — Dis- 
missal of  native  attendants. — Our  rate  of  travel  and  itinerary. — 
Mertvy  Kultuk  and  Kizil  Arvat  routes. — Visit  to  Merv  abandoned. 
— The  town  of  Krasnovodsk,  and  its  scanty  supplies. — ^Visit  to  a 
Turkoman  oba. —  Turkoman  women  and  jewellery. — Armenian 
trading. — Passage  across  the  Caspian. — Baku  and  its  oil. — From 
Baku  to  Tiflis  in  a  horse-box. — Bible  distribution  from  Tiflis. — 
Scenery  at  Batoum. — Voyage  to  Odessa. — Summary  of  journey, 
and  farewell. 


KRASNOVODSK  was  In  a  measure  familiar  to 
me  by  name,  from  its  frequent  recurrence  in 
Frans-Caspian  affairs,  and  I  had  expected  to  find  it  of 
irban  proportions.  The  part  we  looked  down  upon, 
lowever,  on  the  memorable  morning  of  the  22nd 
Xovember,  reminded  me  rather  of  an  English  coast- 
guard station,  with  a  miniature  pier  alongside.  But  in 
ruth  we  viewed  it  from  a  considerable  height,  for 
Krasnovodsk  lies  on  an  arid  flat  below  towering  rocky 
:liffs,  down  whose  precipitous  scarp  we  were  to  crawl 
)y  a  sinuous  path,  somewhat  similar  to  that  by  which 
[  descended  into  the  Yo- Semite  valley.  The  camels 
A'ould  have  to  be  led  slowly,  and  as  we  were  under  the 
nipression  that  the  steamer  we  could  see  at  the  pier 
\  as  to  leave  that  morning,  there  was  no  time  to  lose  ; 
>o    I    suggested    that    Sevier  should    come    with    the 


492  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

camels,  whilst  I  trotted  forward  to  act  the  postman  in 
delivering  the  Governor's  letter. 

I  think  Diotrephes  was  pleased  to  get  back  to 
human  habitations,  for,  tired  as  he  was,  he  galloped 
famously  towards  the  fort,  though  it  required  all  my 
horsemanship,  especially  as  I  had  lost  my  whip,  to 
induce  him  to  step  over  some  tram  rails  that  were 
new  to  him.  Wishing  to  give  the  poor  animal  a  drink 
of  good  water  at  the  first  moment  possible,  I  rode  into 
the  yard  behind  the  Commandant's  house ;  but  I  fear 
f  cut  a  sorry  figure,  for  my  unkempt  appearance  and 
few  words  of  Russian  elicited  only  scanty  deference 
from  the  orderly  I  addressed. 

I  made  my  way  into  the  office  of  Colonel  Chari- 
tonoff,  but  found  no  French-speaking  clerk  to  whom  1 
could  communicate  who  I  was  and  whence  I  hailed. 
nor  could  I  do  much  better  with  the  Colonel  himseli 
till  Sevier  arrived,  though  my  letters  immediately 
secured  me  hospitality.  This,  we  were  given  to 
understand,  would  have  awaited  us,  whether  we  had 
letters  or  not. 

The  camels  were  led  Into  the  yard,  and  the  patient, 
soft-eyed  creatures  knelt  for  the  last  time  to  be 
relieved  of  our  burdens,  after  which,  on  dismissing 
the  natives,  I  paid  Rosy  his  balance,  made  Nazar  a 
present  of  most  of  my  equipment  and  remaining  pro- 
visions for  desert  travel,  and  gave  him  a  letter  to 
General  Grotenhielm,  to  return  with  the  tent  and 
barrels  so  kindly  lent  us.  Afterwards,  on  telling  the 
Colonel  how  long  the  journey  had  taken  us  from 
Kunia  Urgenj  — 14  days  to  do  403  miles, — to  om 
surprise  he  said  that  caravans  following  the  sam 
route  usually  took  20  days,  and  I  have  recently  bet- 
informed  that  Dr.  Vanorden  was  25  days  on  the  roa- 


I 


FROM  KRASNOVODSK  HOMEWARDS. 


493 


from  Krasnovodsk  to  the  Khivan  border.*  The  Times 
correspondent  with  the  Afghan  Frontier  Commission 
reported  that  the  average  rate  of  marching  from 
Nushki  to  Kuhshan  (770  miles),  "  including  halts, 
was  over  15  miles  a  day,"  and  he  adds,  "This,  I 
think  you  will  admit,  is  a  very  remarkable  rate  of 
marching."  Since,  therefore,  our  average,  including 
halts,  amounted  to  about  double  this  rate  throughout, 
I  suppose  I  ought  to  have  been  more  thankful  than 
I  was  at  the  time. 

We  had  come  by  what  was,  I  suppose,  the  easiest 
road  for  us  ;  but  had  there  been  steam  communication 
with  Mertvy  Kultuk,  we  heard  of  a  road  thither  which 
was  said  to  be  fit  for  vehicles  and  to  have  pasture  for 
both  camels  and  horses.  The  Times  of  August  22  nd, 
1883,  gave  a  description  of  this  ''  New  Route  to  Central 
Asia,"  lying  between  the  Caspian  and  Kungrad,  a  dis- 
tance in  all  of  295  miles,  over  which  the  longest  portion 
destitute  of  water  does  not  exceed  30  miles.  Some 
have  talked  of  making  a  railway  in  this  direction  to 
connect  the  Caspian  with  the  Oxus.  There  is,  how- 
ever, as  usual  in  Russia,  an  awkward  difficulty  in  the 
way,  for  the  Bay  of  the  Caspian  is  so  shallow  that  large 

*  Our  itinerary  from  Khiva  to  Krasnovodsk  was  as  follows 

Versts.        ! 

Nov.  12  Sary  Kamish 
13  Kaplan  Kir 
15  Uzun  Kuyu 


Xov. 


2  Khiva 

2  Shakhavat 

2  Ambar 

3  Tashauz    . 

4  Iliali 
5 — 8  Kunia  Urgenj  60 

10  Karategin  wells  of  40 
10  Mashrek  ruins  .'  28 
10  Halting  Place    .       5 

10  Ak  Bugut  ,         .      13 

11  Jedurun  (halt)   .     14 

12  Dekche      .         .       8 


34 
50 
68 
100 
160 
200 
228 

2^6 
260 
268 


16  Kazakhli  . 

17  Kum-sebshem 

18  Seikhis  Khan 

19  Tuar . 

19  Portokup  . 

20  Demerjan 

21  Suili  . 

22  Krasnovodsk 


Versts. 
17      285 


H7 
38 
40 

54 
34 

72 
24 


432 
470 

510 

564 

598 
670 
694 

764 


764  versts  in  17  days'  travelling,  or  45  versts  (or  30  miles)  per  day. 


494  RUSSIA  A    CENTRAL  ASIA. 

vessels  cannot  approach  within  20  or  2)0  miles,  so  that 
when  General  Chernaieff  officially  opened  the  new 
route,  and  arrived  at  the  coast,  the  steamer  for  which 
he  had  telegraphed  was  not  to  be  seen,  and  he  had  to 
gain  the  open  sea  in  a  fishing  boat  before  he  found  a 
vessel  to  take  him  to  Astrakhan.*  I  have  already  spoken 
of  the  shallowness  of  the  Lower  Oxus  also,  so  that 
there  are  several  obstacles  to  be  overcome  before  water 
communication  can  be  made  extensively  available. 

We  found  that  the  smaller  steamer,  or  rather  tug 
and  barge,  had  not  ceased  plying  for  the  season  between 
Krasnovodsk  and  the  railway  terminus  at  Mikhailovsk, 
as  we  feared  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk  might  be  the  case ; 
for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  when  one  reads  of 
the  Trans-Caspian  railway  from  Krasnovodsk,  this  is  a 
figure  of  speech,  and  would-be  travellers  from  the  large 
steamers  have  to  disembark  at  this  place  and  be  taken 
across  the  bay  some  50  miles  in  a  smaller  craft,  there 
being  no  other  regular  means  of  communication. 
Hence  we  were  told  we  could  have  reached  Kizil  Arvat 
from  Khiva  in  five  days,  and  have  come  on  to  Mikhai- 
lovsk in  a  few  hours.  We  should  by  this  means  have 
peeped  into  the  Akhal  oasis,  where  I  was  informed 
there  were  at  that  time  between  Krasnovodsk  and 
Askhabad  10,000  rifies,  about  2,000  cavalry,  and  5  or  6 
batteries  of  artillery. 

Also,  we  should  have  been  within  400  miles  of  Merv, 
but  I  had  decided  not  to  go  thither,  for  I  had  alreadjfc 
exceeded  my  limit  as  to  time,  and  surveying  officer^ 
were  coming  off  the  steppe,  thereby  implying  that  the 

*  Concerning  other  parts  of  the  Caspian  shore,  Hasan  Kuli  Bay, 
where  the  Atrak  disembogues,  is  only  3  feet  deep,  and  choked  with 
reeds.  From  Tuik  Karagan  spit  to  Balkan  Bay,  however,  there  is  a 
good  depth  of  water,  the  best  anchorages  being  in  Alexander,  Kinderli, 
Balkan,  and  Michael  Bays. 


FR  OM  KRA  SNO  VODSK  HOAIE  WA  RDS.  495 

ccison  for  outdoor  work  was  over.  I  w^as  told  that  I 
riight  be  some  time  at  Kizil  Arvat  before  I  found  a 
;ultable  guide  to  take  me  a  journey  on  which  I  might 
lave  to  battle  with  the  elements  as  well  as  the  Turko- 
nans ;  and,  finally,  I  could  not  learn  that,  when  I 
*eached  Merv,  there  would  be  anything  special  for  me 
o  see  or  do,  since  I  had  no  more  books  to  distribute. 
vVhilst,  therefore,  I  was  thankful  to  have  come  thus  far, 
md  by  the  way  that  I  did,  I  determined  to  turn  my 
)ack  upon  Asia,  and  telegraphed  to  London,  for  (^d.  a 
vord,  my  return  to  civilization  thus  :  "  Arrived  through 
Bokhara  down  Oxus  and  across  Aralo-Caspian  desert 
rom  Khiva — telegraph,  if  necessary,  to  Tiflis,"  to 
vhich  place  I  had  now  to  make  my  way  as  quickly 
IS  possible. 

But  it  was  not  so  easy  to  get  across  to  Baku  at  a 
noment's  notice.  The  summer  steamers  had  ceased 
)lying,  and  the  boat  we  saw  waiting  was  to  proceed 
iiouth  to  the  Persian  coast.  We  had  time,  therefore, 
o  look  about  Krasnovodsk,  which  we  soon  voted  a 
orry  place.  In  1877,  a  correspondent  of  the  Golos 
Yfote: — ''  Krasnovodsk  has  now  grown  almost  into  a 
own,  has  become  populous,  and  very  animated"  ;  but 
f  so,  it  must  have  since  come  down  in  the  world,  for 
ny  note-book  gives  the  population  as  only  400  Persians 
i.nd  Armenians,  and  1,000  Russians,  of  whom  800  were 
nilitary. 

Besides  this,  I  think  I  never  saw  a  town  for  which 
lature  had  provided  so  scantily,  and  my  non-strategic 
nind  was  puzzled  to  know  why  the  Russians  had  built 
heir  fort  in  such  a  place,  where  the  population,  if  left 
o  their  own  resources,  must  speedily  starve.  There 
.re  no  wells  of  good  water,  and  they  have,  consequently, 
o  distil  it  from  the  Caspian  at  the  rate  of  16,000  gallons 


49b  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

a  day.  There  are  also  two  engines  at  MIkhailovsk  foi 
a  similar  purpose,  one  of  which  distils  260,000  gallons 
and  the  other  half  this  amount  per  diem,  to  be  seni 
along  the  line  to  waterless  places  in  the  desert.  More 
over,  there  was  not  a  blade  of  grass  to  be  seen.  There 
was  a  solitary  cow  tethered  before  a  bundle  of  hay,  anc 
a  few  bushes  planted  in  what  was  meant  to  be  a  public 
garden,  but  I  cannot  recall  the  sight  of  a  single  tree 
throughout  the  place. 

It  might  be  said,  in  fact,  of  Krasnovodsk  as  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  that  "  their  country  was  nourished  by  the 
king's  country!'"^  for  almost  everything  had  to  be 
brought  from  Baku,  Astrabad,  Astrakhan,  or  adjacent 
parts  of  the  Caspian.  Hence  provisions  were  dear 
They  had  no  pheasants,  as  at  Khiva  ;  beef  cost  3^.  2 
pound,  mutton  2\d.,  and  eggs  from  45-.  to  6s.  a 
hundred. 

One  thing  in  which  Krasnovodsk  seemed  to  be  rich 
was  mineral  oil  in  its  various  forms.  About  30  miles 
distant  is  the  island  of  Cheleken,  where  are  said  to  be 
3,000  springs  of  naphtha,  that  supply  the  fuel  for  the 
distilling  engines.  I  was  also  informed  of  naphtha 
works  on  the  Kizil  Arvat  line.  Large  supplies  of 
mineral  wax  have  been  discovered  on  the  north  of  the 
Little  Balkans,  for  the  carriage  of  which  a  branch 
line  has  been  constructed.  There  is  at  Krasnovodsk 
a  grotto  of  alabaster,  and  salt  obtained  from  th' 
islands  and  lakes  is  exported  for  about  6s.  a  ton. 

The  only  other  produce  of  the  place  I  remember 
hearing  of  was  fish,  caught  by  Turkomans  of  the 
Shikh  tribe,  living  by  the  sea,  a  mile  or  so  outside  the 
town.  To  visit  their  collection  of  tents  gave  us  some- 
thing to  do  on  the  second  afternoon  of  our  stay.     The 

*  Acts  xii.  20. 


FROM  KRASNOVODSK  HOMEWARDS. 


497 


Colonel  provided  us  a  native  for  Interpreter  and  guide, 
and  we  galloped  off  to  the  oba.  It  was  by  no  means 
a  large  one,  and  the  cause  was  speedily  to  be  traced 
to  the  horrible  practices  of  the  Tekkes,  who  had  made 
a  raid  upon  this  tribe  some  time  before,  and  taken 
from  them  nearly  everything  that  was  valuable.*  The 
tribe  was  said  to  number  200  tents,  of  which  there 
were  about  70  in  this  neighbourhood.  There  were 
not  many  men  at  home,  but,  introduced  by  our  guide, 
the  women  did  not  object  to  our  entering  the  tents, 
and  looking  at  what  we  pleased,   Including  their  own 


KTKHSS    AT    K KASNOVODSK. 


ewellery.  Most  of  this  latter  was  of  silver,  but  in  the 
rst  tent  we  entered  the  woman  had  a  pair  of  gold 
arrings,  for  which  she  asked  ^10.  Near  another 
2nt  was  a  large  stone  mortar  with  a  stone  pestle,  for 
eaning  corn,   they  said,  before  it  was  ground,  but   I 

*  Reminding  one  of  the  troublous  times  in  Israel,  when  "  there  was 
)  peace  to  him  that  went  out,  nor  to  him  that  came  in  .  .  ,  and 
ition  was  destroyed  of  nation,  and  city  of  city"  (2  Chron,  xv.  5,  6) — a 
ate  of  things  with  which  Jeremiah  (xlix.  29)  was  familiar  when  he 
■Ophesied,  ''Arise  ye,  go  up  to  Kedar,  and  spoil  the  men  of  the  East ; 
eir  tents  and  their  flocks  shall  they  take  away  :  they  shall  take  to 
emselves  their  curtains,  and  all  their  vessels,  and  their  camels." 

VOL.  IT.  32 


498 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


believe  for  bruising  it  also,  whilst  in  a  third  was  a 
child  amusing  himself  with  a  bird  tied  by  a  string.* 
We  managed  to  purchase  a  few  curiosities  from  these 
nomads  ;  but  the  guide,  seeing  our  bent,  said  he  would 
take  us  to  some  Turkomans  who  were  living  in  house^ 
at  Krasnovodsk.  f 

We  therefore  returned,  and  saw  something  of   the 
town.     The  most  striking  object  is  the  fortress  on  thd|. 
seashore,   a  large  rectangular  space,    enclosed   on  th^ 
three  sides  by  a  high,  well-built,  stone  wall,  and  having 


GOVERNOR  S   HOUSE   AND    STORES   AT    KRASNOVODSK. 


na 


within  It  the  Government  offices,  officers'  houses,  an 
small  barracks.  The  place  gave  one  the  idea  of  a 
depot  for  stores,  which  are  sometimes  packed  under 
the  useful  Kirghese  kibitka,  side  by  side  with  the  less 
bulky  Russian  linen  tent.  Some  of  the  boats  on  the 
shore  I  noticed  were  of  very  primitive  make,  with  flat 
bottoms,  and  simply  cut  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree. 

*  A  child's  plaything,  as  old  as  the  time  of  Job  (xli.  5),  "  Wilt 
play  with  him  as  with  a  bird  ?  "  ;  or,  as  Renan  translates  : — 
"  Joueras-tu  avec  lui  comme  avec  un  passereau  ? 
L'attacheras-tu  avec  un  fil  pour  amuser  tes  enfants  ?  ' 


FR  OAI  KRA  SNO  VODSK  HOME  WA  RDS.  4(^9 

The  Turkomans,  Persians,  and  Armenians  live  with- 
out the  fortress  in  flat-roofed,  stone  houses.  Into  some 
of  these  we  were  led  through  narrow  passages,  and 
shown  a  variety  of  massive  but  coarsely-made  jewel- 
lery, chiefly  in  the  form  of  amulets  worn  on  the  breast. 
We  had  an  opportunity  also  during  our  stay  of  seeing 
something  of  the  keenness  of  the  Armenians,  who  in 
commercial  transactions  outwit  even  the  Jews.  I 
ntimated  that  I  wished  to  sell  my  two  horses,  where- 
upon some  Armenians  came  to  offer  me  for  them  50^". 
each.  I  deferred  the  immediate  acceptance  of  the 
offer,  thinking  I  might  have  further  need  of  them, 
whereupon  the  fellows  came  on  the  morning  of  the 
day  I  was  leaving  to  say  that  they  could  give  now^ 
only  40i".  each  ;  but  rather  than  be  taken  advantage  of 
thus,  and  remembering  that  I  might  need  them  in 
Baku,  I  determined  to  take  them  across  the  Caspian. 
Rosy  and  Nazar  called  the  day  after  our  arrival,  to 
say  that  they  had  secured  some  freight  for  a  homeward 
passage,  and  nominally  to  bid  us  good-bye,  but  hinting 
also  that  a  little  more  sugar,  etc.,  would  be  acceptable. 
On  giving  it,  I  enjoined  upon  Nazar  to  take  care  of 
the  letter  to  the  Governor,  upon  which  he  swore,  in 
i Oriental  fashion,  pointing  to  his  head,*  and  set  off  to 
irecross  the  desert. 

We  started  on  the  evening  of  the  24th.  I  brought 
imy  baggage  and  steeds  on  board  the  Kumo,  bound 
ifor  Baku,  and  it  seemed  to  savour  somewhat  of  home 
when  I  found  that  the  boat  was  built  in  London,  and 
had  done  service  first  on  the  coast  of  Finland,  and  sub- 
sequently had  been  brought  via  Petersburg,  through 
the  canals  to  the  Volga,  and  so  into  the  Caspian.  The 
first  mate,  too,  though  a  Russian  baron,  had  been  in 

*  "  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head  "  (Matt,  v.  36). 


500  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

English  service,  and  I  was  glad  to  hear  him  speak  the 
English  tongue.  Several  engineers,  who  had  been 
engaged  in  surveying  about  Askhabad,  were  on  board, 
one  of  whom  had  met  O' Donovan.  Indeed,  I  met 
two  or  three  Russian  officers  who  knew  this  hero  of 
Merv. 

We  had  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of  the  ferry-like  boat 
tugged  from  Mikhailovsk,  full  of  cattle  and  passengers, 
and  it  was  not  until  two  in  the  morning  that  we  started. 
We  were  at  sea  all  next  day,  making  a  smooth  pas- 
sage of  190  miles,  and  landed  at  Baku  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  26th.  The  long  and  sometimes  robber- 
haunted  post-road  from  Tiflis  had  prevented  me  in 
1880  from  travelling  to  see  the  "  eternal  fires  "  of  Baku, 
and  I  was  devoutly  hoping  that  the  railway  would 
now  be  opened,  so  as  to  obviate  the  disagreeables  of 
about  400  miles'  journey  by  telega. 

We  went  to  Dominique's  Hotel  ''  Italia,"  and  found 
that  a  train  was  to  start  in  two  days,  but  that  tickets 
were  not  purchasable,  and  that  it  was  difficult  to  obtain 
a  pass.  My  way,  moreover,  was  not  made  smoother 
from  the  fact  that  some  Englishmen  who  had  preceded 
me  had  had  the  bad  taste  to  accept  a  free  passage,  and 
then  to  write  to  the  papers  complaining  of  the  slowness 
of  the  administration.  I  went,  however,  to  Baron 
Hubsch,  the  Governor,  and,  having  presented  my  cre- 
dentials, was  told  that  matters  should  be  arranged 
for  us. 

Monday  was  now  left  to  visit  the  oil-wells  at  Bala- 
khane,  and  the  monastery  of  the  fire-worshippers  at 
Surakhane.  The  latter  is  empty,  the  last  priest,  I 
heard,  having  contracted  a  habit  of  paying  less  atten- 
tion to  fire  than  to  fire-water.  As  for  the  wells, 
enough  has  been  said  elsewhere,  and  it  hardly  concerns 


FROM  KRASNOVODSK  HOMEWARDS.  501 

the  subject  of  my  book  except  perhaps  in  this  way. 
The  supply  of  oil  in  this  region  is  said  to  be  practically 
inexhaustible,  and  should  there  be  a  demand  for  it  in 
Persia  and  India,  and  its  export  sufficiently  developed, 
it  would  give  a  commercial,  instead  of  a  strategic, 
motive  for  extending  the  railway  to  Sarakhs. 

On  Tuesday  we  arrived  at  the  Baku  station,  as 
directed,  at  noon,  with  rather  more  than  a  quarter  of 
a  ton  of  luggage,  in  19  parcels,  but  we  did  not  start 
till  half-past  six ;  and  as  we  were  packed  in  a  third-class 
carriage,  with  a  crowd  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  of 
men,  women,  and  children,  some  of  whom  smoked, 
and  others  snored,  I  cannot  pretend  that  I  slept  well 
the  first  night.  Better  by  far  to  have  been  in  my  tent 
in  the  wilderness !  Improvements  awaited  me,  how- 
ever, next  morning,  for  among  the  passengers  to  whom 
I  had  been  introduced  was  M.  Immanuel  Nobel,  a 
son  of  the  ''  oil  king  "  in  these  parts,  and  his  local 
influence  had  secured  for  him  the  luxury  of  a  horse- 
box !  This  he  invited  me  to  share,  so  that  we  were 
now  in  clover,  having  in  common  our  provisions  and 
tea-pot. 

The  time  expended  on  the  350  miles  was  nearly  as 
long  as  it  took  me  to  cross  America,  because  we 
sometimes  had  to  halt  for  an  engine  that  had  met  with 
an  accident,  or  for  a  ballast  train  to  be  unloaded  ;  but 
with  all  this  the  journey  was  not  longer,  and  was  more 
comfortable,  not  to  add  more  economical,  than  if  we  had 
travelled  by  post.  I  was  very  thankful,  therefore,  for 
the  convenience  when  on  the  Saturday  morning  early 
we  were  awakened  with  the  intelligence  that  we  had 
arrived  at  Tiflis. 

Here  I  made  my  way  to  the  depot  of  the  British 
and   Foreign  Bible  Society,  where  a  letter  had  been 


502  RUSSIAAr  CE ANTRAL  ASIA. 

received  only  the  night  before  from  the  Government 
authorities  respecting  a  request  I  made  to  the  Grand 
Duke  Michael  in  1880  to  be  allowed  to  place  New 
Testaments  in  the  prisons  and  hospitals  of  the  Cau- 
casus, so  that  every  prisoner  and  hospital  patient  might 
have  at  hand  a  copy  in  his  own  language.  His  Impe- 
rial Highness  had  granted  my  request  at  once,  and 
12  months  afterwards  information  had  been  sent  me 
in  England  that,  to  carry  out  the  scheme,  1,910  copies 
would  be  needed  in  the  Russ,  Polish,  Armenian, 
Grusinian,  Tatar,  Turkish,  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Persian, 
Greek,  German,  Italian  and  French  languages.  The 
Committee  had  kindly  made  the  grant,  and  the  letter 
just  arrived  was  to  indicate  where  the  books  would  be 
placed,  and  to  whom  they  should  be  sent.  All,  there- 
fore, seemed  to  be  proceeding  correctly,  though  not 
very  rapidly,  and  there  was  nothing  for  me  to  do  in 
the  matter  but  to  wish  the  local  agent  God-speed  in 
his  work,  and  get  forward  to  the  Euxine. 

I  had  telegraphed  from  Baku  that  my  money  should 
be  sent  from  Tashkend  to  Tiflis,  and  this,  after  some 
little  difficulty,  I  managed  to  get  on  the  Saturday. 
Speaking  of  money,  I  may  add  that  I  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Herr  Bayern,  a  naturalist  and  anti- 
quarian, who  had  a  magnificent  collection  of  coins, 
and  who,  when  I  showed  him  my  few,  congratulated 
me  on  having  secured  some  from  Central  Asia,  both 
rare  and  valuable,  but  I  have  not  yet  had  time  to  get 
them  properly  determined. 

We  left  Tiflis  on  December  4th,  and,  arriving  that 
night  at  Poti,  opened  our  umbrellas  for  the  first  time 
since  the  previous  17th  of  August.  The  weather, 
however,  was  now  broken,  and  on  going  next  day  to 
Batoum  we  had  to  wait  there  because  of  storms  in  the 


k 


FROM  KRASXOVODSK  HOMEWARDS.  503 

north  of  the  Black  Sea,  before  we  could  start  for 
Odessa.  Our  delay,  however,  was  much  brightened 
by  the  kindness  and  attention  of  Mr.  Peacock,  in 
havino-  obtained  whose  services  as  Vice-Consul  Her 
Majesty's  Government  may  think  themselves  fortunate. 
He  knows  the  Caucasus  thoroughly,  and  speaks  I 
dare  not  say  how  many  of  its  tongues.  Oddly  enough, 
I  had  met  his  brother  at  Krasnoiarsk,  in  Siberia,  and 
my  portrait  had  already  preceded  me  to  the  Consulate, 
as  one  of  a  party  returned  from  a  Siberian  gold 
mine. 

We  had  a  fine  view  from  Batoum  of  the  North 
Caucasian  chain  of  mountains,  snow-capped  all  along, 
with  the  two  peaks  of  Mount  Elburz  standing  above 
the  rest ;  and  when,  after  leaving  Batoum,  we  came 
opposite  Sukum,  I  was  specially  interested  in  the  view, 
because  I  am  fortunate  enough  to  possess  an  oil- 
painting  by  the  celebrated  Russian  sea  painter, 
Aivazovsky,  "  Off  Sukum  Kali,"  that  was  given  me 
by  the  artist  when  he  made  his  ddbitt  in  London,  in 
1881. 

Our  steamer  was  the  Puschkin,  the  finest  for  its  size 
I  have  ever  travelled  in.  The  captain  had  been 
ordered,  however,  by  telegram,  to  call  at  all  the  ports 
round  the  eastern  coast,  so  that  our  progress  was  not 
rapid,  though  it  gave  us  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
something  of  Kertch  and  Sevastopol,  which  latter  I 
had  visited  before.  At  length,  on  the  morning  of  the 
15th,  we  arrived  at  Odessa.  Here  I  bade  farewell  to 
Mr.  Sevier,  to  whose  patience,  perseverance,  and 
efficiency  not  a  little  of  my  success  was  due.  He  was 
to  go  to  Moscow,  whilst  I,  that  night,  thanks  to  help 
received  at  our  Consulate,  entered  the  train  for 
London,   and   arrived  on   December  21st. 


'^'^lS'W':!;,if;2:!|ifK   .fl 


FROM  KRASNOVODSK  HOMEWARDS.  505 

Thus  ended  my  journey  of  12,000  miles,  during 
which  I  was  absent  from  England  179  days,  and 
slept  in  my  clothes  half  the  nights.  I  was  some- 
what exhausted  by  the  desert  journey,  but  not  so 
much  as  I  have  been  by  writing  this  book,  which 
has  far  exceeded  the  limits  I  anticipated.  I  com- 
menced it  with  the  thought  that,  having  acquired 
information  possessed  by  no  other  Englishman  living, 
it  was  in  a  measure  incumbent  on  me  to  offer  it  to 
the  public.  That  duty  I  have  attempted  to  fulfil,  and 
now  I  leave  the  results  in  higher  hands.  As  my 
going  to  Siberia  was  followed  by  that  of  other 
labourers  in  the  same  field,  so  it  has  been  already  in 
Central  Asia ;  and  if  the  publication  of  my  books 
shall,  by  throwing  light  upon  little-known  parts  of  the 
world,  tend  in  any  way  to  their  further  evangelization 
and  conquest  for  Christ,  I  shall  deem  that  my  labour 
and  expenditure  of  time  in  writing  are  justified.  I 
have  then  only  to  thank  the  reader  who  has  had 
patience  to  follow  me  to  the  end,  and  to  bid  him  a 
kind  farewell  ! 


APPENDIX     A. 


THE    FAUNA    OF   RUSSIAN    TURKISTAN. 

I    AM  conscious  of  acting  somewhat  rashly  in  attemptin 
to  put  together  the  information  I  have  gathered  respec 
ing  the  fauna  and   flora  of  Russian  Central  Asia,  because 
know    that   to   do  it   properly  requires  a  larger  amount  ( 
scientific   knowledge  than  I  possess.      My  case,   however, 
this.      Before    I    had   quite   decided    whether    to    make    tl" 
present  work   a  chatty  book  of  travel,  or  to   attempt  som«  i 
thing  more  solid,  I  went  to  the  British  Museum  to  ask  whj  i 
information  they  possessed  of  the  zoology  of  Turkistan.     . 
pile  of  Fedchenko's  books  was  shown  me,  said   to  be  full  < 
valuable  information,  but  lost  to  the  major  part  of  the  sciei 
rific  world,  because  written  in  Russian.      That  the  books  we 
beautifully  illustrated  only  made  the  matter  more  tantalizing 
but  as  the   names  of  the  species,  and   in   some  cases  the 
descriptions,  were  in  Latin,  I  began  to  examine  them. 

Just  about  this  time  I  chanced  to  meet  Mr.  W.  H.  Crom 
who  has  translated  several  articles  from  the  Russian  f 
periodical  literature,  and  who  kindly  volunteered  to  help  rr 
At  first  I  thought  to  avail  myself  of  his  services  only  to  t' 
extent  of  one  or  two  introductions  in  Fedchenko's  work,  whic 
when  put  into  English,  promised  to  furnish  general  data  f 
embodiment  in  my  text.  The  translation,  however,  sped 
well,  that  ere  long  the  majority  of  the  introductions  were  doi 
when  it  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  be  of  service  to  a(  .| 
them,  with  their  accompanying  lists  of  species,  as  appendic 

On  consulting  Professor  Newton,  of  Cambridge,  Dr.Gianth 


APPENDIX  A.— PREFACE  TO   THE  FAUNA.        507 

jf  the  British  Museum,  Dr.  Sclater,  of  the  Zoological  Society, 
Air.  Dresser,  F.Z.S.,  Mr.  MacLachlan,  F.R.S.,  and  other 
naturalists,  they  all  commended  the  idea,  and,  what  was 
'setter,  several  volunteered  assistance.  Thus  encouraged  by 
:heir  sympathy,  and  further  helped  by  Mr.  Cromie,  the  work 
aas  continued,  and  other  naturalists  communicated  with. 
The  result  is  that  I  am  able  to  place  before  the  reader  in  a 
larrow  compass  a  certain  amount  of  information  upon  the 
auna  and  flora  of  the  country  I  travelled  through,  which 
nay  perhaps  be  of  some  little  use,  until  better  is  forthcoming, 
have  also  been  careful  to  indicate,  when  possible,  where 
nore  and  fuller  information  may  be  found. 

Until  within  the  last  thirty  years,  it  will  be  remembered, 
lurkistan  was  all  but  unknown  to  science,  and  autoptic 
\  riters  upon  its  fauna  and  flora  even  now  may  be  counted 
)n  one's  fingers.  Among  zoological  writers  we  have 
^rjevalsky,  Severtsoff,  Fedchenko,  Alpheraky,  Finsch, 
3shanin,  and  Bogdanoff ;   and  we  will  speak  of  these  first. 

If  we  approach  the  country,  as  the  Russians  entered  it,  from 
he  north-east,  then  of  the  latest  naturalists  we  have  Dr.  Otto 
Insch,  who  journeyed  up  the  Irtish,  and  continued  southwards 
o  Ala-Kul.  Although  his  book  is  not  strictly  zoological, 
le  touches  a  good  deal  upon  the  forms  of  animal  life  he 
net  with,  and  I  have  embodied  much  of  his  information, 
vhen  it  concerns  my  own  route. 

Proceeding  south  to  the  Kuldja  district,  and  the  surround- 
\\g  mountains,  we  have  Colonel  Prjevalsky's  "  Journey  from 
vuldja  to  Lob-Nor,"  wherein  occur  several  items  of  zoological 
nformation,  but  they  are  not  tabulated.  In  the  case  of 
>r.  Alpheraky  we  are  more  fortunate.  This  gentleman 
)enetrated  to  the  Yuldus  plateau  to  study  the  Lepidoptera  of 
he  region,  and  captured  12,000  specimens.  He  has  been 
;ood  enough  to  send  me  in  manuscript  his  list  of  377  species, 
•  hich  is  given  furthur-on.* 

Proceeding  westwards,  we  come  to  the  regions  travelled 
>y  a   famous   naturalist,   M.  N.  A.  Severtsoff,   who,   in  1867, 

*  For  a  list  of  Vertebrata  observed  by  him,  as  well  as  further  remarks  upon  his 
epidoptera,  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  247. 


5o8  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

explored  the  Thian  Shan  as  far  as  the  sources  of  the  Narii ! 
and  afterwards  published  his  "  Vertical  and  Horizontal  Distr 
bution  of  Turkistan  Animals."  The  portions  relating  to  th 
Mammals  and  Birds  were  translated,  the  former  into  Englis 
in  the  Annals  and  Magazine  of  Natural  History,  and  th 
latter  into  German  in  Cabanis'  Journal  fiir  OrnitJiologi 
Mr.  Dresser  also  published  some  notes  on  Severtsoff's  bird 
in  the  Ibis.  In  October  and  November,  1877,  and  from  Jul 
to  September,  1S78,  Severtsoff  investigated  on  the  spot  tb  1 
zoology  of  the  Pamir  and  the  Alai.  An  account  is  give: 
in  the  Ibis  of  his  "  Birds  of  the  Pamir  Range,"  the  species  c 
which  are  added  to  the  list  given  hereafter.  He  likewise  put 
lished,  at  Tashkend,  two  papers  in  Russian  on  "  New  Specie 
of  Turkistan  Birds,"  and  "  Characteristics  of  the  Vertebrat 
Fauna  of  the  Pamir  "  in  the  Notes  of  tJie  Turkistan  Section  0 
the  Imperial  Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  History^  Afitkn 
pology,  and  EtJinography.  I  sent  to  this  eminent  naturali.'^ 
my  proof-sheets  which  bear  his  name  in  this  appendi> 
but,  before  receiving  his  reply,  news  reached  me  from  Russia 
that  in  February  last  he  lost  his  life  through  the  breaking  c 
the  ice  when  crossing  the  Don. 

There  remain  to  be  mentioned  three  names  of  zoologicc 
writers.  First,  that  of  M.  B.  Oshanin,  who  showed  me  hi 
fine  collection  of  Hemiptera,  and  who  has  published 
paper  of  64  pages  on  the  Hemipterous  fauna  of  Turkistai 
also  in  the  Notes  of  the  Imperial  Society  of  Friends  c 
Natural  Historyy  etc.,  at  Tashkend.  Then  follows  that  c 
M.  N.  Bogdanoff,  whose  *'  Account  of  the  Fauna  and  Flor 
of  the  Khivan  Oasis  and  the  Kizil-Kum  Desert  "  had  bee 
published  in  Russian  at  Tashkend  a  month  or  two  before  m 
arrival.  I  am  indebted  to  this  author  for  my  informatic 
concerning  the  Scaphirhynchus.* 

I  have  reserved,  however,  to  the  last  the  greatest  authc 
on  the  fauna  of  Turkistan,  namely.  Professor  A.  P.  Fedchenk< 
who  was  sent  to  Turkistan  as  chief  of  a  scientific  expeditio 
by  the  Imperial  Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  Histor 
A  Jit /tropology,  and  Ethnography,   of   Moscow.      This   socict 

*  .5V.?  Vol.  ii.,  p.  243. 


APPENDIX  A.— PREFACE  TO   THE  FAUNA.        509 

drew  up  "Instructions  for  the  Expedition,"  the  preface  to 
which  sets  forth  the  origin  of  the  work,  by  whom  to  be  done,  at 
what  cost,  and  on  what  points  various  societies  and  speciaHsts 
offered  suggestions  or  asked  information.  There  were  also 
enumerated  lists  of  such  fauna  and  flora  as  were  known  to 
exist  in  the  region,  with  catalogues  of  books  pertaining 
:hereto,  as  well  as  those  on  its  geology  and  ethnography. 

Fedchenko's  travels  extended  at  intervals  from  1868  to 
I  87  I.  In  his  first  journey  he  and  Madame  Olga  Fedchenko 
irrived  at  Samarkand,  in  January,  1869,  and  by  April  had 
:ollected  7,800  zoological  specimens  of  1,700  different 
;pecies.  His  explorations  were  on  that  occasion  confined, 
or  the  most  part,  to  the  Zarafshan  valley,  whence,  in  the 
ollowing  October,  he  returned  to  Moscow. 

In   the  spring  of  1870  he  started  again,  accompanied  by 

vladame    Olga    Fedchenko,    and  joined  the  military   scien- 

ific  expedition  to  the  upper  waters  of  the  Zarafshan,  and  to 

.ake  Iskander-Kul.    Returning  in  September  to  Samarkand, 

e  commenced  winter  work,  and   in  October  completed  his 

oUection   of  fishes,  his  great   prize  being  a  specimen   of  the 

^capJiiiTiyiicJms.     In  the  spring  of  1871  he  made  a  tour  into 

le   Kizil-Kum    desert,  and  then  prepared   for  his    greatest 

)urney,  through  the  khanate   of  Khokand,  where  he  passed 

long  the  Alai  range,  taking  a  general  survey  of  the  countr}- 

aversed,  and   making    an    entomological    collection,    whilst 

ladame   Fedchenko  devoted  herself  to  gathering  botanical 

3ecimens.       He  then  returned  to  Moscow,  having  collected 

uring   his  travels   more  than    57,000   specimens,  including 

lore  than    5,000  species  of   animals.      His  routes    are  well 

idicated  on  a  map   in    Petermann's  MittJieilnngen  for  1874, 

id   among  the  early  fruits  of  these   journeys  appeared,  in 

le  Tiirkistan  Annual  iox  I  873,  his  "Remarks  on  the  Fauna 

id  Flora  of  the  Zarafshan  Valley." 

Among  the  vertebrates  he  collected  was  a  species  of 
ountain  sheep  {Ovis  vignei,  Blyth),  not  previously  found  in 
urkistan. 

In  the  steppe,  between  Samarkand  and  Katte-Kurgan, 
;  found  a  fine  specimen  of  Eryx  jacnlus,  David,   a  serpent, 


5ro  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

described  by  Lichtenstein  under  the  name  of  Boa  tartarica 
Almost  all  the  serpents  found  by  Fedchenko  were  non-veno 
mous,  except  a  species  the  natives  call  ''Chagyri-gilianl'  o 
the  family  of  Pit-vipers  {Trigonocephalus  halys),  from  tht 
neighbourhood  of  Kasalinsk,  and  the  common  adder  of  Europ( 
(  Vipera  bems),  which  he  found  only  once,  near  Tashkend 
Of  Lizards  he  found  in  the  mountains  of  Shahr-i-sab 
Stellio  Lehmanni,  Strauch  {ii.s})^  Ahlepharus  Brandtii,  Strauch 
observed  previously  by  Lehmann  during  his  short  excursioi 
to  Western  Asia.  J.  J.  Skorniakoff  found  another  lizan 
in  the  mountains  south  of  Samarkand,  which  is  extremel' 
interesting  and  little  known.  It  seems  to  be  Euprepis  prin 
ceps,  found  in  the  Trans-Caucasus,  and  described  by  Eichwak 

The  fishes  of  the  Zarafshan  are  especially  noticeable.  1 
appears  that  of  fifteen  species  found  therein,  not  less  than  fivi 
and  those  among  the  most  frequently  recurring,  belong  to  th 
genera  ScJiizotJiorax  and  Oreiims^  which  are  met  with  i 
numbers  in  Kabul,  Kashmir,  Nepaul,  and  in  the  rivers  of  th 
Himalayas.  To  the  genus  SchizotJiorax  also  belongs  th 
^^MafHnka,''  remarkable  for  its  poisonous  eggs. 

Among  the  invertebrates  were  found  many  more  ne 
forms,  constituting  50  per  cent,  in  some  of  the  groups  < 
insects.  Judging  by  comparison  with  known  species,  thai 
appears  in  Fedchenko's  collection  a  predominance  of  tl 
forms,  with  certain  deviations,  of  Southern  Europe,  As 
Minor,  and  parts  of  Africa. 

Among  the  remarkable  representatives  of  Coleoptera  rtic 
be  mentioned  the  beetle  Copris  tnimdus,  the  largest  specimc 
of  which  is  an  inch  and  three  quarters  long. 

Sawflies  are  not  numerous  in  the  Zarafshan  valley  ;  b 
some  of  them  are  interesting  because  of  their  extreme  lik 
ness  to  the  European  species,  though,  compared  with  tl 
typical  forms,  they  are  different  in  colouring.  One  form 
particularly  remarkable.  With  a  normal  male,  related 
the  group  Selandriidce,  is  a  female  without  traces  of  wint 
Affected  by  this  absence  of  wings,  the  thorax  undergo 
important  changes,  and  appears  greatly  swollen,  and  all  t 
females  generally  have  the  appearance  of    little    bags. 


A  PFENDIX  A  .—PRE FA  CE   TO   THE  FA  UNA .         511 

relation  to  this  family  is  astounding,  as  this  is  the  only  known 
example  of  the  wingless  form  in  the  whole  family  of  saw- 
•lies.  /\11  the  other  specialities  of  structure,  however,  as  well 
as  the  wings  of  the  male,  confirm  it. 

Among  the  Orthoptera  must  be  mentioned  two  Locusts 
PacJiyptiius  uiigratorins  and  P.  cinerascens),  and  another  called 
'\Prus''  {Calopteiius  italicus).  Ravages  of  the  locust  are  com- 
plained of  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Perovsk,  and  of  the  Pries 
in  the  Zarafshan  valley,  where  the  latter  is  known  to  the  Tajiks 
under  the  name  oVMalaga,''  and  to  the  Uzbegs  as  "  Chaicrtke!' 

Of  Arachniria,  a  class  very  rich  in  representatives,  the 
Tarantidce  (Lycosa  singoriensis,  Lackm.)  are  remarkable  from 
the  fact  that  in  different  places  in  the  valley  Fedchenko 
found  forms,  which  in  Europe  are  met  with  in  countries  far 
apart  from  each  other,  and  have  been  reckoned  as  different 
species.  The  most  widely-distributed  form  is  that  with  the 
lower  part  of  the  abdomen  quite  black  ;  next  comes  the 
form  with  coloured  edges,  and  finally  that  with  the  lower 
part  almost  entirely  orange. 

The  Scorpions  are  identical  with  those  met  with  in  Trans- 
Caucasia  [Ayidroctonus  caucasicus,  Nordm.).  Galeodidae  are 
represented  by  two  very  well-defined  species  {Solpuga 
araneoides,  Pall.,  and  vS.  hitrepida,  Duf).  The  distribution  of 
the  latter  is  remarkable.  First  found  in  Spain,  it  was  seen 
later  by  Wagner  on  the  Indersk  mountains,  on  the  Urals, 
and  afterwards  by  Fedchenko  in  the  Zarafshan  valley, 
besides  which,  specimens  of  this  Harvestman  are  found  in 
the  collection  of  insects  sent  by  General  Kolpakovsky  from 
Vierny.  The  animal  is  reckoned  poisonous,  and  its  bite  has 
m  certain  cases  been  followed  by  death,  although  nothing 
is  yet  known  of  its  poison  apparatus. 

The  Karakurt  {Latrodectes  lugubris)  does  not  live  in  the 
/>arafshan  valley,  and  is  known  only  in  a  few  localities  of 
Semirechia.  There  is  also  a  form  of  Myriopoda  reckoned 
t'enomous,  viz.,  a  Scolopendra,  constituting  a  new  species. 

Among  the  invertebrate  animals  subjected  to  special 
nvestigation    were    the    rislitd^   and    the   silk-worm.     With 

*  For  some  account  of  his  investigations  on  the  rishta,  see  Vol.  ii.,  p.  148. 


512  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

respect  to  the  disease  of  the  latter,  Fedchenko  showed  the 
presence  therein  of  small  particles  called  after  their  discoverer 
Coi'ualia,  causing  a  disease  termed  pcbrine.  These  particles 
were  found  by  him  in  the  ^%gs>,  larvae,  and  moths  brought 
from  Samarkand.  The  rishta,  or  guinea-worm  {Filaria 
mediuensis),  is  found  in  other  places:  in  Egypt,  Arabia,  and 
India;   but  in  Central  Asia  it  occurs  much  farther  north. 

Fedchenko's  investigations  showed  that  the  germs  with 
which  the  whole  body  of  a  rishta  (taken  out  of  a  man)  is 
filled,  having  fallen  into  water,  enter  into  small  crustaceans  of 
the  genus  Cyclops,  live  in  them  a  long  time  (more  than  a 
month),  lose  their  colour,  change  their  external  form,  and 
begin  the  development  of  sexual  organs.  The  cyclops  ma) 
easily  be  imbibed  in  drinking  water,  as  it  is  very  small 
and  colourless,  and  the  further  progress  of  the  parasite  is 
clear  ;  the  sexual  organs  of  the  rishtas  are  developed  in 
the  intestinal  canal  ;  the  females,  after  fecundation  by  the 
males,  make  their  way  to  the  sub-dermal  tissues,  where  they 
attain  final  development,  i.e.^  become  filled  with  living  germs, 
and  at  the  same  time  grow  to  about  3  J  feet  in  length.  All 
th  is  proces  of  passage  and  growth  occupies  about  twelve 
months  ;  so  that  the  rishta  onl}^  manifests  itself  in  the  body 
of  a  man  in  the  following  year. 

These  remarks  from  the  Tnrkistan  Annual  are  interesting 
as  written  by  Fedchenko  himself,  but  they  are,  of  course, 
the  merest  drops  of  what  he  intended  to  be  a  coming  shower.* 
When  he  returned  to  Russia  with  his  immense  collections 
he  summoned  to  his  aid  several  specialists,  to  whom  respec- 
tively he  committed  his  specimens  for  description  under  his 
own  editorship. 

The  desire  of  the  Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  History 
appears  to  have  been  that  in  each  section  or  subject  should 
appear  not  only  Fedchenko's  collections,  but  every  specie? 
known   in  Turkistan,  with  a  short  and  pithy  description  ol 

*  Madame  Fedchenko  has  been  good  enough  to  send  me  a  list  of  her  lati 
husband's  papers  and  other  publications,  34  in  number,  and  most  of  them  ii 
Russian.  Many  appeared  in  the  Turkistatt  Gazette  for  1870-71  ;  refereucc 
will  be  found  to  others  in  Mejofs  "Bibliography,"  and  to  translations  in  tht 
bibliography  attached  to  this  work. 


APPENDIX  A.— PREFACE  TO   THE  FAUNA.        513 

each,  comparisons  also  being  made  with  the  fauna  of  neigh- 
bouring countries.  It  was  further  made  a  prime  matter  that 
everything  as  far  as  possible  should  be  described  in  Russian 
(new  species,  however,  in  Latin),  the  Society  having  in  view 
the  publication  of  a  work  that  might  serve  every  inquiring 
Russian  as  a  handbook  and  foster  a  taste  for  the  study  of 
Natural  History. 

This  work,  so  well  conceived,   extensively    planned,    and 

energetically  begun,  was,  alas  !  like  so  many  things  in  Russia, 

never  successfully  completed.     The  zealous  and  indefatigable 

Fedchenko,    of   whom    all    speak    so    highly,    lost    his    life 

in    1873,    on    the    Col    du   Geant,    Mont    Blanc;     and    the 

chief  of  the    enterprise   being   thus    taken    away,   the   work 

has    languished.       As    it    now    stands,   various    sections    of 

Fedchenko's    "  PiUeshestvie    v     Turkesta?i"    or    "  Travels    in 

Turkistan,"  have  appeared  as  follows  :  A  Journey  to  Khokand, 

3y  A.  P.  Fedchenko  ;  Flora  of  Turkistan,  I.,  Primnlaceae  et 

Liliaceae,    by   Regel  ;    Astragalus    et    Oxytropis,  by  Bunge  ; 

Descriptiones  plantarum  novarum,  by  Regel  ;  Mammals,  Birds, 

R.eptiles,    and  Fishes,*    by    Severtsoff;    Fishes,    by    Kessler  ; 

Mollnsca,  by  von  Martenst;  Crustacea,  by  Ulianint;  Araneae, 

)y   Kronebergt ;    Coleoptera,    Parts    I.    and    II.,   by    Solsky  ; 

Fellifera,  I.  and  II.,  by  Morawitz;  Sphegidae,  Mutillidae,  and 

^Iirysidiformes,  by  Radoszkovskyt ;   Scoliidae  and  Orthoptera, 

y  De  Saussuret ;    Formicidae,  by  Mayrt  ;   Lepidoptera,   by 

>schofft;  Neuroptera,  by  MacLachlant  {Odonata  by  Brauert) ; 

nd    Vermes,    by   Krabbet;  whilst    as   an    appendix   to    the 

Travels  "    is   published  an  album    of  fourteen   lithographed 

iews  of  Russian  Turkistan  by  Madame  Fedchenko. 

I    accordingly   have    given    Mr.   Cromie's    translations    of 
le  various    introductions,    omitting    here    and    there    local 

*  ephemeral  matter,  and  have  added  the  lists  of  species, 
om  which  I  trust  that  naturalists  will  be  able  to  gather 
»me  idea  of  the  Turkistan  fauna  as  a  whole;  whilst  those 

*  This  included  Fedchenko's  materials,  but  is  entitled  "  Vertical  and  Horizontal 
^tribution  of  Turkistan  Animals." 

Authors,  marked  thus,  have  kindly  revised  proof-sheets  of  their  respective 
cles  as  given  hereafter,  and  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  Madame  Fedchenko,  who 
1 .  looked  through  almost  the  whole  of  the  appendices  on  Fauna  and  Flora. 
VOL.11.  33 


514 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


who  desire  it  may  obtain  further  information  from  the 
originals.  My  own  remarks  hereinafter  are  enclosed  in 
brackets  and  signed  [//.  Z.]. 

VERTICAL    AND    HORIZONTAL   DISTRIBUTION    OF 
TURKISTAN   ANIMALS. 

By  N.  A.  SEVERTSOFF. 
Edited  by  A.  P.  Fedchenko  and  L.  P.  Sabanaeff. 

Explanation  : —  ' 

Vertical  distribution  : — 

Plains  {i). — From  600' to  1,000'  above   the   sea,   comprising   sa  " 

plains. 
Downs  {2). — From  3,000'  to  4,000',  comprising  cultivated  distric" 

and  grassy  steppes. 
Hills  (3). — From  4,soo'  to  8,000'  or  an  average  of  6,000',  comprisir 

larch  woods,  apple  and  ash  groves. 
Mountains  (4). — From    8,500'    to   10,500',  comprising  juniper,  fi 

and  birch  districts. 
Peaks  (5). — From  district  of  Alpine  grasses  up  to  the  snow-line. 

Horizontal  distribution  : — 

N.E.  (I.) — Semirechia  :  comprising  the  districts  of  Kopal,  Vierny,  Issi 

Kul,  the  rivers  Ak-sai  and  Upper  Narin. 
S.E.  (II.) — Semirechia  south  of  Issik-Kul,  about  Son-Kul  and  Chat 

Kul;  the  rivers  Susamir,  Jumgal,  and  Lower  Narin,  flowing  sou 

from   the   Alexandrovski    mountains,  with    others    flowing    norl 

namely,  the  Chu  and  Talas. 
N,W.  (III.) — The  West  Thian  Shan  about  Tashkend,  comprising  t 

Upper  Aris,  Chirchik,  and  Keles  ;    the  Kara-Tau  mountains,  a 

the  Lower  Syr-daria  to  Lake  Aral. 
S.W.  (IV.) — The  Zarafshan  Valley,  Steppe  between  the  Syr-daria  a 

the  Kizil-Kum  Desert,  and  district  about  Khojend. 


s  signifies 

sedens,         or  settled. 

R 

signifies  rare. 

t 

transvolans 

,  passing. 

C 

,,          common. 

e 

erraticus 

,  migratory. 

n 

new. 

n        ,, 

nidulans        , 

,  breeding. 

s 

,,         species. 

a        „ 

aestivus 

,  summer. 

h        „ 

hyemalis 

,  winter. 

[I  have  inserted  the  letters  and  words  at  the  heads  of  columns 
conveying  more   to   the   eye  than   the   figures   in  the  original. 
English  names  of    Severtsoff's  Mammals,  Reptiles,  and  Fishes  h 
been  inserted  by  Dr.  Giinther. — H.  Z.] 


APPENDIX  A.— MAMMALIA. 


515 


MAMMALIA 

{Mammals) 

. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

T. 

2.      . 

"J'-- 

5- 

Mammalia.*                                Mamvials. 

_c 

> 

t; 

^ 

N.E 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

^ 

fi° 

w 

1 

I 

Vesperugo  turcomanus  [spor.]  Tttrcoinan  Bat 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

,,         serotinus                   Serotine     do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

,,         blythi.  Wagn.  Indian  Pipistrelle 

s.C. 

S.C. 

S.C. 

S.C. 

s 

, ,         akokomuli,  Temm.           ? 

s.C. 

s 

Plecotus  auritus  .         .         Long-eared  Bat 

S.R. 

s 

s 

,,        leucoph^us,  U.S.                 ? 

s.R. 

s 

s 

Rhinolophus  euryale  ?  [spor.]  Horseshoe  Bat 

s 

s 

s 

3orex  pulchellus   )                              c/....,„.„ 
„     leucodon     /    '         *         '        ^^'''"' 

s.R. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Erinaceus  auritus   .      Long-eared  Hedgehog 

s 

S 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Ursus  leuconyx  (U.  isabellinus  ?  Horsf.) 

White-clawed  Bear 

s 

S 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

Vieles  taxus,  Gulo  borealis  (?)  .         Badger 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

"oetorius  putorius,  var.  eversmanni. 

Eversniann's  Polecat 

s.C. 

S.C. 

s.C. 

s 

s 

„          alpinus,  Gebl.     Siberian  Weasel 

s 

s 

,,          ermineus  .          .Stoat  ox  Ermine 

S.C. 

s.c.;s.c. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

,,          gale,  Pall  .           Coimnon  Weasel 

s 

s 

vlustela  foina  .         .         .     Beech  Marten 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h?s? 

s 

s 

,,        intermedia,  n.      .         .           ^ 

s 

s 

s? 

s 

s 

,,        martes         .         .       Pine  Marten 

s 

s? 

s? 

s 

s 

^.utra  vulgaris            .         .    Common  Otter 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

'anis  lupus      ....            Wolf 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s?s? 

„      alpinus   .         .    Northern  Wild  Dog 

s 

s 

s 

s 

,,      familiaris          ....    Do. 

S.C. 

s.C. 

S.C. 

S.C. 

s 

s 

s 

a 

a 

„      vulpes     .         .         .      Common  Fox 

S.C.  1  S.C. 

s.C. 

s.C. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

„      melanotis         .         .Black-eared   do. 

S    i     s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

„      corsak     ....         Cor  sac 

s    :    s 

s 

s 

elis  tigris        ....           Tiger\    s    1    s 

s 

S 

s 

s 

S.R. 

a 

a 

,,     irbis         .         .          .     Snow  Leopard 

„    jubata      ....      Cheetah' 

,,     lynx  (cum  var.  cervaria)    .          Lj'nx]    s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

„     manul      ....        Manul\    s 

s 

,,     servalina           ...             ?       j 

s 

s 

s 

„     catus  domesticus       .       Domestic  Cat\    s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

rctomys  baibacinus,  Brndt.     .           Bobac 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

„     caudatus  .         .     Long-tailed  Marmot 

s 

? 

s 

s 

s 

s 

oermophilus  fulvus          .         .        Souslik 

s 

s 

s 

„         leptodactylus  Slender-toed     do. 

s 

s 

s 

„        brevicauda,  Brdt.     \  Short-tailed 

(mugosaricus  ?  Licht. )  )          [Souslik 

r     9                                                                                                          p 

s 

s 

s 

s 

rvicola  arvalis 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

„        leucura       .         .      Common  Vole 

' 

„       gregalis       .         .                   ? 

! 

us  wagneri    .          .         .          .         ? 

S.C.  s.C.  s.C.  1 

s.C. 

s 

s 

major  (M.  Tokmak?  n.s.)  Aryan  Mouse 

s 

\ 

s 

,,        decumanus           .         .         ? 

s 

s 

icetus  songarus      .         .         .     Hamster 

s 

s        s 

s 

s 

„       Eversmanni,  Brndt.      .          Do. 

S      ' 

s 

See  also  Vol.  i.,  p.  160. 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 


Mammalia. 


Mamjuals. 


47- 

48. 
49- 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 

57- 
58. 

59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 
66. 

67. 
68. 

69. 

70. 

71- 

72. 

73- 
74- 
75- 
76. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 


Cricetus  accedula  (sec.  Eversm.  )  Mouse-like 
ecoll.  Karel.)  \   \Ha771ster 

Meriones  tamaricinus        .         .  .? 

,,         meridianus         .         .  .? 

,,         opimus       ...  ? 

,,         Collium,  n.s.      .         .  ? 

Dipus  jaculus  ....         Jerboa 
,,      acontion          .         .         .  Do. 

,,      sagitta,  var.  /3  telum        .  Do. 

,,      lagopus  ....  Do. 

,,      platyurus         .         .         .  Do. 

EUobius  talpinus  rufesc.  Lesser  Mole-mouse 
Hystrix  hirsutirostris,  Brndt. 

Hairy-nosed  Porcupine 
Lagomys  rutilus,  n.s.        .        Ruddy  Pika 
Lepiis  Le/wianni,  n.s.         Lehniann's  Hare 
Camelus  bactrianus  .         .         .         Camel 
,,        dromas        .         .  Dromedary 

(3  hybridus 


Antilope  subgutturosa       .   Persian  Gaze/le 
,,         saiga  .         .    Saigia  Antilope 

Ovis  Karelini.  n.      .         .  Wild  Sheep 

„  Polii,  Blyth*  .  .  .  Do. 
,,  Heinsii,  «...  .  .  Do. 
„  nigrimontana.  n.  .  .  Do. 
,,  aries  steatopyga  .  .  Do. 
Musimon  Vignei,  Blyth     .         .  ? 

Capra  sibirica  .         .         .      Siberian  Ibex 
,,      aegagrus  domesticus  (hircus)  . 

„      s.l Goat\ 

Bos  taurus         .         .         .       Common  Ox\ 

,,    indicus       ....  Zebu^ 

,,    grunniens  (domesticus)  f     .         .    Yak\ 

Cervus  maj-al  (C.  canadensis,  var.  ?)  Wapiti 

,,       capreoluspygargus  Siberian  Roebuck 

„       s.?        .....? 


Equus  caballus 
,,       hemionusj 
,,       asinus     . 

Sus  scrofa  aper 


Horse 
Kiang 

.    Ass 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

c 

2-« 

'■i 

N.E. 

S.E. 

NW. 

S.W. 

s 

Q 

X 

s 

s 
s 

s 
s 
s 

s.C. 

s.C. 

S.C. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S.C. 

s 
s 
s 
s 

s 
s 
s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s.C. 

S.C. 

1 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 
s 

s 
s 
s 

s 
s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S.R. 

s.? 

h 

h 

h 

h 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

^ 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

^ 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S.C. 

S.R. 

S.R. 

s 

s 

s.C. 

s 

s 

s 

h 

s 

s 

h 

s 

s 

s.R. 

S.R. 

s.C. 

s.C. 

s 

s 

S.C. 

s.C. 

s.C. 

s 

s 

s 

For  illustration  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  245.      f  For  illustration  see  Vol.  ii.,  p. 
X  For  description  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  150. 


(43- 


APPENDIX  A.— A  VES. 


5^7 


AVES   {Birds). 

Abbreviations  : — vie.  =  victitat ;  spor.  =  sporadice  ;  reg.  =regio. 
'he  English  equivalents  and  the  Pamir  column  have  been  given  by  Islx.  Henry  Dresser. — H.L.'l 


1  I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

'■« 

2-g 

3. 

'"s 

5-    , 

^ 

AvES.*                                    Birds. 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

.S 

1 

c 

1 

Gyps  ni7ncola,  n.      Himalayan  Vulture 

s 

h.n? 

\ 
n.  sr 

a.n? 

P 

„      fulvus  ;  vie.  I — 4         .  Griffon  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

a 

a 

n 

a?n? 

Vultur  cinereus  ;  vie.  i — 5.   Cinereus  do. 

n 

n 

n.h. 

n.h. 

a.h. 

a.h. 

n 

n 

a 

Otc^ps  calvus      .         .         .    Black  do. 

ea. 

ea. 

Neophron  percnopterus ;  victitat 

i 

reg.  1,2.         .         .       Egyptian  do 

n 

n 

n 

n 

a 

a 

n 

t 

Gjrpaetos  barbatus  ;  rarius  victitat 

reg.  I,  2     .         .         .         Bearded  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

e 

e 

s 

s 

s?s? 

P 

Haliaetos  albicilla          .         .  Sea  Eagle 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

t.h. 

te 

„        leueorypha,  spor.  C, 

aestate      .         .             Pallas' s  do.  do 

a 

a 

a.hR 

h.Ra 

a 

P 

Aquila  fiilva,  var.  A.  nobilis, 

Pall Golden  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

a.h. 

s 

s 

,,     ^  interm.  (ad  chrysaeton) 

Lesser    do.    do 

s 

s 

s 

a.h. 

s 

s 

„    imperialis  ;  reg.  III.,  2  ah. 

Imperial  do. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.h. 

n 

a.  ah 

n?  t 

„    bifasciata  Gray  (adult.  A. 

orientalis,  Caban. ) .         .  Steppe  do. 

n 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

t 

n 

„    clanga.  .         .        Larger  spotted  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

a.t. 

n 

„   pennata,  spor.  C.   .         .  Booted  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

„   minuta.  Brehm,  spor.  C.     Do.     do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

„       „/3albipectus,«.  spor.  C.  Do.     do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

Pandion  fluviatilis  (n.  ?)         .         Osprey 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

Dircaetos  brachydactylus  (n.  ?) 

Short-toed  Eagle 

a 

a 

a 

a 

„    /3  orientalis,  Brehm.         Do.       do. 

e?a? 

ea 

^emis  apivorus     .         .  Honey  Buzzard 

et. 

et. 

Juteo  leucurus       .         .    Long-legged  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n 

n 

P 

„       „  j3  rufinus           .          Do.         do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

„    y  nigricans     .         .          Do.         do. 

n 

n 

n 

„    vulgaris           .         .         Common  do.  \\.'^.\ 

h.R. 

h.R. 

„    lagopus  .         .          Rough-legged  do. 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

lilvusater   .         .         .          Black  Kite 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

,„    j3  melanotis,  Temm. 

(M.  govinda,  Sykes) .     BraJuimty  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

iStur  palumbarius,  ubique  R.      Goshawk 

s 

s 

s 

s 

„    nisus      .         .         .  Sparroiij  Hawk 

n?t. 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t 

(n?)t 

(n?)t 

t.R. 

,f     cenchroides  (badius?,  Gni.,  Heugl; 

var.  major) 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

t 

i'alco  sacer  (F.  laniarius,  Naum.) 

1 

Saker- Falcon 

t 

t 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t 

t.h. 

t 

1 

„    Tscherniaievi,  n.s.  .         .     Do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

t 

a(n?) 

t(n?) 

1 

,,    Hendersoni 

1 

P 

,,    peregrinus      .         .         .   Peregrine 

n?t? 

n?t? 

n?t? 

n?t? 

P 

„    aesalon           ,         .         ,        Merlin 

t 

t.h. 

h 

h 

t.h. 

h 

t 

t 

t    1 

P 

,,    „     /3  alaudarius,  Brehm.           Do. 

t 

t.h. 

t.h. 

„    subbuteo         .         .         .         Hoddy    n    | 

n 

n    j    n       n    1 

n 

n 

! 

*  For  summaiy  in  En 

glish 

seeY 

ol.  i., 

page 

415- 

5i8 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

2.  ^ 

^•.- 

4-.:  |5-. 

AvES.                                       Birds. 

_c 

% 

TZi 

i  !  "i 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

(4 

Q 

K 

1     1 

30.  Cerchneis  tinnunculus  ;  ubique 

h.  R.  reg.  2.         .         .        Kestrel 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

t 

n.h. 

n 

n    a.R 

31.     „    cenchris;  montibus  Karatau 

3.W.           .         .         .         .  Lesser  do. 

n.a. 

n 

a(n?) 

n.R. 

n.R. 

1 

32,   Erythropus  vespertinus 

1 

Orange-legged  Hobby 

t 

t 

t.ea 

33.  Circus  rufus  .         .         .  Marsh  Harrier 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

a 

34.  Strigiceps  cyaneus          .         .      Hen  do. 

n 

n 

s 

s 

s.n.h 

s.n.h 

n 

a       a 

35.      „    pallidus          .         .         .  Pallid  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

36.     ,,    cineraceus      .         .     Montagu's  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

yj.  Surnia  nisoria        .         .          Hawk  Oivl 

s 

h? 

s 

38.      „  nivea       ....  Snowy  do. 

h 

h 

39.  Athene  noctua  orientalis        .    Little  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

p 

a  (si 

40.   Syrniumaluco,spor.  fl.Tschat.  Tazvnydo. 

s?R. 

s? 

41.  Strix  flammea,  spor.;   mont. 

ad  fl.  Arys.        .         .         .    Barn  do. 

s?R. 

s? 

42.   Ephialtes  scops     .         .         .     Scops  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n?t. 

t 

n 

43.   Bubo  maximus  (var.  B.  turco- 

manus,  Eversm.)        .         .    Eagle  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

44.  Aegolius  brachyotos,  ubique  t. 

C.S.,  h.R.           .         .    Short-eared  do. 

t 

t 

t 

t.h. 

t 

t 

t 

45.     ,,   otus;  ubique  t.C;  s.h.R. 

Long-eared  do. 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t 

46.   Corvus  corax         .         .         .         Raven 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

a       a 

47.      ,,    i-«<^(r^nj!X,  «.  (C.  umbrinus?,  Riipp.) 

Brozun-necked  Raven 

S.R. 

s.R. 

s.R. 

S.R. 

48.     „    corone,  pauci,  s.      .     Carrion  Crorv 

n 

n 

n 

s 

n 

n 

n 

a       a 

49.     ,>    comix    .         .         .           Hooded  do. 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

t       t 

,,    13  hybrida       .         .         .     L>o.     do. 

h 

h 

h 

h 

h 

50.     „    monedula       .         .         .     Jackdaw 

s 

S 

s 

s 

s.C. 

s.C. 

n 

a       a 

51.     „    frugilegus ;  pauci,  s.         .            Rook 

n 

n 

n 

s 

n{hR) 

n(hR) 

52.  Fregilus    graculus  ;     reg.    2,    spor.   h. 

Chotigh 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h 

s 

s     a(n 

53.  Pyrrhocorax  alpinus       .         .  Alpine  do. 

s 

s    a(s 

54.  Pica  caudata,  var.  a  bactriana,  Gould 

Magpie 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S 

S 

n(s?) 

a       a 

,,    /3  leucoptera,  Gould  -     .         Do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S 

S 

n(s?) 

a       a 

55.  Nucifraga  caryocactates           Nutcracker 

s 

h? 

s 

56.  Podoces  Y zx\Aqx\  Pander' sg7'ound Chough 

s 

s 

57.  Stumus  roseus,  spor.  C.n.       Rose  pastor 

n 

n 

n 

n 

a 

a.n. 

n 

58.     „    vulgaris  ;  rarius  h.           .      Starling 

n 

n 

n.h. 

h 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n 

a.t.    a.t 

59.     „    unicolor  (purpurascens  ?, 

Gould),  rarius  h.       Pmple-winged  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n?s? 

n.h. 

n 

n 

a.t.    a.1 

60.  Passer  domesticus,  spor.  C. 

House  Sparrow 

s 

s 

s 

s 

ea.R 

s 

61.     „     salicarius  ;     pauci   h., 

sporadice  C.      .          .          Spanish  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n.R 

n 

62.      „    montanus,  C.           .         .       Tree  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

n(s?) 

a      a 

63.     „     ammodendri ;  n.         Severtsoff's  do. 

s 

s 

64.     ,,    petronia          .         .         .     Rock  do. 

n 

n 

n;  s? 

n 

65.     ,,    pulverulentus,  n.  (Fring. 

altaica?,  Eversm.)      .         .  Desert  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n;s? 

n 

n 

66.  Coccothraustes  speculigerus 

White-zuinged  Grosbeak 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h 

n.s. 

APPENDIX  A.—AVES. 


519 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

^■t  !  i 

4.  . 

?2 

5- 

I  .; 

AvES.                                     Birds. 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

n.h. 

s.w. 

.5 

1 
0 
P 

K 

c 

1 

.  Chlorospiza  chloris       .           Greenfinch 

h 

n 

:  Fringilla  montifringilla          Brainbling 

t 

t 

t.h. 

h 

t.h. 

t 

t 

t 

.     „     coelebs          .         .         •    Chaffi7ich 

h 

h.R. 

h.R. 

.     „     nivalis.         .         .         .  Snowfinch 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

t 

n 

P 

Fringilauda  altaica       .... 

P 

.  Leucosticte  Brandtii,  Bonap. 

Gray-crowned  Finch 

s 

s 

s 

h? 

h? 

n(s?) 

P 

„    pamirensis  n.        .         .         .         . 

P 

.  Acanthis  cannabina      .         .        Linnet 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

n 

n 

„  /3  bella,  Bonap.        .         .         .Do. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

n 

n 

P 

.     „    flavirostris    .         .         .           7wite 

h 

h 

h 

h 

„    brevirostris 

P 

,     „    linaria.         .         .     Lesser  Redpoll 

h.R. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

h 

h 

h 

.  Carduelis  onentalisBimalayan  Goldfinch 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

n 

n 

.     „    europaeus     .         .      European  do. 

n?h. 

n?h 

n?h. 

h 

n?h 

n? 

Oraegithus  pusillus,  Pall. 

h 

(<d.\gm{xon%,Y.\&c%m)Red-frontedFi7ich 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

n 

Pyrrhula  vulgaris          .         .    Bullfinch 

h.R. 

h 

„   nepalensis  (an  s.  ?)  i^r^^ww       do. 

h.R. 

h 

,  Uragus  sibiricus    (spor.) 

Siberian  Rosefinch 

h.n. 

h 

n 

Carpodacus  rubicilla,  Giild. 

(C.  caucasicus,  Pall.)      Caucasian  do. 

s 

h? 

s 

„  hodochlamySjBrdt.  Red-mantled  do. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h.R. 

s 

h.R. 

h 

n(s?) 

„  rerythrinus      .         .           Scarlet  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

P 

„  mongolicus 

P 

Erythrospiza  incarnata,  n.  .      Rose  do. 

s 

s 

h.t.R 

h.t. 

„    phoenicoptera,  Schl. 

Bonap.  ;  spor.         Scarlet-winged  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h.R. 

s 

„  obsoleta,  spor.  C.            .  Desert  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

Emberiza  cioides,  Brdt.  (an  n.  ?) 

IVhite-browed  Bunting 

t.C. 

t.C. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

t.C. 

t(n?) 

t 

,,    cia.       .         .         .         Meadow  do. 

t.C.u 

t.C.n 

h.n. 

h.n. 

h.t. 

t.C.n 

t.n. 

t 

„    hortulana      .         .         .       Ortolan 

n 

n 

n 

t.R. 

n 

n 

„    caesia  .         Cretzschmar's  Bunting 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.R. 

n 

t 

t 

„    citrinella  ;  prope  fl.  Syr- 

daria  h.  R.      .         .            Yellotu  do. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

„    caniceps        .          White- capped  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    huttoni 

P 

„    pithyornus  (an  n.  ?')      .      Pine  do. 

t.C. 

t.C. 

h 

h 

h 

t.C. 

t(n?) 

t 

P 

„    schoeniclus  .         .         .      Reed  do. 

h.t. 

h.t. 

h.t. 

h 

h 

h.t. 

t 

„      ,,    /3  minor         .... 

t.h. 

h.t. 

h.t. 

h 

h 

h.t. 

t 

„    pyrrhuloides ;  reg.  3,  Issyk- 

Kul,  an  s.?       .      Large-billed  do.  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

n 

)     , ,    miliaris          .         .         .      Corn  do. 

s.n. 

s.n. 

h 

s 

n 

)     „    pusilla  ....    Little  do. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

)  Euspiza  brunniceps      Brown-headed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n 

P 

)     „    aureola,  ad  fl.  Syr-daria 

aestate  visa       .      Y ellow-br'easted  do. 

a.R. 

a.R. 

\  'lectrophanes  nivalis     .         .  Snoiu  do. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

Urdus  merula       .         .           Blackbij-d 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

t.h. 

n.h. 

n 

,,  atrigularis      Black-throated  Thi'ush 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

h 

h.C. 

n.h. 

n 

.,  mystacinus,  n.  (Bechsteini,  ? 

Naum.)      .         .       Black-throated  do. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

h 

h 

n.h. 

n 

P 

S20 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

«5 

2.  ^ 

3. 

^•« 

5-  . 

AvES.                                       Birds. 

c 

^ 

=' 

S 

^ 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

'rt 

Q 

1 

1 

I 

104.  Turdus  ruficollis,  Pall,  (non  Radde) 

> 

ubique  R.     Red-breasted  Thrush 

t         t 

h 

t.h. 

t.h. 

1 

105.     ,,    pallens,  Pall.,  urbe  Vierny 

1 

visus Pale  do. 

t 

i 

t 

106.     ,,    viscivorus       .          .         .  Missel  do. 

n.t.  i  n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

n 

n 

107.     „    pilaris    ....    Fieldfare 

t.h.    t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

108.     ,,    iliacus,  ubique  R.  .         .     Redwing 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

109.  Myophone  Temminckii 

Yellmv-hilled  Whistling  Thrush 

n 

n 

t? 

n 

1 10.  Petrocichla  cyane           .         .     Bhie  do. 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

III.     ,,    saxatilis           .         .         .     Rock  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

a 

112.  Saxicola  oenanthe          ,         .  Wheatear 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

t 

n 

n 

113.     ,,    squalida,   j  S.    isabellina,     Riipp., 

Eversm.         (^      non  Temm. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

n 

n 

„     i3  saltator  j"                Isabelline  Chat 

Menetr.          .'                                Do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n? 

t 

114.     „    leucomela,  Pall. 

(S.  morio,  Ehrb.)      Eastern  pied  Chat 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

n 

n.t. 

n 

t 

t 

„    /3  lugens,  Licht.,  Heugl. 

(leucomela,  Temm.)  .         .      Pied  do. 

115.     ,,     monacha,   Brehm  ;    in 

rupestris      .         .         .          Hooded  do. 

n 

n 

n 

116.     ,,   talas.,  n.           ..... 

n 

n 

t 

n.t. 

n 

n 

117.     ,,   melanogcnys.  n.s.    Black-cheeked  do. 

nt. 

t(n?) 

n.t. 

t(n?) 

118.     „    syenitica,  Heugl 

ea. 

n 

ea. 

n 

n 

119.   Saxicola  salina,  Eversm 

(S.  deserti,  Riipp.)     .            Desert  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

t 

t 

t.R 

, ,    13  xanthomelaena,  Ehrb., 

Heugl.        .         .       Black-throated  do. 

n 

n 

120.  Pratincola  rubetra          .         .  Whinchat 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

n 

n 

121.     ,,     rubicola          .         .         .  Stonechat 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

n 

n 

,,    j3  indica,  Gould     .     Eastern  Chat 

n 

n. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

122.     ,,    Hemprichi,  Ehrb.; 

spor.  R.       .         .         .White-tailed do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

1 

123.  Lusciola  luscinia,  /3  Hafizi,  n. 

Persian  Nightingale 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n 

,,     y  philomela,  Pall.            Thrush  do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

j    t 

n 

1 

124.     ,,    aedon,Pall. (philomela.  Est.)  Z>^.  r/c?. 

t.n. 

t 

'    t 

n 

,,    )8  infuscata,  «.         .         .       Do.  do. 

' 

t.n. 

i    t 

n 

125.  Lusciola  suecica  Red-spotted  Blue-throat 

t.n.    t.n. 

t.n. 

t 

t 

t 

n 

a.R. 

,,    /3  orientalis,  Brehm.        .       Do.  do. 

t 

t 

126.     ,,    rubecula;  urbe  Chimkent 

Redbreast 

h.R. 

h.R. 

127.   Ruticilla  phoenicura      .         .    Redstart 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

!  t 

n    1    n 

a 

128.     „    erythroprocta,  Gould         Goulds  do. 

n 

n 

n 

I  t 

n 

-n 

,,     rufiventris 

1 

i 

129.     ,,     erythrogastra,  Giildenst. 

i 

III.hR.        .         .        Giildenstddt's  do. 

n 

n 

t.h. 

n.h. 

It.h.R 

n(h?) 

n 

a(n 

130.     ,,    txy\hxoViO\.d^.YMtx's>.  Eversviann^ s do. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

h.n? 

h.n. 

t.h. 

n(h?) 

n 

a 

,,     aurorea?,   Pall,  (e  coll. 

Karelin.)     .         .         .          Reeves''  do. 

n? 

n? 

n? 

131.     ,,    lugens,  n.        .         .  Blue-headed  do. 

1    ^ 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t 

n 

132.  Calliope  Ballionii,    n.    (C.  pectoralis?, 

! 

Gou  d)            White-tailed  Ruby  Throat 

i    n 

n 

1 

n 

•   n 

APPENDIX  A.— A  VES. 


521 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

2.  . 

in 

3. 

4-  . 

5-^. 

AvES.                                        Birds. 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

0 

= 

S 

c 

1 

1 

Ck 

Q 

s 

s 

Ah 

^ 

nia  albigula,  n.  (Bessonornis  guttura- 

is,  Guer.  ?)  White-throated  Robin  Chat 

n.t. 

n 

t 

n 

P 

Ivia  nisoria         .         Barred  Warbler 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

n 

cinerea    .         .          White-throat  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

P 

curruca  ....  Lesser  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

minuscula        .         .         .         .    ? 

P 

magnirostris,w.  Large-billed  Warbler 

n.t. 

t 

n 

P 

orphea  .         .         .        Orphean  do. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

.    mystacea,  Men.  (subalpina  ?. 

remm. )        .         .         .  Subalpine  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

;  aphornis  aralensis,Eversm.  Desert  do. 

n 

n.C. 

a.R. 

Ion  galactodes,  van  familiaris, 

I  en.           .         .           Grey-backed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

..    Dlunibeitarsus         .         .         .     ? 

oedula  superciliosa.  Cab, 

Yellow-browed  do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

n 

P 

Middendorffi,  Meves  =  Phyl- 

).scopus  viridanus     Middendorff's  do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

,    ,,     /3  hypolaina,  n.         Do.         do. 

n 

n 

n 

P 

.    „     y  intermedia,  n.       Do.         do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

a 

a-t. 

n 

n 

obscura,  n.  (Phylloscopus 

idicus,  Jerd. )     ,         .          Indian  do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

n 

a 

fulvescens,  n.  (Ph.  tristis) 

Siberian  Chiffchaff 

t.C. 

t.C. 

t.C. 

tc. 

t 

t 

licaria  turdoides;  spor. 

Thrushlike  Warbler 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

arundinacea?          .         .     Reed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.R. 

brro'ipoinis,  n.  (Hypolais 

nligata,  Licht.).         .           Booted  do. 

n 

t 

n 

capistrata,  n.  (Acrocephalus 

L^ricola,  Jerd.)    .         .    Paddyfield  do. 

n 

n 

icaria  palustris  (?)     .         .Marsh  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

P 

maa-onyx,  n.s.         .         .    Do.     do. 

n 

n 

curhyncha,  n.s.  (Acrocephalus 

iinetorum,  Blyth)       Blyth' s  Reed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

.    sphtnura,  n.s.  (Acrocephalus 

ametorum,  Blyth)     .         .    Do.     do. 

n 

a.R. 

n 

n 

P 

gracilis,  n.   (Acrocephalus 

: 

P 

-ricola,  Jerd.)  .         .    Paddyfield  do. 

^     i 

n 

obsoleta,  n.      .         .    Pale-booted  do. 

n    1 

n 

pallida,  Ehrenb.,  Eversm. 

1 

Hypolais  cahgata,  Licht.)    Booted  do. 

n    j    n 

t 

n 

n 

P 

iamariceti,  n.s.  (H.  pallida, 

■ill'-)  •         .         .         .    Olivaceous  do. 

n 

n 

.    viodesta,  n.  (A.  agricola. 

ferd.)          .         .         .     Paddyfield  do. 

n    1 

n 

ioucolor,  n.s.  (A.  dumetorum. 

■lyth)         .         .          Blyth' s  Reed  do. 

n 

n 

.    scita,  Eversm.  (Iduna  salicaria, 

Kays.,  non  Pall.)  H.  caligata,  Lich. 

Booted  do. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

n 

.l\z.ftisca,n.s.    .         .            Cettfs  do. 

n       n 

n 

n 

albiventris,  n.          .         .     Do.    do. 

n    i 

t 

n 

scalenura,  n.  .         .         .     Do.    do. 

t.n. 

1 

t.n. 

522 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


I, 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

2.^. 

3- 

"1 

5. 

AvES.                                     Birds. 

c 

^ 

,2 

.u 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

S.W. 

A, 

Q 

K 

1 

I 

164.  Calamoherpe  phragmitis  Sedge  Warbler 

n.t. 

n 

t 

165.  Acridiornis  locustella      Grasshopper  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

166.     ,,    lanceolata  (?),  Degl.  Gerbe, 

Lanceolated  do. 

n?t. 

n?t. 

t 

n? 

n? 

„    straminea,  n.s 

167.  Accentor  atrogularis,  Brdt. 

Black-throated  Accentor 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

h 

h(n?) 

n 

168.      „  fiilvescens,  n.           .          Tawny  do. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h.R. 

h 

n 

a(n 

169.     „    altaicus,  Brdl.         .       Brandt's  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

170.     „    montanellus    .         .     Mountain  do. 

n 

n 

n 

171.  Regulus  flavicapillus      .         Goldencrest 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

t.h. 

n 

172.  Parus  bocharensis,  Licht. 

Bokhariot  Titmouse 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S.R. 

173.     „    major     ....    Great  do. 

s 

174.     , ,  Jlavipectus,  n.       Yellow-breasted  do. 

n.R? 

n? 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h.R. 

n(s?) 

175-     >>    cyanus   ....  Azure  do. 

s 

h 

s 

176.     ,,    rufipectus  (ater,  var.  asiatica?). 

Eastern  Coal  do. 

s 

h 

n.h. 

177.     „    melanolophus,  Gould 

Rufous-bellied  Crested  do. 

s 

s.h. 

n(s?) 

178.     ,,    songarus,  n 

s 

h 

n.h. 

1 79.  Panurusbarbatus,spor.C.-5<far^6?^^^^fl7m^ 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

180.  Leptopoecile  Sophiae,  n.        .         .         . 

s 

h 

n 

181.  Aegithalus  pendulinus  ;  reg. 

2  n  R,  h  R.         .   Penduline  Titmoztse 

n 

s 

s 

n.h. 

n 

182.     ,,    atricapillus,  n 

n 

t?n? 

n 

n 

183.     „    rutilaJis,  n 

s 

s 

h 

184.      „    macronyXy  n.           .         .         .         . 

s 

s? 

h 

185.     ,,    coronatus,  n. 

s?n. 

n 

186.  Cinclus  asiaticus,  Gould  ;  spor.  C. 

Asiatic  Dipper 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s.h. 

n.Ch 

Ra 

187.     „    leucogaster     .         White-bellied  do. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

a 

188.  Troglodytes  nepalensis    Nepalese  Wren 

s 

s 

s 

n(s?) 

h 

n? 

n 

189.     ,,    europaeus?     .         .     European  do. 

s 

h 

n? 

190.  Sitta  syriaca,  regione  2  spor. 

h.  praeruptis      .         Syrian  Nuthatch 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h 

n.s. 

191.  Tichodromaphoenicoptera  Wall  Creeper 

s 

s 

s 

s 

h.R. 

h 

n.s. 

n 

J  92.  Certhia  fami  iaris  .         .         .     Tree  do. 

s 

e.h. 

h.R. 

s.h. 

n 

193.     „    taeniura,  n.  .         .         .      Do.  do. 

s 

s 

h.R. 

s.h. 

n 

194.  Motacilla  alba       .         .  White  Wagtail 

t 

t 

t 

h 

t 

t 

, ,    |3  dukhunensis,  Gould  Blcukfaceddo. 

n 

t 

t 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

t 

[3 

195.     ,,    personata,  Gould  ;  III.,  IV., 

- 

h  R.,  reg.  2         .         .         .       Pied  do. 

n 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.hC 

n.R. 

n.C.    n   1 

,,    (3  maderaspatensis,  Gould     Do.  do. 

n 

n 

n.R. 

n 

„    personata,  y  melanota           Do.  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

196.     „    sulphurea;  Ill.h.  R.  reg.2   Grey  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

e.t. 

t 

n 

n 

\Qn.  Budytes  flava.        .         .           Yellow  do. 

t.C. 

tc. 

t.C. 

t.nR 

t.C. 

t.C. 

„     /3  cinereocapilla        Grey-headed  do. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t 

t 

198.     „    melanocephala 

Black-headed  Yellow  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n? 

199.     „     Rayi,  var.  flavifrons           Ray's  do. 

t.R. 

t.nR 

t 

« 

200.     „     citreola  .                Yellow-headed  do. 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t 

% 

„    |3  var.  melanota  (Bud.  citreo- 

fl 

loides,  Gould)  Black-backed  Yellow  do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

n 

n 

1 

APPENDIX  A.—AV^S. 


523 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

2.  . 

3. 

''i 

^•1 

AvES.                                     Birds. 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 
n 

s.w. 

s 

PL, 

t.n. 

n 

I 

i 

Anthus  campestris          .      Tawny  Pipit 

n 

n 

„     ^  orientalis,  Brehm.         Do.        do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„     y  brachycentrus,  Heugl.  Do.        do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„     arboreus      /  A.  trivialis,      Tree  do. 

t.nR 

t.nR 

t.nR 

t.n. 

t.R. 

t.C. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

„    /3  pratensisj"  Linn,  t.C.  Meadotvdo. 

t 

t 

t 

t.h. 

t 

t 

„    microrhynchus,  Sw. 

„    cervinus,  var.  rufogularis 

Red-throated  do. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

„     aquaticus         .         .           Water  do 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h(n?) 

h.R. 

h.C. 

n 

„     contelli 

Otocoris  alpestris          .          Shore  Lark 

h.R. 

h.R. 

„     albigula .         .         .        Eastern  do. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

•n.h. 

n.h. 

h 

h 

h.n. !    n 

n 

„     Elivesi 

Alauda  arvensis;  n.R.,  h.R.        Skylark 

t.C. 

t.C. 

t.C. 

t 

t 

t 

t.n. 

t.n. 

t 

„    inconspicua,  n.  (A.  can- 

tareila?,   Bonap.)        .         .           Do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    cristata  .         .         .       Crested  Lark 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

n 

Calandrella  brachydactyla  Short-toed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n.t. 

„    j3  tenuirostris          .             Do.      do. 

n 

n 

„    pispoletta,  Caban.  nee 

Pall Fa/tai  do. 

n 

n 

„    leucophaea,  n. ;  paucae  s. 

Desert  do. 

n.s. 

n.s. 

Melanocorypha  calandra,  h.R. 

Calandra  do. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

h.R. 

n.C. 

„    bimaculata,  Men.            Eastern  do. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n.C. 

„    )3  minor           .         .         .       Do.  do. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n.C. 

„    leucoptera       .        White-winged  do. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

„    tatarica  ....   P/ack  do. 

h 

h 

h 

h.C. 

h 

Lanius  excubitor,  ubique  R. 

Great  Grey  Shrike 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

t.h. 

„    leticopterzis,  n.          White-winged  do.\  n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

t 

„    major,   Pall.,  ubique    R.  Pallas'  do.\  t.h. 

t.h. 

h 

n? 

„    leucopygos,  Hempr. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

t.R. 

„    pallidirostris,  Cass. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

„    schach,  Gmel.  (erythronotus, 

Gould)  spor.  C.          Rufous-backed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    minor     .         .         .  Lesser  Grey  do. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n.R. 

n.C.I  n.C. 

„    collurio  .         .         .    Red- backed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    phoenicurus,  Pall.  .           Bro7vn  do. 

n.C.I  n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

„    isabellinus.  Hempr.      Isabelline  do. 

j 

n 

n 

n.C. 

t 

Driolus  galbula,  C.        .     Golden  Oriole 

n    1    n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

Bombycilla  garrula         .            Wax7ving 

h.R.ih.R. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

h.R. 

VTuscipeta  castanea,  Temm.  . 

n.t.  i 

n.t. 

? 

t 

n 

Muscicapa  grisola        Spotted  Flycatcher 

n.t. !  n.t. 

n.t. 

t 

t 

t.C.l    n 

„    parva      .         .           Red-breasted  do. 

1 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t.R.| 

tiirundo  domestica        .         .     Stvallow 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n.C. 

n 

n 

n 

„    alpestris          .           Red-rumped  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

„    urbica '     . 

„    lagopoda        .          Siberian  Martin 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t(n?) 

Dotyle  riparia         .         .         .    Sand  do. 

te 

t.n. 

t.n. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

te. 

„    rupestris          .         .         .     Crag  do. 

n 

n 

n 

t 

n 

n.R. 

Dypselus  murarius,  ubique,  w.R.    Swift 

t.C.n  t.C.n 

t.C.n 

t.n. 

t 

t.nR 

n.R. 

„    afifinis  ?  Gray         White-rumped  do. 

n? 

n? 

524 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


.         AVES. 


Birds. 


I. 

N.E. 


238. 
239- 

240. 
241. 
242. 

243- 

244. 
245- 

246. 
247. 
248. 
249. 
250. 

251. 
252. 
253- 
254- 
255. 
256. 

257. 

^58. 
259. 

260. 

26(. 

262. 
263. 
264. 


265. 
266. 

267. 

268. 

269. 
270. 

271. 

272. 

273- 
274. 

275- 


II. 

S.E. 


Cypselus  melba,  sporadice  Alpine  Swift 

Caprimulgus  europaeus,  var.  pallens       j 

Goatsucker]^    n 
,,    isabellinus,  Temm.      Egyptian  do.  \ 

Upupa  epops.         .         .         .       Hoopoe  n.C.j  n.C, 

Coracias  garrula,  spor.  C.       .        Rolltt-    n       n 

Merops  apiaster,  sporadice  C 

Cotnnion  Bee-eater 
„    persicus  .         .  Blue-cheeked  do, 

Alcedo  ipsida        .         .         Kingfisher 
„   |3bengalensi.s,ubiques.R.  htdiando. 

Picus  Cabanisii,  Malh.  Pied  Woodpecker 
„    tridactylus       .         .     Three- toed  do. 

lynx  torquilla,  L.  .         .     Wryneck 

Cuculus  canorus,  L.       ,         .        Cuckoo 

Columba  pulchricollis,  Gould 

Darjeeling  Woodpigeon 
„  oenas,  L.  .  .  Stock  Dove 
„  livia  ....  J?ock  do. 
„    rupestris  .         .         .      Do.  do. 

„    fusca,  Pall j    n 

„    turtur,  L.         .         .         .  Turtle  do.\    n 
„    gelastes,  Temm.     Oriental  do.    do.  \  n.t 
„    Turtur  ferrago         .         .         .         .| 
„    chinensis     ( C.     risoria,  j 

Schrenck,  nee  Hartl.)  C^//a;ra' (/^.    do.\    ? 
„    aegyptiaca,  urbis  Egyptian  do.    do., 

Pterocles  arenarius 

Black-  bellied  Sand  Grouse,    n       n 
„    alchata,  sporadice,  C.  Pin-tailed do\  n 


n.C. 

s 

s 
n.t. 

n 

n.t. 

s 
s 


Pallas'  do. 


Black  do. 
Capercaillie 


s 
s?R 


III.     IV. 
N  Wl  S.W, 


n.C. 

s 

n.t. 
n 

n.t. 

s 
s 
n 
n 
n.t. 


Syrrhaptes  paradoxus 

„    tibetanus 
Tetrao  tetrix 

„    urogallus 
Megaloperdix  Xigellii 

Caspian  Sno^v  Partridge 

„    himalayensis 

„    /3  minor  .     Lesser  do.  do. 

Perdix     saxatilis,      var.      P. 

chukar,  Gray      .         .         Chukar  do.\    s 

„    cinerea,  sporadice,  an  ^, .'  Partridge  h.^. 


Daurian  do. 


(?), 


Seesee  do.  \ 
QuaiL 
Do. 


daurica 

„    gryseogularis,    Brdt. 

(P.  Bonbami,  Fras.)  . 
Coturnix  vulgaris,  h.R. 

„    /3  Baldami,  Brebm 
Phasianus  mongolicus  [ 

Mongolian  Pheasant     s 
Gallus  bankiva  domesticusCV/// ///<?«  Cock     s 
Pavo  cristatus  domesticus       .     Peafowl 
Grus  cinerea,  sporadice,  n.    .         Crane  t.n. 

„    leucogeranus  .         .       Siberian  do.\ 

„     virgo,  sporadice  ;  mont. 

Karatau  3,  t.        .         .    Numidian  do}    n 


n.h. 


n  n 
n.R.I 

n.C.  n 

n  n 


n 

n 
s.R. 
n.C. 

s 

n.t. 
n 

n.t. 
n.t. 

s 

s 

n 

n 
n.t. 


h.R 


n.h. 


l\l 


n.R. 
n.R. 

n 

n 

n.C. 
n.C. 


a?t? 
n 


t.R. 


n 

R.n? 
n.h. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

t.n. 

s 
t.n. 
t.nR? 

n 

n 

n.h. 
n 

s 
s 
s 
t 


a.R 

n 

h.s. 


n 
n 

n.C. 
t.n. 
S.R. 
n.C. 

s 

t 
n 

t 
n 
s 
h.R. 
n 
n 
t 


S.C. 

n 
n 


n.h. 


t 
t.n? 


S       i 


t.(n?) 
s 


n 

h.R. 

n 

R 
n 
n 

s 

s  • 
s 
n 


n(s?) 
s 

h 

h 

s 
h.R. 

s 


t.n.  I  t.n. 


t.n. 


APPENDIX  A.— A  VES. 


525 


I. 

II.     III. 

IV. 

".• 

'■i 

IS." 

5- 

. 

AvES.                                       Birds. 

N.E. 

s.e;  n.w 

s.w. 

1 

_!_ 

n 

S 
S 

1 

Ciconia  nigra         .         .        Black  Stork 

n 

I 
n    1    n 

n 

a 

„      alba,    var.    major 

i 

(C.  azreth.,  n.  sp.  '^)    .         .   White  do. 

n 

n 

n 

1    n 

Ardea  cinerea,  var.  A.  brag, 

Isid.,  Geoffr.       .         .         .        Heron 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.t. 

P 

„  purpurea           .         .         .Itirpledo. 

n 

n 

„  alba.  h.R., «..  sporadice  C. 

Great  White  Egret 

n 

n 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

„    /3  melanorhyncha    .           Do. 

1 

n    1 

n 

Scotaeus  nycticorax       .     Night  Heron 

i         1    n    1    n 

n 

n 

Botaurus  stellaris  .         .         .      Bittern 

n    !    n    n.hR 

n 

t.h. 

Ardeola  minuta,  sporadice  C.    Little  do. 

n 

n 

Platalea  leucorodia        .         .    Spoonbill 

n 

n 

n.C. 

t.R. 

Ibis  falcinellus       .         .          Glossy  Ibis 

n.t.    n.t.  j  n.t. 

n.t. 

n.C. 

n.t. 

n 

Otis  tetrax     .         .         .    Little  Bustard 

n.t.    n.t.    n.t. 

t 

n 

n 

P 

„    Macqueeni     .         .  Macqueen  s  do. 

n.t.    n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

n 

t.R. 

P 

„    tarda       ....   Great  do. 

n.h.  n.h. 

n.h. 

s 

nh(s?) 

n 

n 

Oedicnemus  crepitans    .     Stone  Ctirlew 

n       n 

n 

n 

n.R. 

„    /3  senegalensis         .         .     Do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.R. 

Charadrius  pluvialis  ;   reg.  3, 

ad.  lac.  Issyk-kul.        .    Golden  Plover 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

t 

„    squatarola       .         .         .     Gi-ey  do. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

Eudromias  morinellus    .         .     Dotterel 

t 

t 

t 

„    caspius,  Pall.           .  Caspian  Plover 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t.R. 

„    Mongolicus     .         .    Mongolian  do. 

n.R. 

t.R. 

a.t. 

n 

P 

Aegialites  hiaticula        .          Ringed  Jo. 

n.R. 

n.R. 

n 

„    minor      .         .         Lesser-ringed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    cantianus 

Kentish  do. 

n.R. 

n 

n 

P 

Vanellus  cristatus, 

h.R.          .    Lapiuing 

n 

n 

n.h. 

n.h. 

t 

n.h. 

n 

n 

„    gregarius 

.  Sociable  Plffver 

t    !    t 

t 

t 

t 

P 

„    leucurus . 

White-tailed  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

Glareola  pratincoL 

1        .            Pratincole 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n.C. 

n 

„    /3  limbata 

.         .       Do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

Strepsilas  collaris 

Turnstone 

a.t. 

a.t. 

Recurvirostra  avocetta  .         .        Avocei 

n 

n 

n 

Hypsibates  himantopus 

Black-winged  Stilt 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

„    ji  nigricollis    .               Do.          do. 

n 

n 

n 

Falcirostra  Kaufmanni,  n. 

Red-billed  Curlew 

s 

s 

s 

s 

a 

.     „    longipes  (?)  ;/.             Do.            do. 

s?n? 

s?n? 

n 

n 

Haematopus  ostralegus      Oyster-catcher 

n 

n.R.! 

P 

Scolopax  gallinago  :  ubique,  s.R. 

Common  Snipe 
.     „    hyemalis,  Eversmann             Do. 

n.t.    n.t. 

n.t.h 

t.h. 

t 

t.h. 

n 

P 

n.h.   n.h.  i    h 

h 

h 

n 

n 

a 

.     „    gallinula          .         .            Jacksnipe 

1 

t 

It.R. 

.     „    rusticola          .         .         .    Woodcock 

t.R., 

t.R. 

t 

t.R. 

t.R. 

Machetes  pugnax  .         .         .           Rttjff 

t    1    ^ 

t        t 

t 

t 

P 

Tringa  minuta       .         .        Little  Stint 

t    !    t 

t 

t 

t 

P 

.     „       Temminckii,      lacubus 

! 

alpestris,  n.         .         Temminck' s  do. 

t.n. 

t.n.  1    t 

n 

t 

t 

t 

n 

P 

.     „    variabilis         .         .         .      Dunlin 

t 

t        t 

t 

t 

P 

„    subarquata      .         .  Pig/ny  Curlew 

t 

t        t 

t 

t 

P 

„    platyrhyncha 

. 

P 

526 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


AVES. 


Birds. 


N.E. 


11. 

S.E. 


Ill 

N.W 


IV. 

s.w. 


317- 
318. 


319- 
320. 

321. 
322. 

323. 
324. 
325- 

326. 
327. 

328. 

329- 
330. 

331- 
332. 
333- 

.334. 
335- 

336. 
.337. 
338. 
339. 
340. 
.341- 

342. 
343- 
344- 

345- 


Calidris  arenaria    .         .         Sanderling 

Phalaropus  angustirostris 

Red-necked  Phalarope 
,,  fulicarius 

Actitis  hypoleucos     Common  Sandpiper    n 

Totanus  glottis  ;  h.R.    .        Gi'ecnshank  t.n. 
„    fuscus      .         .       Spotted  Redshank 
„    calidris    .         .         .       Common  do.  t.nR 
„    stagnatilis        .  Pond  Sandpiper     n 

„    ochropus ;  h.  R.      .         .  Green  do.     n 
„    glareola  ....    IVood  do. 

Terchia  cinerea     .... 

Limosa  melanura  ;  11. R.,  h.R. 

Black-tailed  Godwit 

Numenius  arquatus        .         ,      Curlew 

Rallus  aquaticus,  spor.  C.       Water-rail 

Crex  pratensis        .         .         .  Coiiicrake 

Gallinula  pusilla  .  .  Little  Crake 
„  pygmaea  .  .  Baillon's  do. 
„    porzana .         .         .  Spotted  do. 

„    chloropus        .         .         .    Moorhen 

(Porphyrio?)         .         .         .         .    ? 

Fulica  atra,  sporadice   .         .  Coot 

Podiceps minor;  urbeTschim 
kent,  fontis  C.     .         .        Little  Grebe 
„    aurit'.is    ....  Eared  do. 
„    cornutus, lacu  Son-Kul,  w. Slavon.  do. 
„    rubricollis       .         .    Red-necked  do.  t.R, 
„    cristatus  .  ~ 

Pelecanus  onocrotalus 

Carbo     phalacrocorax, 


346. 
347. 
348. 
349- 
350- 
351- 
352. 
353- 
354. 
355. 

356. 

357. 


,  Red-necked  do. 
Great-crested  do. 
Roseate  Pelican 
var. 
continentalis  .  .  Cormorant 
"  pygmaeus  .  .  .  Little  do 
Larus  canus  .  .  .  Winter  Gull 
,,  cachinnans ;  reg.  3,  ad 
lac.  Issyk-Kul.  Siberian  herring  do. 
„  argentatus  ;  n.R.  ?  locis 
lacustris  .  .  .  Herring  do. 
„  brunneicephalus  .  .  .  ?  , 
Gavia  ichtyaetos     Great  blcuk-headed  do. 


„    ridibunda 

„    minuta    . 
Sterna  caspia 

„    anglica  . 

„    hirundo  . 

„    minuta    . 
Hydrochelidou  niger 

„    leucopareius   . 
Cygnus  olor  ;    reg.  3, 

Kul;  III.  .s.  R.  . 

„     musiciis,    ubique 

reg.  3,  Issyk-Kul 

„         Altumi, 

ubique, 


Blcuk-headed  do. 

.  JMtle  do. 

.    Caspian  Tern 

.    Gtdl-billed  do. 

Common  do. 

.   Little  do. 

.   Black  do. 

Whiskered  do. 

Issyk- 

WildS'wai. 
n.R.  ; 

Hooper  i.h. 
Jloineyer, 

.   Bewick's  Swani  t.h. 


n 


t.R. 
|s.t. 

n.t. 

t.n. 

t.n. 
n.R, 
n.R. 

n 


t.R. 
t.R. 
t.R. 
t.R. 
n 


t 
t.R. 

s.t. 
n.t. 
t.n. 
t.n. 
n.R. 
n.R. 
? 
n 

h 
t.R. 
t.R. 
t.R. 
t.R. 

n 

n 

n.R. 

t 


t.h. 
t.h. 


n 

t.h. 
t.h. 


h 
t?  n? 


n.t. 
t.n. 


n.R. 


n.R.t 

t 
t.R 

t.n. 
t.n. 


t 

tn.R 
n.hR 

n 
t.nR 

n 
n.hR 

n 


h.R.t 

t 
S.C 
t.n. 

tC.n 
t.n. 

n.R 

n.R 


t 

t 
t.(n?) 
t.(n?)  t.(n?) 

n     a.R 


t 

t 
t.(n?) 


n.hR 

n.R 

t 

n 

t 

n 
n 
a.(n?) 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 

n 

h.R.t 

t.R. 


t.n. 


n.C. 


t.h. 
h.R. 


n 

t.h. 
h.R. 


APPENDIX  A.— A  VPS. 


527 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

I. 

2.  . 

3- 

''i 

5- 

■A 

. 

AvES.                                        Birds. 

C 

^ 

J2 

G 

■g 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.WIS.W 

1 

(1h 

Q 

s 

C 

^ 

^ 

Anser  Mlddendorfifii,  //.  (A.  grandis, 

Midd.,  nee  Pall.)         .       Larger  Goose 

t 

t 

h 

t 

t.h. 

t 

„     segetum;    III.  h.,    reg. 

2  ;  t.  reg.  i          .         .         .    Bean  do. 

t 

t 

t.h. 

t 

t.h. 

„    obscurus,  Brehm     .         .         Do. 

h.R. 

h 

„    cinereus  ;  III.  h.  R.,  reg.  2 

Greylag  do. 

n 

n 

n.h. 

h 

n 

n.h. 

n 

n 

„    albifrons.  R.           White- fronted  do. 

h.t. 

t 

h.R. 

,,    cygnoides        .         .      Swanlike  do. 

n? 

n? 

„    ruficollis           .          Red-breasted  do. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

„    Skorniakovi,  n.       .         Painted  do. 

n 

n 

P 

Anas  rutila,  sporadice  Ruddy  Sheldrake 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

P 

„    tadorna  .         .         .       Common  do. 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

t 

P 

„    boschas,  h.R.          .         .     Mallard 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n.h. 

h(n?) 

n.h. 

n.h. 

n 

„    strepera,  ubique  h.  R.,  reg.  i,  2 

Gadzvall 

n 

t 

n.h. 

n.h. 

„    querquedula   .         .         .     Gargany 

n 

n 

n 

n 

n 

P 

„    crecca Teal 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

t.h. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

P 

„    clypeata.         .         ,         .    Shoveller 

t.n. 

t.n. 

t.n. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

P 

„    penelope  ;  III,  2,  h  ?      .     Widgeon 

t 

t 

t 

h 

t 

t 

„    acuta  ;  lacu  Issyk-Kul,  n.  ?  Pintail 

P 

Fuligula  fusca        .         .       Velvet  Scoter 

t.h. 

t.h. 

„    cristata  .         .         .      Crested  Duck 

t 

t 

h.t. 

h.t. 

t 

h.t. 

P 

„    ferina;  reg.  I,  h.  R.              Pochard 

t 

t 

h.t. 

h 

t 

t.h. 

t.R. 

t.R. 

„    leucophthalma         White-eyed  Duck 

n 

n 

n 

t 

t.nR. 

P 

„    rufina      .         .    Red-crested  Pochard 

n 

n 

n 

s.n. 

n 

t 

„    clangula;  reg.  i  ,h.  R.  Golden-eye  Duck 

h.t. 

h.t. 

h.t. 

t.h. 

h 

t 

„    mersa      .         .    White-headed    do. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n.t. 

n 

t.R. 

Mergus  merganser 

Red-breasted  Merganser 

n.th. 

n.th. 

t.h. 

h 

t 

h 

n 

n 

„    albellus  ....         Smew 

h 

h 

h 

t.h. 

h 

P 

Phoenicopterus  roseus,  Pall.     Flamingo 

te 

te 

te 

te 

Cum  Cal.  pispoletta,  385  spec.  (pag.  523). 

528 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


REPTILIA  {Reptiles). 


33- 


Reptilia. 


Reptiles. 


Tortoise 
Do 


Chersus  iberus 
Homopus  Horsfieldi 
Psammosaurus  caspius.  Eichw. 
Gymnodactylus  caspius,  Eichw. 

„    scaber,  Riipp 

,,     Eversmanni,  Strauch 
Phrynocephalus  auritus     .... 

„    helioscopus 

,,    interscapularis,  Licht. 

„     caudivolvulus  (int.  lac.  Balkhash  et  Ala- 

Kul.) 

Stellio  aralensis,  Licht 

„     Lehmanni,  Strauch    .         .         . 

„     himalayanus,  Strauch 
Teratoscincus  Keyserlingii,  Strauch  ? 
Eremias  variabilis 

„    intermedius,  Strauch 

„    coeruleo-ocellatus,  Dum.  (velox,  Pall.) 

?    erythrurus,  n.  (potius  jun.  praec.  spec.  ?) 
Scapteira  grammica,  Licht. 

„     scripta,  Schrenk. 
Lacerta  stirpium 
Pseudopus  Pallasii   . 
Ablepharus  deserti,  Strauch 

„     Brandtii,  Strauch 
Euprepis  princeps    . 
Eryx  jaculus,  L.  (Boa  tatarica 
Tropidonotus  hydrus 
Elaphe  dione    . 

Colubridum  species  nondum  determinata 
Zamaenis  Fedchenkoi,  Strauch 
Choristodon  sibiricus,  Dum.  (Taphrometopon 
lineolatum,  Brdt) 

„     brachycephalus.  Sev. 
Trigonocephalus  halys,  Licht.  (reg.  2,  3,  mont 

Karatau) 

Pelias  berus  ;  in  borealibus      .         .  Viper 


Commo7i  Lizard 


Licht.) 


N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

J 

c 

s 

0 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 
s 

s 

s 
s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S.R. 

S.R. 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 
s 

s 
s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s? 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

S      ' 

I  have  borrowed  M.  Strauch' s  definitions  of  Turkistan  reptilia  from 
Fedchenko's  report  on  his  first  expedition  {Fro.  Soc.  Friefids  of  A^af. 
Hist.,  Vol.  iii.,  Part  i).  Fedchenko  also  communicated  to  me  un- 
published definitions  of  Stellio  himalaya7ius  and  Zamaenis  Fedchenkoi. 

Of  reptiles  I  myself  found  only  Scapteira  gram?nica,  S.  scripta, 
and,  perhaps,  Fhry?iocephalus  i?tter scapular  is.  The  Gymnodactylus 
Eversmanni,  Stellio  Lehman7ii,  S.  himalayanus,  Etiprepis  princeps, 
Ablepharus  Brandtii,  which  I  did  not  obtain,  are  evidently  peculiar  to 


APPENDIX  A.— AMPHIBIA. 


529 


the  S.W.  district,  which  is  more  definitely  characterized  by  southern 
reptiles. 

Eremias  e7'ythrurus  is  distinguished  from  E.  j'^/(9.r  only  by  its  colour 
and  smaller  size ;  the  scales  and  dorsal  marks  generally  are  almost 
identical.  Fedchenko  considers  E,  erythrurus  as  a  young  E.  velox. 
But  the  distribution  appears  to  me  different.  In  the  eastern  part  of 
Turkistan,  commencing  from  Aulie-Ata,  and  even  Chimkent,  I  did  not 
meet  with  E.  erythrurus,  but  there  were  multitudes  of  E.  velox. 
Afterwards,  at  Khojend,  I  did  not  see  the  very  young  small  specimens 
of  the  latter  species,  which  is  in  favour  of  Fedchenko' s  opinion. 


AMPHIBIA   [Amphibians). 


Amphibia.                       Amphibians. 

N.E. 

S.E. 

N.W 

s.w. 

1 

Downs. 
Hills. 

1.  Rana  viridis  cachinnans    Edible  Ft'og 

2.  Bufo  variabilis           .         Green  Toad 

3.  ..    3.1  (B.  variabilis,  var.) 

4.  Ranodon  sibiricus,  Kessl. 

5.  .,    Kessleri,  Ballion 

6.  ,.     J 

s 
s 

s 

s 
s 

s 
s 

s 
s 

s 
s 
s 

s 

s 

S 
s 
s 

s 

s 
s 
s 

s 

s 

s 

The  difference  of  the  conditions  regulating  the  vertical  distribution 
of  Reptilia  and  Amphibia  may  be  remarked  in  the  above  lists.  The 
former  require  heat,  the  latter  moisture,  especially  the  Urodela  (genus 
Ranodo7i),  which,  therefore,  appear  in  Central  Asia  only  near  the 
mountains,  living  in  spring-basins,  and  in  marshes  near  water  of  very 
low  temperature,  not  more  than  45°  to  48''  in  summer.  Ranodon  s. 
(No.  6)  was  obtained  in  the  marshes  on  the  small  Almatinka  river,  near 
Vierny,  at  about  6,000'.  Two  specimens  were  presented  to  me  by 
General  Kolpakovsky,  and  given  for  definition  to  Mr.  Ballion,  who 
described  R.  Kessleri.  The  remaining  two  species  are  from  the 
northern  Ala-Tau.  I  consider  it  probable  that  they  might  be  found 
higher  than  6,000',  in  the  region  of  firs.  It  is  no  less  probable  that  at 
this  latter  altitude,  especially  on  the  Kegen  table-land,  a  few  reptiles 
may  be  found. 


VOL.  II. 


34 


530  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


PISCES*  [Fishes). 

The  vertical  distribution  of  Turkistan  fishes  cannot  so  well  be  expressed 
as  that  of  Mammals,  Birds,  Reptiles,  and  Amphibia.  The  chief 
water  systems  of  the  region  are  those  of  the  Aral,  the  Balkhash,  and 
the  Upper  Tarim.  There  are  other  systems  of  second  grade,  of  which 
the  more  important  are  those  of  the  Issyk-Kul,  the  Chu,  Talas,  and 
Zarafshan.  The  last  three,  however,  might  be  added  to  the  Aral 
system. 

The  principal  ichthyological  districts  of  the  region  are  also  three 
(those  of  I,  the  Marinka — Schizothorax — and  Osmanoif — Oreinus  ei 
Diptychus ;  2,  the  Carp,  the  Silurus  and  Barbel,  together  with  the 
Marinka;  and  3,  the  Aral  Sturgeon);  but  each  of  them  consists  of  parts 
of  the  different  water  systems,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Syr-daria. 
at  different  portions  of  its  course,  belongs  to  all  three  ichthyologica 
districts. 

In  the  following  list  each  of  the  ichthyological  districts  is  designatec 
by  a  Roman  figure,  and  the  distribution  of  each  species  in  the  district; 
by  an  Arabic  figure,  showing  the  place  of  finding,  thus : — 

I.  Mountain  District : — 

I.  Tributaries  of  Balkhash;  2,  Upper  Chu;  3,  Talas;  4,  Tributarie 
of  Nary  n  ;  5,  Aksai ;  6,  Mountain  streams  of  Zarafshan;  7,  Uppe 
Surkhab. 

II.  Middle  District : — 

8,  Balkhash;  9,  Issyk-Kul;  10,  Chu,  below  Tokmak ;  11,  Lowi 
Arys  and  Chirchik ;  12,  Springs  at  Chimkent ;  13,  Zarafshan,  belo 
Penjakend;  14,  Sources  of  Zarafshan  ;  15,  Syr-daria  at  Khojend  ;  i< 
Springs  at  Khojend. 

III.  Lower  District : — 

17,  Syr-daria  at  Chinaz  ;  18,  Syr-daria  at  Perovsk  and  below  ;  i 
Lower  Amu-daria  ;  20,  Aral  Sea. 

The  italics  denote  species  peculiar  to  Central  Asia ;  almost  all  tl 
new  ones  have  been  described  by  Kessler.  IVte  species  marked  with  < 
asterisk  are  common  also  to  the  Caspian  and  Black  Seas. 

*  [For  another  List  of  Fishes,  by  Kessler,  see  p.  533. — H.  Z.] 


APPENDIX  A.— PISCES. 


531 


Pisces.                                              FisJies. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

I.  Acipenser  nudiventris,  Lovetzky       Sturgeon 

17,  18,  19 

2.  Scaphirhynchus  Fedchetikoi,  Kessl.,  n.s. 

17 

3.  Salnio  s.  (orientalis  ?  Griff,  j  .          .          Trout 

7 

4.  *Esox  lucius,  L Pike 

*I7,  18,  19 

5.  *Silurus  glanis,  L.,  var.  aralensis,  Kessl. 

*io,  II,  13,  15 

*i7, 18, 19,  20 

6.   Cottiis  spinulosus,  Kessl.,  ii.s.  Miller  s  thumb 

16 

7.  *Cyprinus  carpio  ....           Carp 

*9, 10,11,13,15 

17,  18,  19,  20 

8.  Capoeta  (Scaphiodon)    Steiudach- 

neri,  Kessl.,  n.s.       .         .         .         .         . 

13 

9.  Barbus  conocephalus,  Kessl.  (chaly- 

batus,  Lehm.,  nee  Pall.)  .         .      Barbels 

13,  »5? 

17,  18,  19 

0.     .,    brachycephahis,  Kessl.   (Cypr. 

barbus,  Lehm.)         .         .         .         Do. 

13,  15? 

17,  18,  19 

I.     ..    lacertoidcs,  Kessl.,  n.s 

15,16? 

2.   Oreinus  eurystomus,  Kessl.,  n.s.   . 

6 

3.     .,    minutus,  Kessl.,  n.s. 

6 

4-     V     J 

1,4? 

5-     .,    s.? 

5,4? 

6.  Schtzothorax  Fcdchenkoi,  Kessl.,  n.s. 

13 

7.     .,    affinis 

6 

8.     .,    J 

8? 

9.     .,    aksaiensis,  Kessl.,  n.s.     . 

5 

3.  Diptychus  Scverzovi,  Kessl.,  n.s.   . 

4.  5 

I.  *Gobio  fluviatilis,  Cuv.,  var.  lepido- 

laema,  Kessl Gudgeon 

*i3,  15,  16? 

2.  Sijualius  intet-medius,  Kessl.,  n.s. 

14 

3.     „    squaliusculus.,    Kessl.,  n.s. 

15?  16 

*i8 

\.  *Scardinius  erythrophthalmus,  L. .         Rudd 

*i5?  16 

*i7,  18 

5.  *Leuciscus  rutilus,  L.    .         .         .         Roach 

*? 

3.     ..     Lehmanni'i  Brandt 

13 

*  ? 

7.  *Alburnus  fasciatus,  Nordm.          .         Bleak 

*I3 

5.  *  .,    chalcoides,  Giildenst.  (clupeoides. 

Pall.) Do. 

*i3 

).     „     iblidides.  Kessl.,  n.s.        .         .         Do. 

15?  16 

'•     ,,    -^ Do. 

7 

18 

\.  *Aspius  rapax,  Pall 

13? 

*i8 

r.  *Abramis  brama,  L.      .         .         .        Bream 

*i8 

\.  *  ,,    sapa,  Pall Do. 

*i8 

\.  *  .,    s.  (ballerus  ?)         .         .         .         Do. 

*i8 

;.  Acanthobrama  Kuschakewitschi.,  Kessl.,  n.s. 

15,  16 

17 

>.  Cobitis  longicauda,  Kessl.,  n.s.      .      Loaches 

15?  16 

|.     .,    uranoicopus,  Kessl.,  n.s.          .         Do. 

13 

'•     •'    J Do. 

I 

'•     V    -^ Do. 

4 

>.  *Pelecus  cultratus 

*i7,  18 

.  *Lucioperca  sandra 

*n\i^ 

•-.  *Perca  fluviatilis  ....          Pei-ch 

*i7,  18 

To  the  above  list,  besides  certain  fishes  of  Fedchenko's  second  col- 
lection, which  have  been  described  by  Kessler,  should  probably  be 
added  Issyk-Kul  Bream  and  Roaches,  some  species  of  Oreinus, 
Schizothorax,  and  Diptychus  from  the  mountain  streams,  the  majority 


532  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

of  which  are  uninvestigated,  and  various  small  Cy^?'midae,  from  the 
Balkhash  and  Chu,  so  that  the  total  number  of  species  of  Turkistan 
fishes  may  exceed  50. 

The  species  inserted  in  the  list  show  the  remarkable  ichthyological 
specialties  of  the  region,  and  that  there  are  in  it  at  least  two  ichthy- 
ological districts,  their  differences  being  clearly  defined,  although  Carp 
{Cy;p7'i?iidae)  predominate  in  both. 

Almost  all  of  the  ti  species  of  the  mountain  district  (I)  are  peculiar 
thereto  ;  the  Balkhash  Marinka,  marked  with  an  ?  in  the  list,  has  not 
been  scientifically  determined,  and  may,  on  closer  study,  prove  to  be  a 
separate  species,  distributed  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  Balkhash  tribu- 
taries, but  not  in  the  mountains. 

Of  the  22  species  of  the  middle  district  (II)  10  were  also  found  in 
the  lower  district  (HI) ;  but  probably  the  Caspian  Albumus  {fasciatus 
et  chalcoides),  which  was  only  found  in  the  Zarafshan  valley,  also  lives 
in  the  lower  district,  so  that  the  species  peculiar  to  district  II  probably 
consist  of  rather  less  than  one-half  of  all  its  fauna. 

Of  the  18  species  in  the  lower  district  (III)  7  or  8  only  are  peculiar 
thereto,  so  that  this  district  (HI)  is  much  less  distinct  in  its  fishes 
from  district  II  than  are  both  (II  and  III)  from  the  upper  district  (I). 
Not  a  single  species  is  known  to  be  really  common  to  districts  I  and 
II,  much  less  to  I  and  III. 

There  have  been  found  26  species  peculiar  to  Central  Asia ;  all  of 
them  were  in  the  upper  district ;  14  out  of  22  were  in  the  middle  district ; 
and  5  out  of  18  in  the  lower  district,  and  all  of  European  genera — forms 
like  to  Ponto-Caspian.  Of  the  latter,  12  were  actually  found  in  the 
lower  district,  and  probably  there  are  more  ;  14  or  15  are  mentioned 
in  the  list ;  there  were  8  in  the  middle  district,  but  not  one  in  the 
upper  (I). 

There  are  three  ichthyological  faunas  in  the  Turkistan  region  nol 
having  any  common  species  between  them,  and  not  corresponding  with 
the  districts,  as  these  have  more  or  less  a  mixture  of  two  or  even  of  al] 
three  different  faunas. 

A.  Ancient  Central  Asian  fauna — principally  in  the  upper  district. 

B.  New  Central  Asian  fauna,  of  which  the  majority  of  species  are  ii 
the  Middle  district,  the  minority  in  the  Lower. 

C.  Ponto-Caspian,  of  which  the  majority  of  species  are  in  the  Lowe 
district,  the  minority  in  the  Middle. 

Although  these  three  faunas  do  not  possess  any  species  in  common 
the  degree  of  their  differences  are  far  from  uniform.  The  ancien 
Central  Asian  may  be  considered  as  quite  original,  while  the  ne\ 
Central  Asian  is  rather  an  altered  part  of  the  Ponto-Caspian  fauna 
in  which,  for  all  its  species,  are  found  corresponding  and  closely 
related  forms,  partly  met  with  even  in  Turkistan  waters,  and  unchanged 
there. 

This   shows   that   the   new   Central   Asian   fauna    was  geological] 
separated  at  a  recent  epoch,  on    the  division    of   the    former    Aralo 
Caspian  basin  into  the  present  waters,  while  the  ancient  Central  Asia;* 
fauna  consists  of  the  remnant  which  escaped,  being  driven  by  newe  1 

fauna   into  the   mountain    streams The  local  varieties  of   th 

Silurus  gla7tis  aralensis  and  Gohiojluviatilis  lepidolcnmus  show  tha 
the  evolution  of  a  new  Central  Asian  fauna  from  geographically  sepa 
rated  parts  of  the  Ponto-Caspian  still  continues. 


APPENDIX  A.— PISCES.  533 


PISCES  [Fishes). 

By  K.  F.  Kessler. 

This  article  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  further  investigation  of 
the  Ichthyological  fauna  of  Turkistan.  To  this  end  are  inserted  [in  the 
original]  concise  descriptions  of  all  the  species  of  fishes  thus  far  found 
in  the  country,  with  the  distinctive  characters  of  the  genera,  families, 
and  orders  to  which  the  species  mentioned  belong.  The  new  species  of 
fishes  collected  by  A.  P.  Fedchenko  on  his  first  journey  to  Turkistan, 
and  also  the  new  species  obtained  in  the  same  countr}^  by  Severtsoff 
and  Kushakevitch,  have  already  been  described  by  me  in  an  article 
entitled  "Ichthyological  Fauna  of  Turkistan,"  which  appeared  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Imperial  Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  History  of 
Moscow,  in  1872. 

During  his  second  journey  in  Turkistan,  Fedchenko  found  only  four 
new  species  :  Ascitis  esocinus,  Cobitis  elegans,  Salmo  oxianus,  and 
Scaphirhynchus  Fedcheitkoi  (a  detailed  description  of  which  also  is 
included  in  the  above-mentioned  article).  But  these  species  are  very 
interesting  in  many  respects.  Aspius  esoci?ius  by  its  elongated  body  and 
flattened  head  constitutes  a  very  remarkable  form  of  the  genus  Aspius, 
which  up  to  the  present  has  only  had  three  representatives — one  in  S.E. 
Europe  \A  .  rapax) ;  another  in  W.  Asia  [A .  vorax) ;  and  the  third  in 
China  {A.  spilurus).  Salmo  oxiamis,  discovered  in  the  Kizil-su,  in 
the  Alai,  appears  in  Turkistan  as  the  sole  representative  of  the 
numerous  family  of  salmons.  Scaphirhynchiis  Fedche?ikoi  [of  which 
the  only  other  species  of  the  same  genus  known  to  us  [Scaph.  raf- 
nesqiiii)he\oT\gs  to  North  America]  is  of  great  importance,  not  only  from 
a  zoological,  but  also  from  a  biological  point  of  view,  on  account  of 
the  extreme  smallness  of  its  eyes  and  the  rudimentary  condition  of  its 
air  bladder. 

The  little  fish  described  by  me  in  an  article  on  the  "  Ichthyological 
Fauna  of  Turkistan,"  and  called  Schizothorax  minutus,  was  ascer- 
tained to  be  a  young  specimen  of  Schiz.  etirystomiis,  as,  however,  had 
been  already  supposed.  In  the  last  collection  made  by  Fedchenko, 
there  were,  speaking  generally,  many  young  fishes  of  the  genera 
Barbus  and  Schizothorax,  which  enabled  me  to  convince  myself  of 
the  fact  that  the  rows  of  teeth,  with  which  many  species  of  these 
genera  are  furnished,  on  the  hinder  side  of  the  large  bony  ray  of  the 
dorsal  fin,  are,  among  young  fishes,  at  first  very  large  and  not  numerous, 
but  afterwards  gradually  increase  in  number  and  at  the  same  time 
become  comparatively  smaller. 

For  the  description  of  each  species  of  fish  the  so-called  charac- 
teristic formula  has  been  introduced  by  me  ;  i.e.,  a  series  of  numbers 
which  indicate  how  many  hard  and  soft  rays  are  found  in  each  of 
the  fins,  and  also  how  many  scales  are  found  on  the  lateral  line,  how 


534  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

many  rows  of  scales  are  above  the  lateral  line,  and  how  many  below 
it.  For  example,  the  characterizing  formula  for  the  hresim,  A br amis 
brama,  is  written  thus  : — 

P.  I  15 — 17  ;  V.  28  ;  D.  3/9— 10  ;  A.  3  24— 26  ;  C.  19  ;  Lateral  line  50  !^   55  ; 

and  means  that  in  that  fish  each  of  the  pectoral  fins  contains  i  hard 
and  from  15-17  soft  rays  ;  each  of  the  ventral  fins  2  hard  rays  and  8 
soft ;  the  dorsal  fin  3  hard  rays  and  9  or  10  soft  rays  ;  the  anal  fin, 
3  hard  and  from  24  to  26  soft  rays  ;  the  caudal  fin,  19  full  rays  (besides 
the  small  upper  and  lower  incomplete  rays),  and  also  that  there  are 
on  the  lateral  line,  commencing  from  the  upper  part  of  the  branchial 
crevices  to  the  base  of  the  caudal  fin,  from  50  to  55  separate  scales  ; 
between  that  line  and  the  base  of  the  dorsal  fin,  from  12  to  14 
longitudinal  rows  of  scales  ;  and  between  that  line  and  the  base  of  the 
ventral  fins,  7  or  8  rows  of  scales.  It  is  here  necessary  to  remark  that 
to  the  hard  rays  in  the  dorsal  and  anal  fins  are  also  added,  in  front, 
little  incomplete  rays,  often  very  minute,  and  almost  rudimentary.  The 
characterizing  formula  of  fishes  is  often  of  the  utmost  importance 
in  the  recognition  of  the  species  to  which  they  belong ;  it  some- 
times happens  that  a  single  one  of  these  formulae  is  sufficient  for  the 
determination  of  the  species,  particularly  in  the  carp  family. 

In  describing  the  species,  I  have  referred  to  the  following  works, 
besides  the  above-mentioned  "  Ichthyological  Fauna  of  Turkistan  "  :— 

1.  Giinther,  A.,  "Catalogue  of  the  Fishes  in  the  Collection  of  the 
British  Museum,"  8  vols.     1859-70. 

2.  Pallas,  P.  S.,  ''Zoographia  Rosso-asiatica,"  3  vols.,  4to.  1831.  Ln 
this  are  described,  more  or  less  satisfactorily,  all  species  of  Russian 
fishes,  which  were  known  to  Pallas,  and  it  remains  up  to  this  day  the 
principal  source  of  information  regarding  Russian  Ichthyology. 

3.  Kessler,  K.,  "Description  of  the  Fishes  met  with  in  the  Waters 
of  the  St.  Petersburg  Province."  8vo.  1864.  In  it  are  to  be  found  detailed 
descriptions  of  many  of  the  species  of  fishes  which  also  belong  to 
Turkistan. 

The  Ichthyological  Fauna  of  Turkistan  is  composed  half  of  European 
and  half  of  Asiatic  forms  ;  and  these  are,  in  their  turn,  divided  into 
several  categories.  As  regards  European  species,  some  of  them 
{Perca  Jiuviatilis,  Gohio  jfluviatilis,  Leuciscus  riitilus,  Abramis 
brama,  Scardiniiis  erythrophthal mus ,  and  Cobitis  fae?ihi)  are  re- 
markable for  the  wideness  of  their  distribution,  being  met  with  in  the 
waters  of  almost  the  whole  of  Europe  ;  and  others  (^Lucwperca  sandra^ 
Siliiriis  gla7iis,  CyPfimis  carpio,  Abramis  sapa,  Aspius  rapax, 
Pelecus  cultratiis,  A/b7ir?tus  c/ialcoides,  Albu7'7i7cs  fasciatus,  and 
Acipenser  schipa)  belong  to  the  number  of  fishes  characteristic  ot 
Eastern  Europe,  inhabiting  principally  the  waters  of  the  Pontine  and 
Caspian  basins.  To  the  European  forms  should  also  be  added  :  Coftia 
spiiiulosns,  exceedingly  like  Coitus  gobio,  Alburnus  taeiitatt^s,  ver) 
like  the  species  A.  fasciatiis,  and  A.  bimaculafus^  and  Salmo oxianus, 
allied  to  S.  triitta  and  S.  far  in.  All  these  European  forms  belong 
principally  to  the  lower  course  of  the  Syr-daria,  Amu-daria,  and  pan 
of  the  Zarafshan. 

To  the  Asiatic  forms  are  related  species  of  the  genera  :  Capoefa 
Barbiis,  Schizothorax,  Diptyc/ius,  AcaiifhobratJia,  and  partly  also  t( 
the  genera  Albur7ius  {A.  ibliuides),  Aspius  (A.  esociuus),  and  Cobitu 
(C   lo7igicauda,   C.   ura^ioscopus,   C.  dor.Kalis,   C.  elega7is).     Certait 


APPENDIX  A.— PISCES.  535 

representatives  of  the  genera  Barbtis  and  Cobitis  are.  in  fact,  met  with 
in  Europe,  particularly  in  the  S.E  ,  but  all  the  said  genera  are  pre- 
eminently Asiatic.  The  genera  Schizothorax  and  Diptychits,  which 
are  characterized  by  a  slit  sheath  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  belly, 
belong  exclusively,  as  far  as  at  present  known,  to  the  high  mountainous 
countries  of  Central  Asia.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  only  species  of  the 
genus  Di^ptychzis  {viz.,  Diptychus  juaculatus,  Steind.)  known  up  to  the 
discovery  of  the  Turkistan  species,  was  found  in  Tibet  at  the  altitude  of 
11,200  feet.  And  the  Turkistan  species  {Diptychus  Sez>e7'zozn)\ia.s  also 
obtained  by  Severtsoff  in  the  rivers  Ottuk  and  Aksai,  at  the  altitude  of 
10,000  feet.  Representatives  of  the  genera  Capoeta  and  Acanthobra77ia 
were  previously  found  almost  exclusively  in  the  rivers  of  W.  Asia, 
Syria,  Anatolia,  and  Persia. 

On  each  journey,  however,  the  most  interesting  Ichthyological  dis- 
covery of  Fedchenko  was  the  Scaphirhynchus  Fedchenkoi  which 
inhabits,  it  appears,  the  Syr-daria  exclusively.  The  interest  of  this 
find  has  been  further  increased  by  the  discovery  of  a  third  species  of 
Scaphirhynchus  by  M.  N.  Bogdanoif,  in  the  Amu-daria.  From  this 
it  seems  that  each  of  the  two  great  rivers  emptying  into  the  Aral  Sea 
(as  also  the  River  Mississippi)  has  its  separate  representative  of  the 
genus  Scaphir hynchus ,  while  almost  all  the  other  fishes  met  with  in  the 
lower  parts  of  the  Syr-  and  the  Amu-daria  respectively,  so  far  as  is  known, 
do  not  differ  according  to  locality,  but  belong  to  the  same  species.  It 
may,  therefore,  be  anticipated  that  in  course  of  time  other  species  of  the 
genus  Scaphirhynchus  will  be  discovered  in  the  rivers  of  E.  Turkistan 
and  China  (as  not  long  ago  was  discovered,  in  the  river  Yang-tse-kiang, 
a  species  of  the  genus  Spatularia,  the  third  genus  of  sturgeons,  viz., 
Spatularia  gladius,  Martens). 

Of  the  38  species  of  fishes,  known  to  us  up  to  the  present  in  Turki- 
stan, no  less  than  25  belong  to  the  carp  family,  which,  therefore,  may 
be  regarded  as  completely  predominating.  This  famil}^  is  also  very 
rich  in  representatives  in  the  rivers  of  S.  Europe,  W.  Asia,  and  the  E. 
of  India,  but  does  not  predominate  over  all  the  other  families  to  such 
a  degree,  as  in  Turkistan.  The  small  number  of  representatives  of  the 
.Sihtrus  (one  species)  and  Sahnoiiidae  (one  or  two  species)  families  is 
also  very  characteristic  of  the  Turkistan  Ichthyological  fauna,  as  the 
said  two  families  are  very  rich  in  species  in  almost  all  other  mountain 
countries. 

It  is  very  probable  that  of  the  fishes  inhabiting  the  Syr-daria  and 
Amu-daria  many  live  in  the  Aral  Sea,  but  this  sea  remains  uninvesti- 
gated. It  is  only  known  that  the  fishermen  on  the  islands  of  the 
Aral  catch  small  sturgeons,  silurus,  and  carp.  There  is  but  one 
species  of  fish  from  the  Aral  Sea  in  Fedchenko' s  collection — Pelecus 
cultratus.  Meanwhile,  it  would  be  of  the  highest  interest  to  know 
whether  other  sorts  of  marine  fishes  besides  the  small  sturgeon  exist 
in  the  Aral  Sea,  and  whether  there  are  not  preserved  in  it  descendants 
of  those  species  which  once  inhabited  the  ancient  Pontine-Caspian-Aral 
basin.  Thus,  for  example,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  there  are  in  it  no 
representatives  of  Gobius,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  the  Black  and 
Caspian  Seas. 


536 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


TELEOSTEI. 


ACANTHOPTERI. 
Percoidei,  Cuv. 
I.  Perca,  L. 

1.  Perca  fluviatilis,  L.     Perch. 

II.  Lucioperca,  Cuv. 

2.  Lucioperca  Sandra,  Cuv.  Pike-Perch, 

Cataphracti,  Cuv. 

III.  Cottus,  L. 

3.  Cottus  spinulosus,  Kessl.      JiJiller's 

Thu7nb. 

PHYSOSTOMI,   MULLER. 

SiLUROIDEI,    AgASSIZ. 

IV.  Silurus,  L. 

4.  Silurus  glanis,  L. 

Cyprinoidei,  Agassiz. 

V.  Cyprinus,  L. 

5.  Cyprinus  carpio,  L.      Carp. 

VI.  Capoeta,  Cuv. 

6.  Capoeta  Steindachneri,  Kessler. 

VII.  Barbus,  Cuv. 

7.  Barbusconocephalus.Kess.  ] 

8.  ..      lacerloides,  ,,     ^Barbels. 

9.  ..      brachycephalus,  .,     ) 
VIII.  Schizothorax,  Haeckel. 

10.  Schizothorax  aksaiensis,  Kessler. 

11.  ,,  Fedchenkoi,    ,, 

12.  „  afifinis,  ,, 

13.  .,  eurystomus.     ,, 
IX.  Diptychus,  Steindachner. 

14.  Diptychus  Sewerzowi,  Kessler. 

X.  Gobio,  Cuvier. 

15.  Gobio  fluviatilis,  Cuv.      Gudgeon 

XI.  Abramis,  Cuvier. 

16.  Abramis  bramn,  L.     Bream 


17.  Abramis  sapa,  Pallas. 

XII.  Acanthobrama,  Haeckel. 

i8.  Acanthobrama  Kuschakewitschi,  K. 

XIII.  Pelecus,  Agassiz. 

19.  Pelecus  cultratus,  L. 

XIV.  Alburnus,  Rondelet. 

20.  Alburnus chalcoides,Guld.  )  ry,    , 

21.  .,         iblioides,  Kessl.  i^^"''^-'- 

22.  .,        fasciatus,  Nordm. 

23.  ,,        taeniatus,  Kessler. 
XV.  Aspius,  Agassiz. 

24.  Aspius  rapax,  Pallas. 

25.  „       esocinus,  Kessler. 
XVI.  Scardinius,  Bonaparte. 

26.  Scardinius     eiythrophthalmus,     L. 

/^uJd. 

XVII.  Squalius,  Bonaparte. 

27.  Squalius  intermedius,  Kessler. 

28.  .,       squaliusculus,     ,, 
XVIII.  Leuciscus,  Eondelet. 

29.  Leuciscus  rutilus,  L.     Roach. 

Salmonoidei,  H.-eckel. 
XIX.  Salmo,  L.     Trout. 

30.  Salmo  oxianus,  Kessler. 

ESOCINI,    H^CKEL. 

XX.  Esox.  L. 

31.  Esox  lucius,  L.     Pike. 

Acanthopsides,  H.^ckel. 
XXI.  Cobitis,  I. 

32.  Cobitis  longicauda, Kessl.  ] 

33.  „       uranoscopus,    ,, 

34.  „       dorsalis,  ,,    V  Loaches. 

35.  ..       elegans,  ,,    I 

36.  ..       taenia,  L. 


GANOIDEL 


CHONDROSTEI,    MiJLLER. 

XXII.  Acipenser,  L.     Sturgeon. 

37.  Acipenser  schipa,  Lovetzky. 

XXIII.  Scapbirhynchus,  Haeckel. 

38.  Scaphirhynchus  Fedchenkoi, 

Kessler. 

Addenda. 
I.  Perca    Schrenkii,    Kessler.     Perch. 


2.  Barbus  plafyrostris,  Kessler.  Barbel 

3.  Schizothorax  orientalis,      ,, 

4.  .,  argentatus,    ,, 

5.  Diptychus  Dybowskii,        ,, 

XXIV.  Diplophysa. 

6.  Diplophysa  Strauchii,  Kessler. 

7.  ..  labiata,  ,, 


APPENDIX  A.— MOLLUSC  A. 


537 


MOLLUSCA  iMollusks). 

By  Eduard  von  Martens   (Professor  in  the  University  of  Berlin). 

The  following  description  of  Turkistan  Mollusca  is  based  chiefly  upon 
the  materials  collected  by  Fedchenko,  and  in  addition  there  have  been 
included  from  the  same  region  those  very  few  species  which  were  known 
to  science  previously,  viz.,  three  species  collected  by  P.  P.  Semenoff 
in  the  Thian  Shan,  and  one  which  was  known,  thanks  to  Messrs.  Mid- 
dendorff  and  Baer,  from  the  Sea  of  Aral. 

In  the  definition  and  determination  of  species,  I  have  constantly  had 
in  view  that  the  matter  referred  to  a  country  in  which  we  might  expect 
perfectly  new  and  peculiar  forms,  as  well  as  many  of  the  most  widely 
distributed  European  ones,  and  also  such  as  are  now  known  in  the 
farther  parts  of  Asia.  I  have,  therefore,  considered  it  necessary  to 
carefully  compare  each  of  the  species  of  Mollusca  collected,  first  with 
representatives  of  the  European  fauna,  and  afterwards  with  those  made 
known  to  us  from  the  Himalayas  by  English  students  ;  and,  if  I  did  not 
find  constant  and  unvarying  characters,  I  did  not  hesitate  to  consider 
the  species  as  known  ;  there  are,  however,  many  new  species  which  for 
the  present  may  be  considered  as  peculiar  to  Turkistan. 

The  naked  Mollusca  {Lhnax,  Amalia)  have  been  investigated  and 
described  by  F.  D.  Heinemann,  of  Frankfurt-on-the-Maine,  and  the 
small  fresh-water  Mollusca  {Corbicula  minima,  and  Pisidium)  by  S. 
Clessin,  of  Dinkelscherben,  as  they  had  for  a  long  time  specially 
occupied  themselves  with  these  genera  ;  they  are  consequently  respon- 
sible for  the  distinctness  of  the  new  species  here  described. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  more  mountainous  parts  of  Eastern 
Turkistan  many  land  Mollusca  will  yet  be  discovered ;  it  is  very 
astonishing,  for  instance,  that  in  the  whole  of  that  region  we  have  not 
found  a  single  species  of  the  genus  Clattsilia. 


538 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Genus. 


Limax 
Amalia 
Parmacella  . . . 
Vitrina 

Macrochlamys 

Nanina  {Orobia) 


„     {Rotula) 
Hyalina 

„     {Conulus) 
Helix  {Patiila) 


Altai. 


Trans- Baikal 
and  Irkutsk. 


(Zurama) 
\Plectotropis) 
\Perforatella) 
(Frtiticola  ) 


{Aaista) 
(^Ariontd) 

(^Trachia) 
{Xerophila) 


Buliminus  {Napaeus) 
„     {Zebrina) 


?  cellaria,  E. 


bicallosa       ; 

fraticum,  E.    J 
Schrenckii,  E. 
?  rufescens,  E. 

hispida,  E. 

?  sericea,  E. 


?  obscurus,  E. 


„     {Chondrula) 
Cionella  ( Glessula) 

„     iZua)  ... 
Stenogyra  (^Opeas) 
Clausilia 


..I     lubrica,  E. 


pellucida,  E. 


fulva,  E. 
ruderata,  E. 
pygmaea,  E. 


costata,  E. 


?  fruticum,  E. 
Schrenckii,  E. 

rufescens,  E. 

hispida,  E. 

?  sericea,  E. 

Sieboldiana 


lubrica,  E. 


PlTpa  (  Jorquilld)  . . , 

„     {Pitpilla)  ...| 

„     {Cylindrus) 
Vertigo        


Turkistan. 

3 


muscorum,  E.       muscorum,  £. 


edentula,  E. 
Shuttleworthiana,E 


Fedchenkoi 
maculata 
Olivieri. 
rugulosa 
conoidea 
sogdiana 
turanica 


nitida,  E. 
fulva,  E. 


costata,  E. 
plectotropis 

rubens 
rufispira 


phaeozona 


derbentina,  E. 
Semenowi 
Fedchenkoi 

miser 
segregatus 

eremita 

albiplicatus 

sogdianus 


mtumescens 
lubrica,  E. 


muscorum,  E. 
cristata 

anti vertigo,  E. 


APPENDIX  A.—MOLLUSCA. 


539 


Cashmere. 

6 


nitida,  E. 


costata,  E. 


.  I      segregatus 

candelaris 
domina 


lubrica,  E.  lubrica,  E. 


Huttoniana     j     Huttoniana 
tibetica         i 


N.W.  Himalaya 

(Simla,  etc.) 

7 


Yun-nan. 


?  cassida 

chloroplax 
splendens 

labiata 

monticola 

Jacquemontii 

angelica 

fastigiata 

planiuscula 

nana 

bullula 

humilis 


radicicola 

elatior 


pettos 


'    candelaris 

rufistrigatus 

kunawurensis 

Boysianus 

nivicola 

vibex 

arcuatus 


cylindrica 
Waageni  ■ 


gutta 

pulla 
himalayana 


arata 


catostoma 


Andersoni 


E.  Tibet  (Moupin). 
9 


subfusiformis 
macroceramiformis 


Bianconii 

Davidi 
plicatilis 

tibetica 

Rupelli 

inopinata 

subechinata 

(Sarelii) 


moupimana 
arbusticola 


Alphonsi 


Baudoni 

moupinianus 

Davidi 


tibetiana 

serrata 

gibbosula 


540 

RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Genus. 

Altai. 
I. 

putris.  E. 

Trans- Baikal 

and  Irkutsk. 

2. 

Turkistan. 
3- 

Afghanistan. 
4- 

Succinea      

putris,  E. 

putris,  E. 

Pfeifferi.  E. 

Pfeifferi,  E. 

Pfeifferi,  E. 

altaica 

Pupula        

polita,  E. 

Limnaea      

auricularia,  E. 

auricularia,  E. 

auricularia,  E. 
obliquata 

bactriana 

ovata,  E. 

ovata,  E. 

ovata,  E. 

\ 

lagotis,  E. 
var.  costulata 

. 

var.  albipicta 

•  peregra,  E. 

peregra,  E. 

peregra,  E. 

peregra,  E. 

.  truncatula,  E. 

truncatula,  E. 

truncatula,  E. 

truncatula,  E 

stagnalis,  E. 

stagnalis,  E. 

?  stagnalis,  E 

palustris,  E. 

palustris,  E. 

Vhys3.  {Aplexa)      ... 

... 

hypnorum,  E. 

Planorbis     

corneus,  E. 

... 

... 

„     {Anisus) 

marginatus,  E. 

... 

subangulatus,  E. 

„     (Spiralina) 

vortex,  E. 
var.discoideus,E 

leucostomus,  E. 

„    {Bathyomphalus) 

contortus.  E. 

contortus,  E. 

,,     {Gyraulus) 

albus,  E. 

albus,  E. 
limophilus,  E. 

albus,  E. 
glaber,  E. 

convexiusculu 

„     {Segmentina)  ... 

nitidus,  E. 

nitidus,  E. 

nitidus,  E. 

... 

Choanomphalus     ... 

... 

Maacki 

Ancylus       

... 

sibiricus 

lacustris,  E. 

Paludina     

... 

baicalensis 

... 

Bithynia      

tentaculata,  E. 

ventricosa,  E. 

Hydrobia  (A  mnicola) 



angarensis 

pallida 
brevicula 

parvula 

Valvata        

cristata,  E. 

piscinalis,  E. 
baicalensis 
cristata,  E. 

... 

... 

Melania       

... 



... 

elegans 

pyramis 

tigrina 

Anodonta 

cellensis,  E. 

cellensis,  E. 

piscinalis,  E. 

anatina,  E. 

rostrata,  E. 
Sedakowii 

„     {Barbala) 

plicata 

Margaritana 

... 

daurica 

Unio            

mongolicus 
pictorum,  E. 



marginalis  va 

Corbicula 





fluminalis 
minima 

Cyclas         

calyculata,  E. 

calyculata,  E. 

Pisidium 

s. 

5. 

obliquatum 
acuminatum 
sphaeriiforme 

turanicum 

29  species, 

46  species, 

50  species. 

19  species, 

*  \i.c.,  peculiar  to 
the  place]. 

2  (8  per  cent.) 

8  (17  percent.) 

26  (52  per  cent.) 

9  (47  per  cent 

characteristic* 

characteristic. 

characteristic. 

characteristic 

Of  these  there  are  known  only  in  various  parts  of  Central  Asia,  99  species.  Four 
also  in  India,  to  the  south  of  the  Himalayas,  11  species ;  in  India  and  China,  i  specie 
in  China  or  Japan,  3  .species ;  in  Asia  Minor,  l)ut  not  in  Europe,  2  species. 


APPENDIX  A.—MOLLUSCA 


541 


Tibet. 

5 


luricularia,  E. 


agotis  var.,  E. 

Hookeri 

peregra,  E. 

truncatula.  E. 


lanus  (subfos.) 


iiscinalis  (sub- 
[fos.),  E. 


13  species, 
{38  per  cent.) 
characteristic. 


Cashmere. 
6 


?  PfeifFeri,  E. 

auricularia,  E. 
succinea 

peregra.  E. 
stagnalis,  E. 

indicus 


calathus 
bengalensis 

piscinalis,  E. 


16  species, 
3  (19  per  cent.) 
characteristic. 


N.W.  Himalaya 
(Simla,  etc.) 

7 


Yun-nan. 


jE.  Tibet  (Moupin). 

9 


calathus 


acuminata 


pervia 
{Davidn,  Desk. ) 


tibetanus 


28  species. 

25  (89  per  cent.) 

characteristic. 


6  species, 

all  characteristic. 


19  species, 

18  (95  per  cent.) 

characteristic. 


Total  species  found  only  in  Asia 

,,         ,,        found  also  in  (E)  Europe 


.  116 

•     51 

167  species. 


542 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


[Professor  von  Martens,  having  revised  the  foregoing,  informs  me  that 
considerable  additions  to  the  Mollusca  of  Turkistan  and  the  adjacent 
regions  have  been  made  by  the  collections  of  Dohrandt  (1875),  and 
Barbot  (1876)  in  Khiva;  of  Prjevalsky,  in  Mongolia;  and  Dr.  Albert 
Regel,  in  Kuldja  (1878).*  The  Professor  received  another  collection 
made  (1873-79)  by  Colonel  Kushakevich  in  the  Southern  Ala-Tau,  Kho- 
kand,  and  Pamir.f  He  is  good  enough  to  forward  me  a  new  table, 
thus :— 


I. 
Khiva. 

II. 
Samarkand. 

III. 

Ferghana. 

IV. 

Kuldja. 

V. 
Ala-Tau. 

VI, 
Yuldus. 

VII. 
Kashgar. 

VIII. 
Ladak. 

Total  No.    . 
Peculiar  sp. 
Europ.  sp.  . 

4 
I 

I 

18 

3 

7 

26 

9 
6 

20 
8 
0 

I 

5 
0 

3 

9 

2 

3 

7 
5 

with  general  remarks,  as  follows  : — H.  Z.] 

Land  Mollusca. — This  table  shows  very  distinctly  the  scarcity  of 
land  snails  in  the  desert  plains  (i.,  vii.,  viii.),  as  opposed  to  the  larger 
number  and  more  peculiar  forms  in  the  mountain  regions  (iii.,  iv.). 
The  total  number  of  species  in  this  list  is  53,  of  which  ^t^  are,  as  far 
as  we  know,  peculiar  to  Central  Asia  as  here  understood ;  on  the 
other  hand,  11  species  are  also  generally  distributed  in  most  parts  of 
Europe,  but  all  of  small  size,  most  of  them  being  also  found  in  Siberia 
and  North  America  (circumpolar  species).  Most  of  the  genera  and 
sub-genera,  and  exactly  those  which  are  richer  in  species,  are  European, 
and  generally  characteristic  of  the  Palaearctic  region  [F?'ut/cicola, 
Xerophila,  Zebrina,  Chondrula')  ;  but  many  of  the  species,  chiefly 
in  Fruticicola,  are  somewhat  abnormal,  and  may  form  hereafter  the 
types  of  distinct  subgenera.  V^itrina  is  characteristic  of  northern 
and  alpine  countries  ;  Sifccmea  is  a  cosmopolitan  genus  ;  one  of  the 
species,  .S".  Martensiajia,  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  intensively 
coloured  in  the  genus.  Parniacella  is  peculiar  to  Western  Asia  and 
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  Trachia  is,  to  some  extent,  a  type  of 
Eastern  Asia.  Macrochlatnys  is  a  more  tropical  genus.  The  total 
absence  of  Clausilia  is  very  remarkable,  as  this  genus  is  very  richly 
represented  in  South-Eastern  Europe,  and  it  is  also  tolerably  well  repre- 
sented in  India  and  China.  Its  absence  gives  a  decidedly  northern 
feature  to  the  fauna  of  the  whole  of  Central  Asia. 

Fresh-water  Mollusca. — Among  the  fresh-water  Mollusca,  the  pre- 
dominant feature  is  the  large  number  of  air-breathing  species  which 
live  in  stagnant  water,  and  the  paucity,  and  almost  total  absence,  of  the 
genera  living  in  running  water,  for  example,  Neritiiia,  Unto,  Melauia, 
and  Melanopsis.  The  same  is  the  case  in  most  northern  regions  ;  for 
example,  Siberia  and  Canada  and  also,  to  some  extent,  in  Central 
Europe,  whereas  in  Southern  Europe  the  case  i.^  reversed.  Also  in  the 
Alps  of  Central  Europe  the  genera  Limfiaea  and  Pisidium  (and  in 
some  places  also  Fla?wrbis)  extend  further  north  than  the  rest  of  the 
fresh-water  Mollusca.  If  we  omit  the  species  found  in  Lake  Aral,  which 
are  all  Caspian  and  belong  to  a  peculiar  fauna,  the  number  of  fresh- 

*  [Von  Martens  has  published  anoiher  volume,  incorporating  this  additional  in- 
formation on  the  Mollusca  of  Central  Asia,  in  the  Mcnioirfs  dc  FAcad.  Jmp.  de 
St.  PHersbour}^,  tome  xxx.,  No.  II,  1882.J 

f  [See  Sitzungsberichte  der  naturforschcndcn  Freundc  in  Berlin,^  J"ly>  1882 
pp.  103  arid  107.] 


APPENDIX  A.—ARANEAE.  543 

water  species  contained  in  our  list  is  39,  the  larger  half  of  which — 22 — 
are  somewhat  generally  distributed  in  Europe ;  others  are  Siberian 
[Planorbis  sibiri'cns),  or  Chinese  {Limiiaea  pervia),  or  peculiar  to 
South-Western  Asia  and  Northern  Africa  {Corbiculajflumiitalis),  and 
the  few  which  are  peculiar  are  all  of  small  size  [Hydrobia,  Ptsidiiim), 
and  exhibit  no  striking  differences  from  European  species.  Some 
varieties  of  Limnaea  are  characterized  by  exceptional  thickness  of  the 
shell  (Z.  auricular ia,  var.  obliqicata  ;  lagotis,  var.  solidissinui)  ;  they 
live  in  elevated  lakes  wdth  stony  bed :  others  are  characterized  by 
white  markings  {lagotis,  var.  albopicta).  The  scarcity  of  MoUusca  in 
running  water  may  be  due  to  the  low  temperature  and  stony  bed  of 
the  rivers,  just  as  it  is  in  Switzerland. 


ARANEAE   [Spiders). 
By  Alexander  Kroneberg. 

In  the  collection  brought  by  Fedchenko's  expedition,  the  Araneae  are 

important,  and  the  more  interesting,  because  up  to  the  present  we  have 

had  almost  no  information    concerning  this   portion  of  the   fauna   of 

Turkistan.     I  can  find  in  the  literature  only  two  references  to  the  forms 

found  in  Turkistan,  both  of  them  in  the  great  work  of  C.  Koch  ("  Die 

Arachnideii,"   etc.),   wherein  are   described    Tarantula  obsoleta  and 

Calliethera  tricincta  from  Bokhara.     The  latter  species  is  found  in 

Fedchenko's  collection.     Our  knowledge  is  a  little  fuller  in  this  respect 

with  regard  to  the  fauna  of  the  countries  adjacent  to  Turkistan,  which 

resemble  it  in   character  and  climate,  namely,   the    Caspian  steppes, 

Kirghese  steppes,  and  Southern  Siberia.     Besides  the  large  tarantula 

[Trochosa  si7igurie?isis,  Laxm.),  which  is  generally  distributed  over  the 

whole  of  Southern   Russia,  Pallas  describes  in  his  "Travels,"  and  in 

*' Spicilegia  Zoologica,"  the  ''  Kresiovik""  (or  Cross-spider,  ?>.,  with 

a  cross  on  its  back),  Argiope  Brunjiichii,  Scop,  {speciosa,  Pall.),  and 

A.   lobata,    Pall.,  known  by  their  remarkable  form  and  colouring  in 

Southern  Europe,  from  the  Caspian  steppes  and  Upper  Irtish.     The 

tchirn  mentioned:  in  his  "  Travels,"  which  is  known  to  the  Kalmuks  by 

its  stinging  homed  cattle,  may,  in  the  opinion  of  Motschulsky  [Bull,  de 

Mosc,   1849),  b^  related  to  Lycosa  infer?ialis,  Motsch.,  or  to  Latro- 

dectus  higubris.  Id. 

It  is  difficult  to  recognize  the  spiders  of  which  Lepechin  speaks  in 
his  journal.  The  large  ICrestovik,  found  by  him  near  Kamyshin  on 
the  Volga,  and  called  Ar.  bicornis,  was  afterwards  described  by 
Krinitsky  in  the  Bull,  de  AIosc,  1837,  N^-  V.,p.  78,  under  the  name 
Ep.  Lepechini,  and  is  probably  Ep.  augulata  or  regia.  Another 
species,  met  with  in  the  Urals  under  the  bark  of  trees,  and  named  by 
Gmelin  Ar.  alba,  is  probably  related  to  Thomisus  onustus  [abbreviatus) 
or  vatius.  Eichwald("  Fauna  Casp.  Caucas.")  confined  himself  to  the 
Arg.  lobata  and  ^rz^;z/2/(f>^// mentioned  above. 

If  we  add  to  these  a  few  more  spidery  described  by  Keyserling  and  L. 
Koch  from  the  environs  of  Sarepta,  we  have,  as  a  general  total  for  the 
whole  cis-Caspian  steppe  country,  and  Turkistan,  only  10  or  12  species, 
which  certainly  does  not  permit  us  to  form  even  an  approximate  idea 
of  the  character  of  the  local  fauna  and  its  relation  to  the  faunae  of  neigh- 
bouring countries. 

The  collection  sent  to  me  principally  consisted  of  the  materials  col- 


544  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

lected  in  Turkistan  and  the  Khanate  of  Khokand,  with  the  addition  ol 
some  species  received  by  Fedchenko  from  the  neighbouring  localities- 
Orenburg,  Semirechia,  and  Kuldja.  The  total  number  of  species 
amounted  to  i8o,  of  which  146  appeared  to  be  recognizable;  of  that 
number  loi  were  already  known,  and  45  were  new. 

As  all  the  species  already  described,  which  were  found  in  Turkistan, 
are  related  to  the  forms  distributed  over  Central  Europe  and  the 
countries  surrounding  the  Mediterranean,  and  as  among  the  new 
species  there  is  not  one  tropical  form,  the  list  of  spiders  here  given 
has  quite  a  European  character.  It  is,  however,  necessar}'  to  remark 
that,  judging  from  the  data  in  our  possession  concerning  the  fauna  of 
Central  and  Southern  Europe,  this  list,  in  all  probability,  does  not  repre- 
sent more  than  one-third  of  the  species  to  be  met  with  in  Turkistan. 
The  labours  of  faunistic  naturalists  of  late  years  have  disclosed,  par- 
ticularly in  Southern  Europe,  an  unexpected  wealth  of  forms,  and  there 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Turkistan  is  poorer  in  this  respect  than 
the  western  countries.  As  regards  North-Westem  and  Central  Europe 
— Westring  (1862)  enumerated  308  species  in  Sweden;  Blackwall 
(1863)  304  in  Britain,  not  reckoning  those  afterwards  described  by 
Cambridge  ;  *  in  Central  Europe,  Menge  (1866)  took  at  least  350  species 
in  East  Prussia  alone  ;  Italy  has,  according  to  Canestrini  and  Pavesi 
("  Catalogo  sistem.,"  1870),  485  species. t 

Quite  as  rich,  apparently,  are  the  southern  and  eastern  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean.  In  dry  and  stony  Syria  and  Palestine,  Cambridge  suc- 
ceeded in  collecting,  in  the  course  of  two  months,  not  less  than  300 
species,  half  of  which  appeared  to  be  new.  This  large  percentage, 
and  the  constant  increase  in  the  number  of  species  in  European  lists, 
show  that  the  figures  quoted  above  are  \evy  far  from  representing  the 
whole  of  this  portion  of  the  fauna  of  the  said  localities.  Doubtless, 
therefore,  in  time,  the  list  of  Turkistan  spiders  will  be  materially 
increased,  and  it  is  also  very  probable  that  in  the  southern  portion, 
in  Balkh,  Kunduz,  etc.,  certain  forms  will  be  found  of  a  tropical 
character,  similar  to  those  found  by  Cambridge  in  Syria,  though  in  a 
ver}'  small  number,  notwithstanding  that  their  distribution  towards  the 
north  does  not,  in  this  countr}%  meet  with  such  important  natural 
obstacles  as,  in  Southern  Turkistan,  are  presented  by  the  Hindu 
Kush  and  the  mountains  on  the  Persian  frontier. 

Of  the  16  families  to  which,  according  to  Thorell  ("  On  European 
Spiders,"  p.  42),  the  European  spiders  belong,  all  except  two  groups 
{Urocteot'dae  and  Filistatoidae),  ver}-  limited  in  number,  have  their 
representatives  in  Turkistan.  The  146  species  known  there  (including 
one  undescribed  Cy7'tauche?nus)  belong  to  55  genera,  which  constitute 
approximately  one  half  of  the  total  of  European  genera  (according  to 
Thorell,  120).  Among  them  are  not  found  many  of  those  semi-tropical 
genera,  such,  for  example,  as  Argyrodes,  Scytodes,  Heferopoda.  Ctenus, 
etc.,  which  belong  also  to  the  Mediterranean  fauna,  not  to  speak  of 
purely  tropical  forms.  The  species  are  distributed  in  such  a  way  that 
after  deducting  45  new  ones,  of  the   remaining  loi   species  15  were 

*  [In  1880,  the  Rev.  O.  Pickard  Cambridge  (who  has  been  good  enough  to  look 
over  this  article  for  me)  was  acquainted  with  518  British  spiders. — //.  Z.] 

t  As  far  as  regards  European  Russia,  the  country  nearest  the  region  in  which 
we  are  interested,  we  have  only  the  incomplete  lists  of  Nordmann  for  Finland, 
Grube  for  the  Baltic  governments,  and  Simashko  for  the  environs  of  St.  Peters- 
burg. But  judging  from  what  Nordmann  says,  and  from  materials  in  my 
possession,  not  less  than  400  species  of  spiders  are  met  with  in  European  Russia. 


APPENDIX  A.—ARANEAE. 


545 


known  up  to  this  time  exclusively  in  Northern  and  Central  Europe  56 
belong  also  to  the  Mediterranean  fauna,  and  30  to  the  latter  alone. 
The  following  are  common  to  Turkistan  and  Central  Europe  :  — 


1.  Linyphia  nebulosa,  Sund. 

2.  Erigone  bicuspidata.  Menge. 

3.  ,,         livida,  Blackw. 

4.  ..         fuscipalpis,  Koch. 

5.  Singa  pygmaea,  Sund. 

6.  Drassus  villosus,  Thor. 

7.  Gnaphosa  variana,  Koch. 

8.  Xysticus  sabulosus,  Hahn. 

Of  the  species  of  the  Mediterranean  fauna  there  are  found  in  Turkistan 


Xysticus  bifasciatus,  Koch. 

,.         luctuosus,  Blackw. 

„  acerbus,  Thor. 

Artanes  pallidus,  Walck. 

,,  paecilus.  Thor. 
Philodromus  elegans,  Blackw 


15.  Lycosa  herbigrada,  Blackw 


1.  Argiope  Brunnichii,  Scop. 

2.  ..        lobata.  Pall. 

3.  Epeira  regia,  C.  Koch. 

4.  ,,       Victoria,  Thor. 

5.  Theridium  punicum,  Luc. 

6.  Latrodectus  erebus,  Sav.  et  Aud. 

7.  ,.  conglobatus,  C.  Koch. 

8.  Dictyna  consecuta,  Cambr. 

9.  Drassus  lutescens,  C.  Koch. 

10.  Melanophora  conspicua.  L.  Koch. 

11.  Gnaphosa  exornata,  C.  Koch. 

12.  (?)  Gnaphosa  rufula,  L.  Koch. 

13.  Chiracanthium  italicum,  Canestr. 

14.  „  Seidlitzii,  L.  Koch. 

15.  Misumena  villosa,  Walck. 

Of  the   new    species    belonging 


16.  Xysticus  brevitarsis,  Sim. 

1 7.  Thanatus  Albini,  Sav.  et  Aud. 
(?)  Cyrtauchenius  Walckenaeri,  Luc. 
Tarentula  narbonensis,  Latr. 

,,          albo-fasciata,  BruUe. 
Trochosa  singoriensis,  Laxm. 
Oxyopes  gentiUs,  C.  Koch. 

23.  Palpimanus  gibbulus,  Duf. 

24.  Eresus  imperialis,  Duf. 
Ballus  rufipes,  Sim. 
(?)  Euophrys  intenta,  Blackw. 
Philaeus  haemorrhoicus,  C.  Koch. 

28.  Menemerus  indistinctus,  Cambr. 

29.  Heliophanus  rufithorax,  Sim. 

30.  Calliethera  tricincta,  C.  Koch. 

to    the   genera    distributed  almost 


18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 

22. 


25- 
26. 

27. 


exclusively  over  the  Mediterranean  district  there  are  also,  Zodariu?n 
bactriamcfn,  Her siliola pallida^  Cteniza  ferghanensis ,  Eresus  tristiSy 
and  Er.  arenarius,  and,  in  addition,  one  Cyrfaicchenms.  Finally,  to  the 
number  of  forms  with  Southern  European  character  may  be  added, 
Meta  deiitipalpis,  Ther/diii?n  tiiberculatujti,  Amaurobms  lo7igi- 
Ipalpis,  Sparassus  sericeus,  Xysticus  lugubris,  and  the  large  species  of 
tarantula,  Taretitula  alticeps,  fulviventris,  and  latifasciata.  The 
remainder  have  a  more  uniform  character,  if  we  do  not  reckon  the 
comparatively  large  numbers  of  certain  species  of  the  family  Dras- 
soidae,  for  example,  Drassus,  Melanuphura,  Chiracanthium,  as  a 
special  distinguishing  feature  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  Mediterranean 
province. 

Thus  the  Turkistan  fauna  of  spiders,  so  far  as  we  now  know,  appears 
to  be  composed  of  representatives  of  both  divisions  of  the  European 
fauna,  with  a  slight  predominance  of  South  European  forms.  Although 
the  apparent  preponderance  of  the  latter,  partly  the  consequence  of  the 
very  limited  materials,  is  in  itself  unimportant,  the  presence  of  many 
characteristic  southern  genera,  as  Argiope,  Latrodectus,  Zodarium, 
Hersiliola,  Eresus,  Palpimanus,  together  with  certain  Theraphosoidae 
{Myga/idae),  and  the  large  Sparassus  and  Tarentula,  at  once  clearly 
shows  the  connection  between  Turkistan  and  the  Mediterranean  pro- 
vince. In  any  case,  our  acquaintance  "with  the  spiders  of  the  Steppe 
fauna  is  still  too  incomplete  to  enable  us  to  say  definitely  whether  it 
constitutes  a  simple  continuation  of  the  Mediterranean  fauna  towards 
the  east,  or  a  special  faunistic  province,  bearing  the  same  relation  to  it 
as  the  Central  European.* 

*  A  certain  peculiarity  of  its  character  may  be  recognized  in  the  comparative 
VOL.  II.  35 


546  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 

With  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the  species  known  previously 
in  Turkistan  itself,  our  observations  do  not  enable  us  to  draw  anv 
conclusions  whatever,  the  more  so,  as  the  European  fauna  in  this 
respect  has  hardly  been  touched.  From  the  comparison  of  the  locali- 
ties it  is  not  evident,  for  instance,  whether  the  Central  European  forms 
met  with  in  Turkistan  belonged  principally  to  any  known  zone,  or 
whether  the  sharp  contrast  in  the  nature  of  the  lower  and  Alpine  zones, 
or  steppe  and  cultivated  zones,  is  accompanied  by  the  predominance  of 
known  typical  forms  of  spiders.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  direct 
attention  to  certain  facts  connected  with  vertical  distribution.  On  the 
banks  of  the  Iskander-Kul,  at  7,000',  were  found  not  only  Epeira 
■patagiata,  Liiiyphia  horteiisis,  Theridium  sisyphii/m,  Alisumena 
vatia,  and  Thoniisiis  onustus,  but  in  much  higher  localities  not  a  few 
species  were  also  met  with.  Thus  in  Autchi  pass,  at  an  elevation  of 
7,500'  to  11,200'  were  collected  Erigone  bicuspidata,  TJuridiiwi 
albo}naculatuiu,  Lycosa  palustris^  Xysticiis  crtstatus,  and  Philaeus 
hae^norrhoicits,  and  of  the  new  species,  Drassiis  breviceps^  juotiticohi, 
and  Lycosa  velox ;  in  the  Kichi-Alai,  higher  than  9,000',  were  found 
Lycosa  palustris,  X.  cristatus,  and  Heliophamis  trimcorum,  and  on 
the  Jiptyk  pass  at  8,650',  Latrodectus  conglobatus . 

The  evident  incompleteness  of  our  information  concerning  Turkistan 
spiders  was  also  the  cause  of  my  departure  from  the  plan  laid  down 
of  giving  a  table  for  the  definition  of  genera  and  species.  For  the 
European  genera,  which  up  to  the  present  have  been  met  with  in 
Turkistan,  there  exists  already  a  very  detailed  table  in  the  work  of  Prof. 
Thorell,  of  Upsala  ("On  European  Spiders,"  by  T.  Thorell,  Upsala. 
4to,  1869-70),  a  work  which  I  have  followed  in  the  systematic  arrange- 
ment of  the  species  enumerated  below  : — 

I.  Epfiroidae.  I  II.  Thp:ridioidae. 

Argiope  Briinnichii,  Scop.  j   21.  Pachygnatha  Clerkii,  Sund. 


2.        „        lobata,  Pall. 


3.  Epeira  regia,  Koch.  ;   23.  Linyphia  pusilla, 


4.  ,,  tartarica,  n.s. 

5.  „  cornuta.  CI. 

6.  ,,  patagiata,  ,, 

7.  ,,  sellers.  Walck. 

8.  „  cucurbitina.  CI. 

9.  ..  adianta,  Walck. 

10.  ..  acalypha,     ,, 

11.  .,  Victoria,  Thor. 


22.  ..  de  Geeri, 


24.  ,,         hortensis, 

25.  „         nebiilosa. 

26.  Erigone  dentipalpis.  Reuss. 

27.  .,         bicuspidata.  Menge. 

28.  ,,        livida,  Blackw. 

29.  „         fuscipalpis,  C.  Koch. 

30.  Ero  tuberculata.  de  G. 
Theridium  (Phyllonethis)  lineatuni, 


12.  Singa  haniata,  CI.  I  CI. 

13.  ..       Herii,  Hahn.  I  32.  ..  sisyphium,  CI, 

14.  ,.       pygmaea,  Sund.  1  33.  ..  tuberculatum,  n.s. 

15.  ..       albovittata,  Westr.  j  34.  ..  punicum,  Luc. 

16.  „       aenea,  n.s.  35.  Steatoda  triangulosa,  Walck. 

17.  Zilla  montana,  C.  Koch.  1  36.  Lithyphantes  corollatus,  L. 


[8.  Meta  dentipalpis,  n.s. 

19.  Tetragnatha  e.xtensa,  L. 

20.  Uloborus  Walckenaerius,  Latr. 


37.  .,  hamatus,  C.  Koch. 

38.  Latrodectus  conglobatus,      ., 

39.  v  erelms,  Sav.  et  Aud. 


poverty  of  Turkistan  representatives  of  the  family  of  Attoidcu,  which,  as  i; 
known,  is  extremely  rich  in  .species  in  Southern  Europe,  N,  Africa,  and  Syria 
and,  further,  is  compostd  of  forms  not  so  easily  escaping  the  attention  of  collector; 
as  the  small  Linyphia.  Erigone,  and  others.  Judging  from  what  I  have  succeede( 
in  collecting  in  the  steppes  of  S.E.  Russia  and  the  eastern  part  of  the  Caucasus 
these  localities  also,  in  an  important  degree,  fall  short  of  the  numerous  Attoidae  0 
Western  countries. 


APPENDIX  A.—ARAA^EAE. 


547 


40. 
41. 
42. 

43- 

44. 

45- 
46. 

47- 

48. 
49. 
50- 
51- 
52- 
53- 
54- 
55- 
56. 

57- 
58. 

59- 
60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 

71- 

72. 

73- 

74- 

75- 
76. 

77- 
78. 

80. 
81. 
82. 

84. 

^5- 
86. 

87. 


90. 


III.    SCYTODOIDAE. 

Pholcus  Forskalii,  Thor. 
IV.    Enyoidae. 
Zodarium  bactrianum,  n.s. 

V.  Hersilioidae. 
Hersiliola  pallida,  n.s. 

VI.  Agelenoidae. 
Dictyna  arundinacea,  L. 

„        consecuta,  Cambr. 
Amaurobius  longipalpis,  n.s. 
Caelotes  major,  n.s. 
Agelena  labyrinthica,  CI. 

VII.  Drassoidae. 
Clubiona  maracandica,  n.a. 
Chiracanthium  carnifex,  Fabr. 

nutrix,  Walck. 
italicum,Can.  et  Pav. 
.,  .Seidlitzii,  L.  Koch. 

..  brevidens,  n.s. 

Micaria  pulicaria.  Sund. 
pygmaea,  n.s. 
modesta,  n.s. 
Drassus  villosus,  Thor. 

loricatus,  L.  Koch. 
lutescens.  C.  Koch, 
rufescens,  n.s. 
breviceps,  n.s. 
tiionticola,  n.s. 
Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 
Melanophora  Petiverii,  Scop. 

..  conspicua,  L.  Koch, 

jaxartensis,  n.s. 
fuscimana,  n.s. 
hamipalpis,  n.s. 
picea,  n.s. 
Gnaphosa  variana,  C.  Koch, 
exoniata,        ,, 
rufula,  L.  Koch. 

VIII.  Dysderoiuae. 

Dysdera  aculeata,  n.s. 

tartarica,  n.s. 

IX.  Theraphosoidae. 

Cteniza  ferghanensis,  n.s. 

Cyrtauchenius  Walckenaeri,  Luc. 

X.  Thomisoidae. 
Sparassus  sericeus,  n.s. 
oculatus,  n.s. 
Artanes  pallidus,  Walck. 

poecilus,  Thor. 
Philodromus  aureolus,  CI. 

elegans,  Black w. 
fallax,  Sund. 
pictus,  JUS. 
humilis,  n.s. 
Thanatus  oblongus,  Walck. 
arenarius,  Thor. 
Albini,  Sav.  et  Aud. 
Thomisus  abbreviatus,  Walck. 
Misumena  vatia,  CI. 


91. 

Misumena  lateralis,  C.  Koch. 

92. 

villosa,  Walck. 

93- 

Diaea  dorsata,  Fabr. 

94. 

globosa,     ,. 

95- 

Xysticus  cristatus,  CI. 

96. 

,.         bifasciatus,  C  Koch. 

97- 

,.         hictuosus,  Blackw. 

98. 

acerbus,  Thor. 

99. 

,.         sabidosus,  Hahn. 

100. 

brevitarsis,  Sim. 

lOI. 

concinnus,  n.s. 

102. 

..         lugubris,  n.s. 

XL  Lycosoidae. 

103. 

Lycosa  herbigrada,  Blackw. 

104. 

palustris,  L. 

105. 

velox,  n.s. 

106. 

oriental  is,  n.s. 

107. 

concolor,  n.s. 

108. 

,.      aculeata,  n.s. 

109. 

Tarentula  trabalis.  CI. 

no. 

fabrilis,   ,, 

III. 

albofasciata,  Brulle 

112. 

latifasciata,  n.s. 

113- 

narbonensis,  Latr. 

114. 

alticeps,  n.s. 

115- 

fulviventris,  n.s. 

116. 

Trochosa  ruricola,  De  G. 

117. 

,,        terricola,  Thor. 

118. 

,,        cinerea,  Fabr. 

119. 

,.        singoriensis,  Laxm. 

120. 

Dolomedes  fimbriatus,  CI. 

121. 

Ocyale  mirabilis.  CI. 

XIL  Oxyopoidae. 

122. 

Oxyopes  lineatus,  Latr. 

123. 

,.        gentilis,  C.  Koch. 

XIII.  Eresoidae. 

124. 

Palpimanus  gibbulus,  Duf. 

125. 

Eresus  cinnabarinus,  Oliv. 

126. 

tristis,  n.s. 

127. 

imperialis.  Duf. 

128. 

arenarius,  n.s. 

XIV.  Attoidae. 

129. 

Leptorchestes  hilarulus,  C.  Koch. 

130- 

Epiblemum  tricinctum,          ,, 

131- 

Heliophanus  truncorum,       ,, 

132. 

„            flavipes,  Hahn. 

133- 

,,            nitens,  C  Koch. 

134- 

,,             iiifithorax,  Sim. 

135- 

Ballus  rufipes,  Sim. 

136- 

Marpessa  obscura,  n.s. 

137- 

marginata,  n.s. 

138. 

Menemeras  indistinctus,  Camoi. 

139- 

Euophrys  intenta,  Blackw. 

140. 

„         ocellata,  n.s. 

141. 

Philaeus  haemorrhoicus,  C.  Koch 

142. 

Attus  floricola,  C.  Koch. 

143- 

albo-cinctus,  n.s. 

144. 

elegans,  n.s. 

H5- 

Aelurops  ater,  n.s. 

146 

variegatus,  n.s. 

548  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


CRUSTACEA. 

By  V.   N.   Ulianin. 

The  following  pages  contain  the  results  of  the  examination  of  part  of 
the  Crustacea  collected  by  Fedchenko,  viz.,  Amphipoda,  Isopoda,  Cope- 
poda,  Fhyllopoda,  and  Cladocera.  Ostracoda  will  form  the  subject  of 
another  part  of  the  "  Travels  in  Turkestan." 

The  Copepoda  Fedchenko  proposed  to  treat  himself,  and  conse- 
quently devoted  special  attention  to  creatures  of  this  order.  During 
his  travels  he,  whenever  possible,  submitted  the  specimens  of  this  order 
that  he  collected  to  a  more  or  less  detailed  preliminary  investigation. 
To  such  preliminary,  but  in  the  majority  of  cases  very  minute,  investi- 
gation were  also  submitted  all  species  of  the  genus  Cyclops  collected 
by  him.  There  only  remained  for  me  to  verify  his  remarks,  in  part  to 
complete  them,  and  prepare  from  them  the  descriptions  of  the  species  of 
that  genus  furnished  by  myself.  In  this  I  have  received  great  assistance 
from  the  beautiful  and  remarkably  detailed  drawings  of  entire  specimens 
of  Cyclops  and  also  of  many  details,  prepared  from  fresh  specimens,  by 
Madame  Fedchenko,  under  the  supervision  of  her  husband. 

[These  drawings  are  added  in  the  original. — H.  Z.] 

I  have  endeavoured  to  compile  the  present  list  as  a  handbook,  with 
synoptical  tables.  With  the  aid  of  these  tables,  the  distinguishing 
marks  of  the  new  forms  described  by  me,  and  of  forms  previously  defined, 
are  easily  seen. 

In  all  there  are  51  species  enumerated  in  the  present  volume  {2 
Atnphipoda,  9  Isopoda,  17  free-living  Copepuda,  2  parasitic  Copepoda, 
2  PhylLopoda,  and  19  Cladocera),  of  which  17  are  new  (i  Amphipoda, 
7  Isopoda,  8  Copepoda,  and  i  Cladocera^.  Doubtless  there  is  to  be 
found  in  Turkistan  a  much  larger  number  of  species  of  Crustacea,-  and 
much  remains  to  be  done  by  future  investigators  of  that  countr}-  to 
complete  the  present  list. 

The  land  Crustacea  are  represented  in  the  collection  by  only  one 
genus,  Porcellio,  the  multitudinous  species  of  which  are,  as  is  known, 
scattered  over  the  world.  It  is  very  probable  that  in  Turkistan  thert 
are  to  be  found  certain  other  genera  of  Porcellioiiidcc  very  common  ir. 
Europe  (viz.,  Ligidiutn,  Philoscia,  and  Platyar'thrus),  which  are  di- 
tributed  over  the  whole  of  Central  and  Southern  European  Russia.  Tl) 
absence  of  species  of  these  genera  in  Fedchenko's  collection  may  easil\ 
be  explained,  partly  by  the  mode  of  life  of  creatures  related  to  thes. 
genera  (species  of  the  genera  Philoscia  and  Ligidiutn  always  livi 
solitarily  and  somewhat  concealed),  and  partly  from  their  small  siz« 
{Platyarthrus). 

Neither  one  cause  nor  the  other  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  absence  fron 
the  Turkistan  collection  of  the  genera  Ar77iadillidi7(m  and  Artnadili 


APPENDIX  A.— CRUSTACEA.  549 

the  first  of  which  inhabits  the  whole  of  Central  (part  of  Northern)  and 
Southern  Europe,  the  second  being  principally  distributed  over  South 
Europe.  The  species  of  the  two  above-named  genera  always  attain  a 
considerable  size,  and  are  always  found  in  large  numbers  dispersed  over 
limited  areas.  The  consequence  is  that  in  localities  inhabited  by 
the  species  of  these  genera,  some  of  the  first  are  always  caught  by 
the  collector,  and  they  are  always  represented  in  collections  by 
numerous  specimens.  The  absence  of  representatives  of  these  genera 
in  the  Turkistan  collection  appears  to  me,  therefore,  a  very  weighty 
evidence  that  they  really  do  not  inhabit  Russian  Central  Asia.  The 
absence  of  the  genera  ArmadiUidiu7?i  and  Armadillo  from  the  Tur- 
kistan fauna  is  also  partly  confirmed  by  their  distribution  in  other 
countries.  The  species  of  the  genus  Ar fuadillidium.  in  the  west 
of  Europe  extend  tolerably  far  towards  the  north  ;  many  of  them  are 
found  in  the  northern  part  of  the  British  Isles,  in  North  Germany, 
Denmark,  and  even  in  Southern  Sweden.  As  we  advance  towards 
the  east  the  northern  limit  of  distribution  of  genus  Armadillidium 
trends  rapidly  southwards,  and  within  the  limits  of  European  Russia,  so 
far  as  I  can  judge  from  my  rather  extensive  collection  oi  Parcel lionidae, 
it  does  not  extend  beyond  the  north  of  Kief  and  the  neighbouring 
provinces. 

As  regards  the  species  of  the  genus  Porcellio,  found  in  Turkistan, 
they  decidedly  ought  to  be  added  to  the  number  of  the  species  living 
in  the  so-called  Mediterranean  region.  Of  the  two  species  found  by 
Fedchenko  in  Turkistan,  which  had  been  already  described,  one  {Pore, 
ortiatus,  M.-E.)  was  previously  found  in  the  environs  of  Carthagena,  and 
the  other  {Pore,  laevis,  Latr.),  though  it  is  also  distributed  over  the  whole 
of  Central  Europe  as  is  shown  by  me  in  its  place,  principally  belongs 
to  Southern  Europe,  where  only  it  attains  its  full  development.  The 
Turkistan  specimens  are  similar  to  those  dwelling  in  Southern  Europe 
along  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  and  neighbouring  seas,  and  are, 
like  these,  distinguished  from  the  Central  European  forms  by  the  con- 
stantly larger  size,  and  also  by  certain  constant  differences  in  the 
colouring  of  the  body.  Of  the  species  of  Poreellio  described  by  me 
as  new,  Pore.  FedcheJikoi  is  extremely  like  that,  described  b}'  Brandt, 
from  Southern  European  Russia  {Pore.  PallasW) ;  Pore,  elegans  is 
extremely  like  that  inhabiting  the  Trans-Caucasus  and  Persia  {Pore. 
Klicgii,  Bdt.),  and  that  common  in  the  whole  of  North  Africa  {Pore. 
Reaumur ii,  Aud.);  Pore,  m^araeandieus  is  very  near  that  described 
from  Andalusia  {Pore,  glaber,  Koch) ;  Pore,  asiatieus  is  doubtless 
allied  to  that  described  from  South  Europe  by  Stein  {Pore,  longieor- 
nis).  -The  foregoing  considerations,  together  with  the  fact  that  the 
forms  foreign  to  the  Mediterranean  province,  though  very  common  over 
the  whole  of  Central  Europe  including  Central  European  Russia  {Pore, 
convexus,  Dg.,  Pore,  seaber,  Bdt.,  Pore,  pietus.^  Bdt.),  are  not  found  in 
Turkistan,  induce  me  to  characterize  the  land  fauna  of  Crustacea  as 
not  very  different  from  that  of  the  Mediterranean  province. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  treat  in  a  satisfactory  manner  the  fresh- 
water fauna  of  Crustacea,  not  only  because  the  materials  collected  by 
Fedchenko  constitute  only  a  certain  proportion  of  all  the  Crustacea 
dwelling  in  fresh-water  in  Turkistan,  but  also  in  consequence  of  the 
paucity  of  materials  for  comparison.  The  fresh-water  Crustacea  of  only 
very  few  parts  of  Europe  have  been  investigated  at  all  completely. 

Fedchenko,    during    his    travels,    found     no    species    of    Astaeus 


550  RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

(crayfish),  and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  non-existent  in 
Turkistan,  as  in  West  and  North  Siberia.* 

The  fresh-water  Gatnmarn-s  is  represented  by  the  ordinary  G.  pulex, 
distributed  over  the  whole  of  Europe. 

Fresh-water  Isopoda  were  not  found  by  the  expedition.  Asel/us, 
which  is  so  common  in  European  fresh  waters,  does  not  appear  to  be 
found  in  Turkistan. 

Of  1 9  Copepoda  found,  two  are  the  common  fish  parasites  of  Europe 
{La7?iprogleiia  ;p7ilchel/a  Sixxd.  A7'g7i/us /oliace?is)\  the  remaining  17 
species  belong  to  three  genera  common  to  Europe — Diaptoinus,  Can- 
thoca7nptus ,  and  Cyclops.  The  genus  Diaptuimis  is  represented  in 
the  collection  by  two  new  and  rather  remarkable  species  ;  only  one 
species  of  the  genus  Canthocamptiis  was  found,  which  is  common  all 
over  Europe.  Finally,  of  the  14  species  of  the  genus  Cyclops  found,  5 
species  are  widely  distributed  over  Central  and  Northern  Europe  (C. 
sig7iatus,  viridis,  teiiuicornis,  serrulatus,  and  phale7'atus),  2  were 
previously  found  only  in  the  Scandinavian  peninsula  and  Denmark 
\C.  affi7iis,  Sars.  and  crassico7'7iis,  M.):  i  (C  Claiisii,  Heller)  was 
observed  only  in  the  Tyrol,  and  the  remaining  6  are  new,  more  or  less 
resembling  European  species. 

Of  the  two  species  of  Turkistan  Phyllopoda,  one  {B7'a7ichipus 
ferox)  is  largely  distributed  over  all  Southern  Europe,  and  the  other 
[Estherm  dahalacensis)  lives  along  the  shores  (northern  as  well  as 
southern)  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  w^aters  lying  near  it. 

The  last  section  included  in  this  paper — Cladoce7'a — contains  19 
species.  Of  these  15  are  more  or  less  common  in  the  whole  of  Western 
Europe.  Three  species  had  already  been  found  onlv  in  the  Scandinavian 
peninsula  and  Denmark  (two  species  of  Ce7'iodaph7iia  and  PIeu7'oxus 
hastatiis'),  and  there  is  but  one  new^  species  belonging  to  the  in- 
teresting section  of  the  genus  Daph7tia  (designated  by  Schodler 
Hyalodaphiiid),  representatives  of  which  were  previously  observed  in 
North  Germany,  Denmark,  Scandinavian  peninsula,  and  Central  Euro- 
pean Russia. 

As  is  evident  from  the  foregoing,  it  is  difficult  to  say,  from  the  data 
at  present  in  our  possession,  to  what  extent  the  Turkistan  fauna  of 
fresh-water  Crustacea  differs  from  that  of  other  localities.  All  that 
we  can  say,  confidently,  is  that  among  the  Crustacea  living  in  the 
fresh  waters  of  Russian  Central  Asia,  a  verj-  large  number  of  West 
European  species  is  found,  and  that  the  new  species,  described  by 
me,  are,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  very  like  the  commonest  in  Central 
and  Southern  Europe. 

With  regard  to  the  two  Crustacea  taken  in  the  Aral  Sea,  one  ol 
them  appears  to  be  a  new  species,  described  by  me  under  the  name 
Ga77t77ia7'us  aralensis ;  the  other — an  Ergasilus — unfortunately,  was 
lost,  so  that  the  species  remains  undescribed.  The  unimportant 
number  of  Crustacea  brought  from  the  Aral  Sea  by  the  expedition 
cannot  on  any  account  be  taken  as  an  evidence  of  special  security 
of  crustaceans  there. 

*  [Madame  Fedchenko  informs  me.  however,  that  the  Astacus  has  since  been 
found  in  Turkistan.  as  communicated  by  Major  N.  A.  Maieff  to  the  Moscow 
Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  History  :  and  that  the  full  description  of  the  species^ 
or  rather  vnriety.  which  proved  to  he  new  and  somewhat  different  from  the  six 
species  hitherto  known  in  Russia,  has  been  given  by  Shimkevich  in  the  Zoologischet 
Anzeiger,  1884.—//.  Z.] 


APPENDIX  A.— CRUSTACEA, 


551 


AMPHIPODA. 
Gammarus,  Fabr.  Fnsh-water shrimp. 

1.  Gammarus  pulex,  Degeer. 

2.  ..  aralensis,  n.s. 

IsoPODA,      IVoodlice. 
Porcellio,  Latr. 
Porcellio  Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 
..         elegans,  n.s. 

ornatus,  M.-Edw. 
latus.  n.s. 
maracandicus,  n.s. 
asiaticus,  n.s. 
laevis,  Ltr. 
marginatus,  n.s. 
orientalis,  n.s. 
ENTOMOSTRACA.     Water-fleas 
COPEPODA,    M.-EDW. 

Calanidae,  Dana. 
Diaptomus,  Westw. 

1.  Diaptomus  asiaticus,  n.s. 

2.  „  affinis,  n.s. 

Harpactidae,  Dana. 
Canthocamptus,  Westw. 

I.  Camhocamptus  mimitus,  Claus. 
Cyclopidae,  Dana. 

Cyclops. 

1.  Cyclops  signatus,  Koch. 

2.  ,,  viridis,  J  urine. 

3.  ,.  tenuicornis,  Claus. 

4.  ,,  vicinus,  n.s. 

5.  „  Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

6.  „  Sarsii,  n.s. 

7.  ,,  orientalis,  n.s. 

^.  ,,  serrulatus,  Fischer. 

9.  ,.  alaiensis,  7i.s. 

10.  ,,  affinis,  Sars. 

11.  ..  Clausii,  Heller. 

12.  ..  phaleratus,  Koch. 

13.  ..  Kaufmanni,  n.s. 

14.  .,  crassicornis,  Miiller. 

Ergasilidae.,  Burin. 
Ergasilus,  Nordm. 
I.   Ergasilus,  s. 


Dichelestidae,  M.  -Ediu. 
Lamproglena,  Nordm. 
I.   Lamproglena  pulchella,  Nordm. 
Argnlidae,  Burm. 

Argulus,  Miiller. 
I.  Argulus  foliaceus,  Lin. 

BRANCHIOPODA. 

Phyllopoda. 
BrancMpus,  Schaeff. 
I.   Branchipus  ferox,  M.-Edw. 

Estheria,  Straus. 
I.   Estheria  dahalacensis,  Straus. 

Cladocera,  Ltr. 
I.   Sida,  Straus. 
I.   Sida  crystallina,  O.  F.  Miiller. 
II.  Daphnia,  Schodler. 

1.  Daphnia  Schaefferi,  Baird. 

2.  ,,        pulex,  Degeer. 

3.  „         vitrea,  n.s. 
Simocephalus,  Schodler. 

1.  Simocephalus  vetulus,  O.  F.  Miillei. 

2.  ,,  exspinosus,  Koch. 
Scapholeberis,  Schodler. 

I.   Scapholeberis  mucronata,  O.  F.  Miill. 
Ceriodaphnia,  Dana. 

1.  Ceriodaphnia  laticaudata,  Miill.,  P. E. 

2.  .,  pulchella,  Sars. 

Moina,  Baird. 
I.  Moina  brachiata,  Jurine. 

Macrothrix,  Baird. 
I.   Macrothrix  laticornis,  Jurine. 

Bosmina,  Baird. 
i(?).   Bosminal  ongirostris,  O.  F.  Miiller. 

Acroperus,  Baird. 
I.    Acroperus  leucocephalus,  Koch. 
Alona,  Baird. 

1.  Alona  quadran^ularis,  O.  F.  Miiller. 

2.  ,,      lineata,  Fisch. 

Pleuroxus,  Baird. 

1.  Pleuroxus  aduncus,  Jurine. 

2.  ,.         trigonellus,  O.  F.  Miiller. 

3.  „         hastatus,  Sars. 

Chydorus,  Leach. 
I.   Chydorus  sphaericus,  O.  F.  Miiller. 


552  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


COLEOPTERA  {Beetles). 

By  S.  M.  Solsky. 

[The  first  part  in  the  original  contains  the  description  of  352  species, 
distributed  among  114  genera,  belonging  to  10  families.  Of  these 
43  species  were  not  found  in  Fedchenko's  collection,  but  they  were 
introduced  by  Solsky  because  they  belonged  either  to  Turkistan  or  the 
adjacent  regions.  There  were  61  species  which  appeared  to  be  quite 
new  to  science,  one  of  them  claiming  recognition  as  a  new  genus. 
To  the  description  of  all  new  species,  and  also  of  certain  others  pre- 
viously known  but  insufficiently  described,  is  added  in  the  original 
a  tolerably  complete  diagnosis  in  Latin,  where  also  those  of  the  formerly 
known  species  of  which  Solsky  had  seen  original  specimens  are 
designated  by  an  asterisk.  The  first  part  constitutes  approximately 
one-third  of  the  work  undertaken  by  Solsky,  which  he  believed  to 
embrace  in  all  as  many  as  1,000  species.  The  second  part  contains 
the  description  of  178  species,  distributed  among  55  genera,  belonging 
to  14  families.  Of  this  number  49  species  and  one  genus  proved  to  be 
pew.  In  the  second  part,  also,  are  commenced  synoptical  tables  which 
will  serve  for  the  definition  of  the  families  and  genera  to  which  belong 
the  species  he  described. 

Solsky  intended,  in  the  third  part,  to  write  a  general  preface,  but 
did  not  live  to  complete  his  manuscript,  A  few  sheets  only  were 
printed,  I  am  informed  by  Madame  Fedchenko,  who  has  been  good 
enough  to  copy  them  for  me,  and  they  are  placed  at  the  end  of  the 
following  list.  Mr.  Robert  MacLachlan,  F.R.S.,  has  pointed  out  to 
me,  however,  concerning  these  species,  unpublished  elsewhere,  that 
nothing  is  more  troublesome  in  systematic  zoology  than  the  publica- 
tion of  names  only  without  descriptions ;  and  seeing  there  are  many 
new  species  in  this  addenda,  I  have,  in  deference  to  his  suggestion, 
struck  out  the  specific  names  for  the  new  species,  and  left  the 
generic  name  with  7i.s.  only.  Solsky' s  description  of  some  new 
Turkistan  species  was  published  by  his  friend,  M.  Erschoff,  in  th(> 
Hor.  Soc.  Ent.  Ross. 

Madame  Fedchenko  further  informs  me  that  in  a  previous  article  in 
the  Hor.  Soc.  Ejit.  Ross.,  Vol.  viii.,  pp.  133  and  165,  Solsky  gave  a 
full  description  (in  French)  of: — 

Curculiojiides :  (i)  Alcides  Chaudoiri,  Guer. 

Longicornes :  (2)  Pachydissus  sartus,  n.s.,  and  of  many  Staphy- 
linides. — H.  Z.] 


APPENDIX  A.—COLEOPTERA. 


553 


I.  CICINDELETAE. 
1.  Cicindela,  L. 

1.  Cicindela  decempustulata,  Menetr. 

2.  „         lurkestanica,  Ballion. 

3.  „         maracandensis,  n.s.,  Slky. 

4.  „         lacteola.  Pall. 

5.  „         Fischeri,  Adams. 

6.  „         melancholica,  Fabr. 

7.  „         sublacerata,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

8.  „         descendens,  Fisch. 

9.  V         Kirilovi,  ,, 

ir.   CARABIDAE. 

Group  I.  Omophronini. 

1.  Omophron,  Latr. 

I.   Omophron  rotundatus,  Chaud. 

Group  2.   Elaphrini. 

2.    Notiophilus,   Dumer. 

I.  Notiophilus  sublaevis,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

Group  3.  Carabini. 

3.  Nebria,  Latr. 

1.  Nebria  psammophila,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  ,.      limbigera,  n.s.,  ,, 

4.  Carabus,  L. 

1.  Carabus  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  ..      Stschurovskii,  n.s.,       ,, 

3.  ..      Kaufmanni,  n.s.,  ,, 

5.  Calosoma,  Web. 
Section  i.    Calosoma. 

1.  Calosoma  sycophanta.  L. 

2.  ,,        turcomanicum,  Motsch. 

3.  ,,        sericeum,  Fabr. 

Section  2.    Callisthenes,  Fisch. 

1.  Callisihenes  Kuschakewitschi,  Ball. 

2.  .,  usgentensis, «. J.,  Solsky. 

Group  4.  Dryptini. 

6.  Polystichns,  Bonelli. 

I.  Polystichus  vittatus,  Brull. 

Group  5.  Brachinini. 

7.  BracMinis,  "Web. 

1.  Brachinus  psophia,  Dej. 

2.  ,.         brevicollis,  Motsch. 

3.  .,         graecus,  Dej. 

8.  Mastaz,  Fisch. 
I.  Mastax  thermaruni,  Stev. 
Group  6.  Lebiini. 
9.     Cymindis,    Latr. 

1.  Cymindis  Andreae,  Menetr. 

2.  „  accentifera,  Zubk. 

3.  .,  decora,  Fisch. 

4.  ..  quadrisignata,  Menetr. 

5.  .,  rufescens,  Gebl. 

6.  ..  Mannerheimi.  Gebl. 


10.  Glycia,  Chaud. 

Glycia  tricolor,  Gebl. 
„      cingulata,   ,, 
.,     flavipes,  n.s.,  Solsky. 
„      bicolor,  n.s.,       „ 
..     anthracina,  n.s.,  ,, 

11.  Demetrias,  Bonelli. 

Demetrias  unipunctatus,  Germ. 

12.  Blechrus,  Motsch. 

Blechrus  plagiatus,  Duft. 
.,       maurus,  Sturm, 
minutus,  Motsch. 

13.  Metabletus,  Schm.-Goeb. 

Metabletus  fuscomaculatus,  Motsch. 
,,         parallelus,  Ballion. 
,,         obliquesignatus,  Solsky. 

14.  Lamprias,  Bonelli. 
Lamprias  cyanocephalus,  L. 
.,       festivus,  Faldrm. 

15.  Lebia,  Latr. 

Lebia  trimaculata,  Gebl. 
.,      cyathigera.  Rossi, 
crux  minor,  L. 

.,      turcica,  Fabr. 

16.  Tetragonoderus,  Dej. 
Tetragonoderusintermedius,  n.s..  Sky. 

Group  7.    DiTOMiNi. 
17.  Aristus,  Latr. 
Aristus  punctulatus,  Chaud. 

tenuesculptus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

18.  Ditomus,  Bonelli. 

Ditomus  calydonius,  Rossi. 
.,       chodschenticus,  Ball. 

19.  Carenochyrus,  n.^.,  Solsky. 
Carenochyrus  titanus,  n.s  ,  Solsky. 

20.  Chilotomns,  Chaud. 
Chilotomus  chalybaeus,  Fldrm. 

Group  8.    SCARITINI. 

21.  Scarites,  Fabr. 

Scarites  bucida,  Pall, 
eurytus,  Fisch. 
Fisf'heri,  Zubk. 
cylindronotus,  Fldrm. 
salinus,  Pall, 
persicus,  Chaud. 

22.  Dyschirius,  Bonelli. 

Dyschirius  cylindricus,  Dej. 

ovicollis,  n.s.,  Solsky. 
dimidiatus,  Chaud. 


554 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


23.  Clivina,  Latr. 
Clivina  collaris,  Herbst. 
„       Ypsilon.  Dej. 

Group  9.  Chlaeniini. 
24,     Chlaenius,  Bonelli. 

Chlaenius  spoliatus,  Rossi, 
,.         caspicus,  Motsch. 

extensus,  Eschsch. 
.,         tenuelimbatus,  Ball. 
,.         chrysothorax,  Kryn. 

Schranki,  Duft. 

flavicornis,  Fisch. 

Steveni,  Quensel, 

semicyaneus,  «.j.,  Solsky. 

holosericeus,  Fabr, 

Group  10,   LiciNiNi. 
25,  Licinus,  Latr. 
Licinus  depressus,  Payk. 

Group  II.  Cnemacanthini. 
26.  Dioctes,  Menetr. 
Dioctes  Lehmanni,  Menetr. 

27.  Broscus,  Panz. 

Broscus  asiaticus,  Ball. 

Group  12,   Harpalini, 
28.     Anisodactylus,    Dej. 
Anisodactylus  signatus,  Illig, 
29.  Acinopus,  Dej. 

Acinopus  striolatus,  Zubk, 

30.  Dichirotrichus,  Duval. 
Dichirotrichus  ustulatus,  Dej. 

,,  microderus,  ii.s..  Slky. 

,.  discicollis,  Dej. 

31.  Fangus,  Ziegl. 
Pangus  brachypus,  Stev. 

,,       externepunctatus,  n.s.,  Slsky. 
„       intermittens,  fi.s.,  ,, 

„       diversopunctatus,  n.s.,     ,, 

32.  Harpalus,  Latr, 

Section  i.    Ophoniis,  Ziegl. 
Ophonus  tataricus,  Menetr. 

cycloderus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 
chlorizans,  n.s.,         „ 

Section  2,  Harpalus. 
Harpalus  ruficornis,  Fabr, 
„         griseus,  Panz. 
,,         anisodactyliformis,       n.s., 

Solsky. 
„         distinguendus.  Duft. 
„         viridulus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 
„         calceatus,  Duft. 


7.  Harpalus  tenebrosus,  Dej, 

8.  .,  remboides,  n.s.,  Solsky 

9.  .,  serripes,  Quensel. 
10.         ..  picipennis,  Duft. 

33.  Acupalpus,  Latr, 

I,  Acupalpus  dor  sal  is,  Fabr. 

34.  Stenolophus,  Dej, 

1.  Stenolophus  abdominalis,  Gene. 

2.  ..  marginatus,  Dej. 

3.  ..  morio,  Menetr. 

Group  13.    Pterostichini. 

35.  Pterosticlius,  Erichs. 

Section   i.     Poecilus,   Bonelli. 

1.  Poecilus  punctulatus,  Fabr. 

2.  ,.  laevigatus,  Menetr, 

3.  ,.  cupreus,  L, 

4.  ,.  longiventris,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

5.  ..  Karelini,  Chaud, 

6.  ,,  janthinipennis,  7i.s.,  Slsky. 

7.  „  deplanatus,  Menetr. 

8.  ,,  leptoderus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

9.  ,.  carbonicolor,  n.s.,     ,, 
10.  ,.  laevicollis,  Chaud. 

Section  2.  Lagarns,  Chaud. 
I.  Lagarus  vernalis,  Panz. 

Section  3.    Oviaseus,  Ziegler. 
I.   Omaseus  niger,  Schaller. 

Section  4.  Argulor,  Megerlc. 
I.  Argutor  stricticollis,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

36.  Zabrus,  Clairv. 
I.   Zabrus  gibbosus.  Zimm. 

37.  Amara,  Bonelli. 
Section  I.   Braiytus.  Steph. 

I.   Bradytus  apricarius,  Payk. 

Section  2.  Cyrtonotus,  Steph. 

1.  Cyrtonotus  caucasicus,  Motsch. 

2.  ,.          intermedius.      ,, 

Section  3.  Ajuathitis,  Zitnf?i. 

1.  Amathitis  microdera.  Chaud. 

2.  ,.         songarica,         ,, 

Section  4.   Celia.  Zimm. 

1.  Celia  erratica,  Duft. 

2.  .,     ambulans,  Zimm. 

3.  ,,      picina,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

4.  ..      testicola,  Zimm. 

Section  5.   Amara,  Zimm. 

1.  Amara  rufipes,  Dej. 

2.  ..       similata,  Gyll. 

3.  ..       famelica,  Zimm. 

4.  ..       trivialis,  Gyll. 


A  PPENDIX  A  .—COLEOPTERA , 


555 


Group   14.     Anchomenini. 
38.  Taphoxenus,  Schauf. 
I.  Taphoxenus  Goliath.  Zubk. 

39.  Pseudotaphoxenus,  Schauf. 
I.   Pseudotaphoxenus  substriatus,  Ball. 

40.  Calathus,  Bonelli. 

1.  Calathus  ambiguus,  Payk. 

2.  ..         nielanocephalus,  L. 

41.  Taphria,  Bonelli. 

I.   Taphria  nivalis,  Panz. 

42.  Dolichus,  Bonelli. 
I.   Dolichus  flavicornis,  Fabr. 

43.  Anchomenns,  Erichs. 

1.  Anchomenus  turkestani-^us,  Ball. 

2.  ..  dorsalis,  Miill. 

Group  15.    Trechini. 
44.  Trechus,  Clair  v. 

1.  Trechus  minutus,  Fabr. 

Group    16.      I5EMBIDIINI. 

45.  Tachypus,  Lacord. 

[.  Tachypus  flavicornis,  71.  s.,  Solsky. 

46.  Tacliys,  Schaum. 

(.  Tachys  anomala,  Kolenati. 

2.  ..        tetraspila,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

3.  ..        testacea,  Motsch. 

I.  ..        brevicornis.  Chaud. 

47.  Bembidium,  Latr. 

1.  Bembidium  inserticeps,  Chaud. 

2.  ,.  posterius,  Gemm.,  Hrld. 

3.  ..  luridicorne.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

4.  ..  lampros.  Herbst. 

5.  ..  cupreolum,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

6.  ..  glaciale,  Heer. 

7.  .,  Kokandicum.  W.J-.,  Slky. 

8.  „  platypterum,  ii.s..      ,, 

9.  „  rugiceps,  Chaud. 
fo.  „  hamatum,  Kolenati. 
[I.  „  tenellum,  Erichs. 

12.  ,.  quadriplagiatum.Mtsch. 

[3.  ..  cardiaderum,  n.s.,  Slky. 

[4.  ..  piceocyaneum,  n.s.,   ,, 

[5.  ..  ovalipenne.  n.s.,         ,, 

t6.  ..  ustum,  Quens. 

[7.  ..  bisignatum,  Menetr. 

18.  ..  parallelipenne,  Chaud. 

[9.  ,,  fasciatum,  ,, 

10.  „  dilutipenne.  fi.s.,  Solsky. 

II.  „  abbreviatum,  n.s..     ,, 

12.  ,.  insidiosum,  «.j-.,        ,, 

13.  .,  marginipenne,  7z.s.,  ,, 

14.  ..  quadripustulatum,  Dej. 


III.    DYTISCIDAE. 
Group  I.    Halt  PL  INI. 

I.  Cnemidotus,  Illig. 
I.   Cnemidotus  caesus.  Duft. 

2.  Haliplus,  Latr. 

1.  Haliplus  ruficollis,  D.  Geer. 

2.  ,         maculatus,  Motsch. 

Group  2.    Hydroporini. 

3.  Oxynoptilus,  Kiesw. 
I.   Oxynoptilus  cuspidatus,  Kunz. 

4.  Hydroporns,  Clairv. 

1.  Hydroporus  inaequalis,  Fabr. 

2.  ,,  fraciilinea,  71  s.,  Solsky. 

3.  .,  enneagrammus,  Ahr. 

4.  „  geminus,  B'abr. 

5.  „  tetragrammus,  Hochh. 

6.  „  parvicollis,  Schaum. 

7.  „  airumlus.  Kolenati. 

8.  .,  steppensis,  Motsch. 

9.  „  planus,  P'abr. 

Group  3.    COLYMl^ETINI. 

5.  Noterus,  Clairv. 
I.  Noterus  sparsus.  Marsh. 

6.  Laccophilus,  Leach. 

1.  Laccophilus  variegatus,  Sturm. 

2.  ..  testaceup.  Aub. 

3.  „  obscurus.  Panz. 

7.  Rhantus,  Lacord. 
I.  Rhantus  vibicicollis,  Hochh. 

8.  Agabns,  Leach. 

1.  Agabus  bipustulatus.  L. 

2.  „        conspersus,  Mrsh. 

3.  ..        amoenus,  n.s..  Solsky. 

4.  ,.        abnormicollis.  Ball. 

Group  4.  Dyti-scim. 

9.  Trogus,  Leach. 
I.   Trogus  Gotschii.  Hochh. 

10.  Eunectes,  Erichs. 
I.  Eunectes  punctatus.  Zubk. 

II.  Hydaticus,  Leach. 

1.  IJydaticus  cinereus.  L. 

2.  „  grammicus.  Germ. 

IV.  GYRINIDAE. 

1.    Gyrinns,    Geoifr. 

1.  Gyrinus  concinnus.  Klug. 

2.  ,.        distinctus.  Aub. 


556 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


V.    HYDROPHILIDAE. 
Group   I.    Hydrophilini. 
1.  HydropMlus,  Geofir. 
I.  Hydrophilus  piceus.  L. 

2.  Hydrochares,  latr. 
I.  Hydrochares  caraboides.  L. 

3.  Hydrobius,  Leach. 

1.  Hydrobius  fuscipes.  L, 

2.  ,,  chalceolus.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

4.  Philhydrus,  Sol, 
I.   Philhydrus  testaceus.  Fabr. 
5.  Laccobius,  Erichs. 

1.  Laccobius  alutaceus.  Thorns. 

2.  ..  decorus,  Gyll. 

3.  ..  grac.lis.  Motsch, 

6.  Berosus,  Leach. 
I.   Berosus  spinosus,  Stev. 

7.  Limnebius,  Leach. 

I.   Limnebius  truncatellus.  Thunb. 
Group  2.    Hp:lophorini. 

8.  Helophorus,  Fabr. 

1.  Helophorus  subcostatus,  Kolenati. 

2.  ..  dorsalis.  Marsh. 

3.  ..  granularis,  Lin. 

9.  Ochthebius,  Leach. 
I.   Ochthebius  bicolon.  Kirby. 

Group  3.    Sphaeridiini. 
10.  Cyclonotum,  Erichs. 
I.   Cyclonotum  oil)iculare.  Fabr. 

11.  Cercyon,  Leach. 
I.  Cercyon  qui>(iuilium.  L. 

12.  Sphaeridium,  Fabr. 
I.  Sphaeridium  bipustulatum.  Fabr. 

VL     STAPHYLINIDAE. 
Group  I.  Aleocharim. 
1.  Falagria,  Munh. 

1.  Falagria  thoracica.  Curtis. 

2.  ..         obscura,  (irav. 

3.  ..         gratilla.  Erichs. 

2.  Leptusa,  Kraatz. 

I.   Leptusa  picipennis,  n.s.,  .Solsky. 

3.  Aleochara,  Orav. 

1.  Aleochara  cras.siuscula,  .Sahib. 

2.  ,,  lanuginosa.  Grav. 

3.  .,  sareptana.  Fvl.  i.  litt. 

4.  .,  spissicomi.s,  Erichs. 

4.  Myrmedonia,  Erichs. 
I.   Myrmedonia  (Irusilloides.  Solsky. 


5.  Tachyusa,  Erichs. 
Tachyusa  cavicollis,  .Solsky. 

6.  Homalota,  Mnnh. 

Homalota  labilis,  Erichs. 
.,  plana,  Gyll. 

.,  immersa,  Erichs. 

,,  analis,  Grav. 

,,  succicola.  Thorns, 

fusca,  Sahib. 

Group  2.  Tachyi'Orini. 
7.  Tachinus,  Grav. 
Tachinus  rutitarsis,  Hochh. 
.,          laticollis,  Grav. 
.,  discoideus,  Erichs. 

8.  Tachyporus,  Grav. 
Tachyporus  chrysomelinus,  L. 

,,  hypnorum,  Fabr. 

.,  armeniacus  Klti. 

.,  scitulus.  Erichs. 

9.  Bolitobius,  Leach. 

Bolitobius  pullus.  Solsky. 

Group  3.    Staphyli  NiNi. 

Section  a.    Qiiediifoniics. 

10.     Heterothops,    Kirby. 

Heterothops  melanocerus,  .Solsky, 

Section  b.  Staphylinini. 

11.  Creophilus,  Kirby. 

Creophilus  ma.xillosus,  L. 

12.  Leistotrophus,  Perty. 
Leistotrophus  sibiricus.  Gebl. 

13.  Ocypus,  Kirby. 

Ocypus  picipennis.  Fabr. 

fuscoaeneu.s,  Sol:-:ky. 

14,  Physetops,  Mnnh. 

Physetops  tataricus,  Pall. 

15.  Philonthus,  Leach. 

Philonthus  rotundicoUis.  .Menetr. 

at  rata  s,  Grav. 

varius.  Gyll. 
.,  ebeninus,  Grav. 

.,  longicornis.  Steph, 

bipustulatus.  Panz, 

discoideus.  CJrav. 

rubellus,  ;/..»•.,  .Solsky, 

micans.  Grav. 

nigritulus.  Grav. 

salinus.  Ksw. 
.,  ftirmosus,  Motsch. 

velatipennis,  Solsky. 

dimidiatipennis.  P>icl 
.,  procerulus.  Grav 


\ 


APPENDIX  A.—COLEOPTERA 


55r 


Section  c.   XantJiolinini. 

16.    Platyprosopus,   Mnnh. 

Platyprosopus  elongalus.  Mnnh. 

Group  4.  Paederim. 
17.    Lathrobium,    Grav. 

Lathrobium  elongatum.  L. 

concolor,  Motsch. 

18.  Dolicaon,  Cast. 

Dolicaon  pullus.  Solsky. 

19.  Cryptobium,  Mnnh. 

Ciyptobiuni  fracticorne,  Payk. 

20.  Stilicus,  Latr. 

Stilicus  prolongatus,  n.s..  Solsky. 
capitalis.  Gemm..  Hrld. 

21.  Sunius,  Leach. 

Sunius  lithocharoides.  n.s..  Solsky. 
fasciatus,  Hochh. 
,.        neglectus.  Maerkel. 

22.  Scopaeus,  Erichs. 

Scopaeus  breviventer,  Sperk. 

23.  Paederas,  Grav. 
Paederus  cephalotes,  Motsch. 

riparius,  L. 
,.         fuscipes.  Curtis, 
albipilis,  Solsky. 

Group   5.    Stem N I. 

24.  Stenus,  Latr. 

Stenus  guttula.  Miill. 
,.        aereus.  Solsky. 
„        ater.  Mnnh. 

buphthalmus.  Grav. 

micros,  n.s.^  Solsky. 

aterrimus.  Erichs. 

bifoveolatus,  Gyll. 
,,        solutus.  Erichs. 
„        tumidulus.  n.s..  Solsky. 

Group    6.      OXYTELTNI. 

25.  Bledius,  Leach. 

Bledius  hinnulus.  Erichs. 
tricornis,  Ilrbst. 

26,  Platystethus,  Mnnh. 
Piatystethus  cornutus,  Grav. 
morsiians.  Payk. 
spinosus.  Erichs. 
capito.  Heer. 

27.  Oxytelus,  Grav. 

Oxytelus  piceus.  Linn. 

nitidulus.  Grav. 

28.  Zonoptilus,  Motsch. 

Zonoptilus  pennifer,  Motsch. 


29.  Ancyrophorus,  Kraatz. 
I.  Ancyrophorus  sericinus.  n,s..  Solsky- 

Group  7.    Omalini. 
30.  Omalium,  Grav. 

1.  Omalium  apicicorne,  n.s  .,  Solsky. 

2.  ,.         taschkentense,  n.s.,    ,, 

3.  ,.         turanicum,  n.s.,  „ 

31.  Anthobium,  Staph. 
I.  Anthobium  fulvipenne.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

VII.    PSELAPHIDAE. 
1.  Ctenistes,  Reichb. 
I.   Ctenistes  palpalis.  Reichb. 
2.  Bryaxis,  Leach. 
I.  Bryaxis  longicornis,  Leach. 

VIII.  SILPHIDAE. 
1.    Necrophorus,  Fatr, 
I.  Necrophorus  humator.  Fabr. 
2.  Silpha,  L. 

1.  Silpha  sinua-.a.  Fabr. 

2.  ..  ferrugata.  n.s..  Solsky. 

3.  ,.  turkestanica,  Ball. 

4.  ..  costata.  Menetr. 

5.  ..  obscura.  L. 

3.  Choleva,  Latr. 

1.  Choleva  fuscipes,  Menetr. 

2.  ..         scitula,  Erichs. 

4.  Agyrtes,  Frohl. 
I.  Agyrtes  ferrugineus.  n.s..  Solsky. 

IX.   ANISOTOMIDAE. 

1.  Hydnobius,  Schmidt. 

I.  Hydnobius  punctatus,  Sturm. 

X.   SCAPHIDIIDAE. 

1.     Scaphium,    Kirby. 

I.  Scaphium  quadraticolle.  «._.r.,  Solsky, 

XL    HISTERIDAE. 


1.  Hister,  L. 

I. 

Hister  turanus.  n.s..  Solsky. 

2. 

3- 
4.. 

quadriniaculatus.  L. 
quatuordecimstriatus.  Gyll 
binotatus,  Erichs. 

planulus.  Menetr. 

7- 

,,        smyrnaeus,  Mars, 
fimetarius.  Hrbst. 

8. 

9- 
10. 
II. 

purpura!>cens,   ,, 
quadrinotatus,  Scriba. 
falsus,  n.s..  Solsky. 
bimaculatus.  L. 

55^ 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


2.  Carcinops,  Mars. 
J.  Carcinops  pusio,  Menetr. 

3.  Saprinus,  Erichs. 

1.  Saprinus  maculatus,  Rossi. 

2.  ,.        interriiptus,  Payk. 

3.  ,.        externus.  Fisch, 

4.  .,        biguttatus,  Stev. 

5.  ,.        ornatus,  Erichs. 

6.  .,   .     semipunctatus.  Fabr. 

7.  „        nitidulus,  ,, 

8.  „        gangeticus.  Mars. 

9.  „        aeneus.  Fabr. 

10.  „        cribellatus,  Mars. 

11.  „        chalcites,  lUig. 

12.  „        sparsutus,  n.s..  Solsky. 

13.  ,,        Mersinae.  Mars. 

14.  ..        ovillum.  U.S..  Solsky. 

15.  ..        lateristrius.  n.s..    ,. 

4.  Gnathoncus,  Duv. 
I.   Gnathoncus  rotundatus,  Illig. 

-2.  ,.  disjunctus,  fi.s.,  Solsky. 

6.  Teretrius,  Erichs. 
I.  Teretrius  picipes,  Fabr. 

XII.  PHALACRIDAE. 
1.  Phalacrus,  Payk. 

I.   Phalacrus  corruscus,  Payk. 
2.  Olibrus,  Erichs. 

1.  Olibrus  bicolor,  F'abr. 

2.  „       liquidus.  Erichs. 

3.  „       affinis.  Sturm. 

4.  ..       oblongus,  Erichs. 

XIII.  NITIDULIDAE. 

Group    I .      B  R  A  C  H  Y  P  T  E  R  I  N  I. 

1.  Brachypterus,  Kugell. 

1.  Brachypterus  canescens,  Motsch. 

2.  ,,  dilatitarsis,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

3.  '.,  gravidus,  Illig. 

Group  2.    NiTlDULINAE. 

2.  Nitidula,  Fabr. 

1.  Nitidula  latiplaga,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  .,       carnaria.  Schall. 

3.  Meligethes,  Kirby. 
I.   Meligethes  xanthopu-;,  /i.s.,  Solsky. 
vulpes.  U.S..  ,, 

lutra,  n  s..  „ 

dislinctus,  Strm. 
tristis.  ,, 

jilaniiisculus,  Hear. 

XIV.    TROGOSITIDAE. 
1.  Trogosita,  L. 
Trogosila  maurilanica.  L. 


XV.  COLYDIIDAE. 
1.  Aglenus,  Erichs. 

Aglenus  brunneus.  Gyll. 

XVI.  CUCUJIDAE. 
1.  Silvanus,  Latr. 

Silvanus  surinamensis.  L. 
XVII.    CRYPTOPHAGIDAE. 

1.  Telmatophilus,  Heer. 

Telmatophilus  sparganii.  Ahrens. 

2.  Cryptophagus,  Hrbst. 
Cryptophagas  acutangulus.  Gyll. 
.,  fumatus,  , , 

,,  cellaris,  Scop. 

,,   .         validus,  Krtz. 
.,  recticollis,  n.s.,  Solsk) 

bactrianus.  n.s.,     ,, 
3.  Atomaria,  Steph. 
Atomaria  dilutella.  u.s..  Solsky. 

XVIII.     LATHRIDIIDAE. 

1.  Monotonia,  Hrbst. 
Monotonia  brevipenne,  Kunze. 

„  quadrifoveolata,  Motsch 

2.  Lathridius,  Hrbst. 
Lathridius  minutus,  L. 

parallelipennis, //.J-.,  Slk) 

3.  Corticaria,  Mrsh. 

Corticaria  badia,  Mnnh. 

„         quadrimaculata,  Mnnh. 

XIX.  THORICTIDAE. 

1.  Thorictus,  Germ. 
Thorictus  ca.staneus,  Germ. 

XX.  DERMESTIDAE. 
1.  Dermestes,  L. 

Dermestes  dimidiatus,  Stev. 
,,  vulpinus,  F. 

Frischii,  Kugel. 
elegans,  n.s.,  Solsky. 
coronatu«i,  Stev. 

2.  Attagenus,  Latr. 

Attagenus  angustatus,  Ball. 

^imulal1s,  n.s.,  .Solsky. 
l)yturoides,  n.s.,     ,, 
pictus.  Ball. 

suspiciosu.s,  n.s.,  .Solsky. 
fasciolatus.  u.s.,       ,, 

3.  Megatoma,  Hbst. 

Megatoma  conspcrsa.  n.s.,  .Sol.sk> 


APPENDIX  A.—COLEOPTERA 


559 


4.  Trogoderma,  Latr. 

1.  Trogoderma  versicolor.  Creutz. 

2.  .,  ornata.  ii.s.,  Solsky. 

5.  Anthrenus,  Geoifr. 

Anthrenus  pimpinellae,  P'abr. 

melanoleucuSjW.j-..  Solsky. 

.,  picturatus.  n.s.,  ,, 

flavidus,  ii.s.^  „ 

rufulus.  U.S.,  ,, 

.,  leucogrammus.  n.s.,  .. 

6.  Orphilus,  Erichs. 
I.   Orphilus  glabratus.  Fabr. 

XXL    BYRRHIDAE. 
1.  Curimus,  Erichs. 
I.   Curimus  asiaticus.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

XXII.    PARNIDAE. 

1.  Parnus,  Fabr. 

I.   Parnus  fuscipennis.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  Dryops,  Oliv. 

I.   Dryops  longus.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

3.  Helichus,  Erichs. 
I.   Helichus  asiaticus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

XXIII.    HETEROCERIDAE. 
1.  Heterocerus,  F. 

1.  Heterocerus  parallelus,  Kryn. 

2.  ,.  flexuosus-.  Steph. 

3.  „  laevigatus.  Fabr. 

4.  ..  sericans,  Kiesw. 

XXIV.    SCARABAEIDAE. 
Group  I.  CoPRiNi. 
1.    Scarabaeus,   L. 
I.   Scarabaeus  sacer.  L. 

2.  Gymnopleurus,  Illig. 

1.  Gymnopleurus  aciculatus,  Gebl. 

2.  ..  flagellatus,  Fabr. 

3.  Synapsis,  Bates. 
I.   Synapsis  tmolus.  Fisch.  de  W. 

4.  Copris,  Geoffr. 

1.  Copris  hispanus,  L. 

2.  .,       lunaris.      ,, 

5.  Onitis,  Fabr. 

1.  Onitis  humerosus,  Pall. 

2.  ..     Pamphylus.  Menetr. 

3.  ..     moeris,  Pall. 

4.  ..     sterculius,  Ball. 


6.  Onthophagus,  Latr. 

I. 

Onthophagu 

5  amyntas,  Oliv. 

2. 

., 

taurus.  Linn. 

3. 

11- 

nutans,  Fabr. 

4. 

camelus,  ,, 

5- 

■)i 

pygargus.  Motsch. 

6. 

„ 

marginalis.  Gebl. 

7- 

,, 

speculifer.  w.j..  Slsky 

8. 

?5 

leucomelas  w..y.,     ,. 

9. 

leuco^tigma,  Stev. 

10. 

11 

Haroldi.  Ball. 

7.  Oniticellus,  Serv. 
[.   Oniticellus  flavipes,  Fabr. 
!.  ..  pallipes,     ., 

Group  2.   Aphodiini. 
8.  Aphodius,  Illig. 
I.   Aphodius  erraticus,  L. 

,  ubterraneus,  L. 

,  haemorrhoidalis,  L. 

,  fimetarius,  L. 

,  foetens,  F. 

,  granarius,  L. 

,  punctipennis,  Hrld. 

,  immundus.  Creutz. 

,  varians,  Duft. 

,  Kraatzi.  Hrld. 

plagiatus,  L. 

niger,  Panz. 

nitidus,  Ball. 
,  brunneus,  Klug. 

melanostictus,  Schm. 

nigrivittis,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

conspurcatus,  L. 
,  quadrisignatus,  Brull. 

,  pu^illus,  Hrbst. 

quadriguttatus,  Hrbst. 
r  Kisilkumi.  ;/..?.,  Solsky. 

gregarius.  Hrld. 

semipellitus.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

lunifer.  n.s.,  „ 

circumductus,  n.s.,   ,, 

Edgardi.  n.s.,  „ 

luridus,  Fabr. 

pecaii,       ,, 


2. 
3- 
4- 
5- 
6. 

7. 
8. 

9- 
10. 
II. 
12. 

13- 
14. 

15- 
16. 

17- 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 

23. 
24. 

25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 


9.  Plagiogonus,  Muls. 
I.   Plagiogonus. praeustus.  Ball. 

10.  Ammoecius,  Muls. 

I.  Ammoecius  discolor,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

11.  Mendidius,  Hrld. 
I.   Mendidius  bidens,  Ball.,  i.  litt. 

12.  Psammobius,  Heer. 

1.  Psammobius  caesus.  Panz. 

2.  .,  variolosus,  Klti. 


56o 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA 


Group    3.     O  R  P  H  N  I  N  I . 

18.  Ochodaeus,  Serv. 

I.   Ochodaeus  cornifrons,  ;/.j-.,  Solsky. 

14.  Codocera,  Eschsch. 
I.   Codocera  ferruginea,  Eschsch. 
Group  4.    Hybosorini. 
15.  Hybosoms,  McLeay. 
I.   Hybosorus  Illigeri,  Reiche. 

Group    5.     G  E  o  T  R  u  p  I  N I . 

16.  Bolboceras,  Kirby. 

I.  Bolboceras  Radoszkovskii.  «.j.,  Slky. 

17.  Geotrnpes,  Latr. 

Section  i.   Ceratophyus ,  Fisch  de  W. 

I.  Ceratophyus  Ammon,  Pall. 

Section  2.   Geotrupes,  Muls. 

1.  Geotrupes  impressus.  Gebl. 

2.  „  foveatus,  Mrsh. 

18.  Lethrns,  Scop. 
Lethrus  brachiicollis,  Fairm. 
„       apterus,  Laxm. 
,,       politus,  U.S.,  Solsky. 
„       scoparius,  Fisch.  de  W. 
„       turkestanicus.  Ball. 
„       laevigatus, 

„       longimanus,  Fisch.  de  W. 
„       Karelini,  Gebl. 
„       crenulatus,   , , 
„       tuberculifrons,  Ball. 


Group  6.  Trogini. 
19.  Trox,  Fabr. 
I.  Trox  granulipennis,  Fairm. 
Group  7.    Glaphyrini. 

20.  Glaphyrus,  Latr. 

1.  Glaphyrus  oxypterus,  Pall. 

2.  „  varians,  Menetr. 

21.  Amphicoma,  Latr. 

1.  Amphicoma  chalybaea,  Fald. 

2.  ,,  analis,  ii.s.,  Solsky. 

3.  „  Kuschakewitschi,  Ball. 

4.  „  dubia,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

5.  „  clypeata,  w.j.,    „ 

Group  8.    Melolonthini. 

22.  Hoplia,  lUig. 

1.  Hoplia  paupera,  Kryn. 

2.  „        detrita,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

23.  Serica,  McLeay. 

1.  Serica  euphorbiae.  Burm. 

2.  „       arenicola.  n.s.^  Solsky. 

24.  Oxycorythus,  n.  g.,  Solsky. 

I.   Oxycorythus  Morawitzi.  n.s.,  Solsky 

[End  of  Part  II.  in  original.] 


[The  follozoiiig  is  the  unpublished  portion  of  Solsky' s  third  part. — H.  L.] 
25.  Lachnosterna,  Hope. 

Lachnostema  holosericea,  Menetr. 
„  porosa.  Fisch. 


26.  Pectinichelus,  Ball. 
I.  Pectinichelus  rhizolrogoides,  Ball. 

27.  Ehizotrogus,  Latr. 

1.  Rhizotrogus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  .,  pulvereus,  Knoch. 

3.  .,  Myschenkowi,  Ball. 

28.  Amphimallus,  Muls. 

1.  Amphimallus  solstitialis,  L. 

2.  „  glabripennis,  Ball. 

29.  Polyphylla,  Harr. 

1.  Polyphylla  hololeuca,  Pall. 

2.  „  adspersa,  Motsch. 

3.  „  irrorata.  Gebl. 

4.  „  U.S.,  Solsky. 


30.  Melolontha,  F. 

1.  Melolontha  afflicta,  Ball. 

2.  ,,  n  s.f  Solsky. 

3.  ..  pectoralis,  Germ. 

31.  Fachydema,  Cast. 
I.   Pachydema  oblonga,  Fisch.  de  W, 
Group  9,  RuTEi.iM. 
32.  Phyllopertba,  Steph. 

1.  Phyllopertha  glabra,  Gebl. 

2.  .,  U.S.,  Solsky 

3.  .,  variabilis.  Ball. 

33.  Anomala,  Sam. 
I.  Anomala  diluta,  Motscli. 

34.  Pharaonus,  Blanch. 

1.  Pharaonus,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  „  n.s., 

35.  Adoretus,  Cast. 

1.  Adoretus  nigrifrons.  Stev. 

2.  „        n.s.,  Solsky. 

3.  „        comptus,  M6n6tr. 


APPENDIX  A.—COLEOPTERA. 


561 


Group  10.  Dynastini. 
36.  Pentodon,  Hope. 

1 .  Pentodon  mongolicus,  Motsch. 

2.  ,.         quadridens,  Gebl. 

37.  Oryctes,  lUig. 
I .  Oryctes  latipennis,  Motsch. 

Group  II.  Cetonini. 
38.  Stalagmosoma,  Burm, 
I.  Stalagmosoma  albella,  Pall. 

39.  Oxythyrea,  Muls. 

I.  Oxythyrea  cinctella  (Stev.),  Schaum. 

40.  Tropinota,  Muls. 
I.  Tropinota  pilosa,  Brull. 

41.  Cetonia,  Fabr. 

1.  Cetonia  afflicta,Gor.  et  Perch., var. 

C    chalybaea,  Solsky. 

2.  ,,  Bogdanoffi,  Solsky. 

3.  „  interruptocostata,  Ball. 

4.  ,.  U.S.,  Solsky. 

5.  .,  Karelini,  Zubk. 

6.  ,.  n.s.,  Solsky. 

7.  ,.  sibirica,  Gebl. 

8.  ,,  marginicoUis,  Ball. 

9.  ,.  Zubkoffi.  Fldrm. 

10.        ,.      fasciata,  Fisch.  de  \V. 

XXV.    BUPRESTIDAE. 

Group  I.   JULODIINAE. 

1.  Julodis,  Eschsch. 
I.  Julodis  variolaris,  Pall. 


Group  2.    BUPRESTINI. 

2.  Psiloptera,  Sol. 
I.  Psiloptera  argentata,  Mnnh. 
3.  Capnodis,  Eschsch. 

1.  Capnodis  Henningi,  Fldrm. 

2.  ,,  excisa,  Men^tr. 

3.  „  parumstriata,  Ball. 

4.  ,,  miliaris,  Klug. 

5.  ,,  tenebricosa,  Ilbst. 

4.  Coeculus,  Cast  6. 
I.  Coeculus  sibiricus,  F. 

5.  Dicerca,    Eschsch. 
I.  Dicerca  aenea,  L. 

6.  Melanophila,  Eschsch. 

I.  Melanophila  decostigma,  F. 
7.  Anthazia,  Eschsch. 

1.  Anthaxia,  n.s.,  Solsky. 

2.  „  kollari,  Mars. 

3.  „  deaurata,  Gmel. 

4.  „  bicolor,  Fldrm. 

5.  „  auriceps,  Men. 

6.  „  n.s.^  Solsky. 

7.  „  n.s.,      ,, 

8.  „  veneiabilis,  Mars. 

8.  Acmaeodera. 

1.  Acmaeodera,  W.J.,  Solsky. 

2.  „  n.s.^       ,, 

3-  »  »-f-»      »» 

4.  ,,  n.s.,      „ 

5.  ,,  n.s.,       ,, 

6.  „  lugens,  Cast.  G. 

7.  „  Boryi,  Brulle. 


VOL.  II. 


36 


5^2  liUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


MELLIFERA  {Bees). 
By  Dr.  Ferdinand  Moravitz. 

Fedchenko  hoped  to  treat  the  Apidae  section  himself,  but  only  succeedec 
in  finishing  the  determination  and  description  of  the  greater  part  of  th( 
species  of  the  genus  Anthophora,  With  what  ardour  he  worked,  anc 
to  what  extent  he  devoted  himself  to  the  labour  of  investigating  th( 
Apidae,  his  observations  show.  He  did  not  confine  himself  to  the  exami 
nation  of  the  external  peculiarities  only  of  these  insects,  but  observec 
also  certain  of  their  internal  organs,  especially  the  sexual  organs,  intend- 
ing to  explain  the  relation  between  their  different  forms,  and  to  attemp 
a  genetical  morphology.  For  this  purpose  he  made  ready  a  number  o 
microscopic  preparations,  but  did  not  succeed  in  completing  them 
leaving  only  very  disconnected  observations. 

The  bees  collected  by  Fedchenko  form  a  very  rich  collection.  Othei 
travellers  in  Turkistan  collected  no  bees,  and,  therefore,  the  country  ma} 
be  called,  in  this  respect,  unexplored.  Lehmann,  who  went  as  far  a; 
Bokhara  and  Samarkand,  sent  to  the  museum  of  the  Academy  o 
Sciences  only  seven  species  of  bees,  collected  by  him  in  the  environs 
of  Orenburg,  and  near  Fort  Novo  Alexandrovsk,  which  were  describee 
by  Erichson  in  "  Menetries^  Catalogue  des  Insectes  recueillis  par  fei 
M.  Lehmann."  Eversmann,  who  had  also  travelled  in  Turkistan,  die 
not,  it  seems,  then  collect  any  Apidae.  Though  in  his  work  ("  Fauns 
Hymenopterologica  Volgo-Uralensis,"  jS'z/j//.  de  Mosc,  1852)  he  ofter 
mentions  that  other  species  inhabit  not  only  the  country  between  th( 
Ural  and  Volga,  but  beyond  the  Ural,  yet  all  the  specimens  seen  by  mt 
were  not  collected  in  Turkistan,  but,  as  is  shown  by  the  localities  marke( 
on  their  tickets,  near  Indersk,  Orsk,  Irkutsk,  and  even  Kiakhta.  Thu 
the  whole  literature  of  Turkistan  bees  is  limited  to  the  work  of  O.  K 
Radoszkovsky,  who  received  some  species  from  Fedchenko,  and  describee 
four  new  species  from  the  environs  of  Samarkand  {Horce  Soc.  Entomol 
Rossicce,  tomus  viii.). 

The  genus  A7tthophora  is  included  in  my  work  as  the  special  labour  0 
Fedchenko,    I  have  only  had  to  verify  the  determination  of  all  the  species 
to  compile  diagnoses,  grouping,  and  synoptical  tables,  and  give  short  de 
scriptions  of  certain  species,  the  majority  of  w^hich  had  been  alread 
described  by  other  entomologists.     I  must  here  remark  that  Fedchenk 
did  not  separate  Saropoda  from  Anthophora,  and  I  have  followed  hi 
plan,  as  Saropoda  is  only  distinguished  from  Anthophora  by  its  maxil 
lary  palpi  consisting  of  five,    and  those  oi  Anthophora  of  six,  joints 
but  the  last  joint  of  the  labial  palpi  of  Saropoda  is  not  turned  away  froi 
the  preceding  one,  as  it  should  be  in  Anthophora.     Belonging,  hov 
ever,  to  the  latter  genus  we  find  a  tolerably  large  number  of  transits 
species,   having  a  special  arrangement  of  palpi,  which  do  not  coriv 
spond  with  either  Saropoda  or  Anthophora.     For  instance,   Anth  , 
mag7iilahris ,  montivaga,   velocissima,   and  ruficornis    have  all  th 
labial  palpi  with  the  last  joint  not  turned  aside  ;  in  vtagtiilabr is\  mo/ 
tivaga,  and  velocissima  the  maxillary  palpi  consist  of  five,  and  in  ruj 
cornis  of  four  joints.     We  observe,  however,  a  like  difference  in  tli 
palpi  among  the  species  of  other  genera  of  mellifera  ;  for  we  rarely  fin 
among  Megachile  or  Osmia  two  species  having  a  perfectly  identic 


APPENDIX  A.—MELLIFERA. 


563 


arrangement  of  palpi.     Among  other  genera  the  maxillary  palpi  do  not 
exist  at  all,  as  in  Pasites,  and,  therefore,  it  is  impossible  to  ascribe  to 
them  any  important  signification,  as  in  the  absence  of  other  important 
distinguishing  marks,  they  do  not  serve  as  generic  characters. 
I.  APIDAE  GENUINAE. 

44.  Anthophora  quadrifasciata,  De  Vill. 


A.    SCOPULIPEDES. 

(i.  Social es.) 

Apis,  Linne. 

I. 

Apis  mellifica,  L. 

Bombus.  Fabr. 

2. 

„      terrestris,  L. 

3- 

,.      leucopygus,  n.s. 

4- 

,,      montanus,  Lepelet. 

5- 

,,      fragrans,  Pallas. 

6. 

,.      laesus,  n.s. 

7. 

,.      mendax,  Gerstack. 

8. 

„      hortorum,  L. 

9- 

„      altaicus,  Eversm. 

10. 

.,      Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

Apathus.  Newman. 

II. 

Apathus  Rossiellus,  Kirby 

(2.  Solitariae.) 

A.  Anthophoridae. 

Anthophora,  Latr. 

12. 

Anthophora  parietina,  Fabr. 

13- 

turanica,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

14. 

Eversmanni,  Radoszk. 

15- 

,,         pedata,  Eversm. 

16. 

„         Heinemanni,  n.s. ,  Fed. 

17- 

,,         Kochi,  n.s.,              ,, 

18. 

,.         Clessini,  n.s.,           ,, 

19. 

,.         Bogdanowi,  n.s.,     ,, 

20. 

,,         Freimuthi,  n.s.,        ,, 

21. 

,,         atricilla,  Eversm. 

22. 

,,         Stschurovskyi,;?.x.,Fed, 

23- 

„         Oschanini,  n.s.,       ,, 

24. 

„         Kronebergi,  n.s.,     „ 

25- 

bi fascia ta,  n.s.,         „ 

26. 

personata,  Erichson. 

27. 

,,         Kessleri,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

28. 

„         similis,  n.s. 

29- 

Uljanini,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

30- 

„         Fedchenkoi,  Radoszk. 

31- 

,,         Olgae,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

32- 

,,         magnilabris,  n.s.,  ,, 

33- 

„         Sichelii,  Radoszk. 

34- 

,.         liturata,  Lepel. 

35- 

„         monacha,  Erichs. 

36. 

„         Strauchi,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

37- 

,.         muscaria,  n.s.,     „ 

38- 

.,         clavicornis,  n.s. 

39- 

tarsidens.w.i-.,  Fedch. 

40. 

Kaufmanni,  n.s.,     ,, 

41. 

,,         gracilipes,  Mor. 

42. 

,,         Saussurei,  n.s.,  Fedch. 

43- 

Solskyi,  n.s.. 

MacLachlani,;«.j.,Fed. 
„  albigena,  Lepel. 

,,  velocissima,  n.s.,  Fed. 

„  montivaga,  n.s.^     ,, 

„  picicornis,  n.s.,       „ 

,,  ruficornis,  n.s.,       ,, 

„  bimaculata,  Panzer. 

„  meridionalis,  w.i.jFed. 

,,  Loewi,  Ji.s.,  ,, 

„  barbipes,  n.s.,         ,, 

„  deserticola,  Mor. 

„  Erschowi,  n.s.,  Fed. 

,,  Radoszkowskyi,  n.s.,  ,, 

Semper!,  n.s..        Fed. 

Abramowi,  n.s.,     ,, 

excelsa,  n.s.,  ,, 

,,  flavescens,  n.s.,       ,, 

„  murina,  n.s.,  ,,' 

,.  melanopyga.  n.s.,   ,, 

.,  Martensi,  n.s.,        ,, 

Plistotrichia,  Mor. 
65.  Plistotrichia  com  pacta,  n.s. 
Tetralonia,  Spinola. 

Tetralonia  vernalis.  7i.s. 

,,  spectabiJis,  n.s. 

„  ruficollis,  Brull^. 

„  transitoria,  n.s. 

.  ,,  tricincta,  Erichs. 

,.  di.stinguenda,  n.s. 

,,  intermedia,  n.s. 

„  mastrucata,  n.s. 

„  Radoszkovskyi,  Mor. 

„  vestita,  n.s. 

„  rufescens,  n.s. 

„  albo-rufa,  Radoszk. 

„  malvae,  Rossi. 

„  nana,  Mor. 

„  ruficornis,  Fabr. 

„  desertorum,  n.s. 

„  pollinosa,  Lepel. 

Eucera,  Scop. 
Eucera  melanocepliala.  n.s. 
„       tibialis,  n.s. 
„       hirsuta,  n.s. 
„       similis,  Lepel. 
„       proxima,  n.s. 
„       clypeata,  Erichs. 
„       pusilla,  n.s. 
„       caucasica,  Mor. 
„       tegularis,  n.s. 
.,       subrufa,  Lepel. 


45- 
46. 

47- 
48. 
49. 
50- 
51- 
52. 
53- 
54- 
55- 
56. 

57. 
58. 

59- 
60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 


66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

71- 

72. 

73- 
74- 
75- 
76. 

77- 
78. 

79- 
80. 
81. 
82. 

83. 
84. 
85: 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
91- 
92. 


564 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA 


93- 

Eucera  tomentosa,  n.s. 

1    140. 

Osmia  proxima,  n.s. 

94. 

,,       ferghanica.  7t.s. 

141. 

,,       simplicicornis,  n.s. 

95- 

sogdiana,  n.s. 

142. 

„       tenuicornis,  n.s. 

96. 

,,       melaleuca,  9i.s. 

143- 

„       abbreviata,  n.s. 

97- 

,.       melanostoma,  n.s. 

144. 

„      brachyura,  n.s. 

Melitturga,  Latr. 

145- 

„       latipes,  n.s. 

9S. 

Melitturga  clavicoinis,  Latr. 

146. 
147. 

,,       ruficrus,  n.s. 
„       ruficomis,  n.s. 

B.   Andrenoides. 

148. 

„       rufopicta,  n.s. 

Xylocopa,  Latr. 

149. 

„       tridentata,  Duf.  et  Perris 

99. 

Xylocopa  valga.  Gerstack. 

150- 

„       rufo-hirta,  Latr. 

100. 

Amedaei,  Lepel. 

151- 

,,       montivaga,  Mor. 

lOI. 

..         turanica.  n.s. 

152. 

,.       acanthophora,  n.s. 

102. 

,,         signata,  n.s. 

153- 

,.       falcata,  n.s. 

103. 

,,         hellenica,  Spinola. 

Lithurgus,  Latr. 

Ceratina,  Latr. 

154.  Lithurgus  monoceros,  Eversm. 

104. 

Ceratina  ferghanica,  Ji.s. 

ass- 

,.         tibialis,  n.s. 

105. 

cyanea,  Kirby. 

ise. 

,.          maximus,  Radoszk. 

Camptoprium,  Spinola. 

Megachile,  Latr. 

106. 

Camptoprium  samarkandum,  Rad. 

157- 

Megachile  muraria.  Fabr. 

107. 

mirabile,  n.s. 

158. 

,,          asiatica,  ji.s. 

Rophites,  Spinola. 

159- 

„          difficilis,  n.s. 

108. 

Rophites  vitellinus,  n.s. 

160. 

,,          desertorum,  n.s. 

109. 

1  • 
,,         orobinus.  n.s. 

161. 

,.         derasa,  Gerst. 

no. 

,,         clavator,  n.s. 

162. 

,,          rubripes,  jt.s. 

III. 

,,         atrocoeruleus,  n.s. 

163. 

,.          grisescens,  Jt.s. 

112. 

,,         canus,  Eversm. 

164. 

,.          Saussurei,  Radoszk. 

165. 

,.         caucasica,  Lepel. 

C.  Dasygastrae. 

166. 

,,         villipes,  JI.S. 

Heriades,  Latr. 

167. 

..         argentata,  Fabr. 

"3 

Heriades  clavicomis,  n.s. 

168. 

,.          communis,  ji.s. 

Osmia,  Fanz. 

169. 

,.         imbecilla,  Gerst. 

114. 

Osmia  longicornis,  Ji.s. 

170. 

,.          apicalis,  Spinola. 

"5- 

„      subcornuta,  n.s. 

171. 

,,          terminata,  n.s. 

116. 

„      fulviventris,  Panzer. 

172. 

„          maritima,  Kirby. 

117. 

„      prasina,  n.s. 

173. 

,.          lagopoda,  Linne. 

118. 

„      melanocephala,  n.s. 

174. 

,.          nitidicollis,  n.s. 

119. 

„      Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

175. 

,.          basilaris,  ji.s. 

120. 

„      maxillaris,  n.s. 

176. 

,.          mandibularis.  n.s. 

121. 

„      rufispina,  n.s. 

177. 

viridicoUis,  n.s. 

122. 

,,      simplex,  n.s. 

178. 

multispinosa,  n.s. 

123. 

„      melanogastra,  Spinola, 

179. 

.,         sanguinipes,  n.s. 

124. 

„      sogdiana,  n.s. 

180. 

..         pulchella,  n.s. 

125. 

,,      coerulescens,  Linn6. 

Anthidium,  Latr. 

126. 

„      cyanescens,  n.s. 

181. 

Anthidium  forcipatum,  n.s. 

127. 

„      indigotea,  n.s. 

182. 

„          laterale,  Latr. 

128. 

„      dilaticornis,  n.s. 

183. 

Fedchenkoi,  ti.s. 

129. 

„      leucogastra,  n.s. 

184. 

limbiferum,  ji.s. 

130. 

,,      agilis,  n.s. 

185. 

ruficorne,  n.s. 

131. 

„      singularis,  ji.s. 

186. 

rubiginosum,  Lepel. 

132. 

,,      atro-alba,  n.s. 

187. 

oblongatum,  Latr. 

»33- 

,.      robusta,  7t.s. 

188. 

„          diadema,           ,, 

134- 

,.      difficilis,  n.s. 

189. 

„          punctatum,        ,, 

'35- 

„      serrilabris,  7t.s. 

190. 

obscuratum,  n.s. 

136. 

,,      adunca,  Panz. 

191. 

cingulatuni,  Lali. 

137. 

,.      rufimana,  n.s. 

192. 

,.          llorentinum,  Fabr. 

138- 

furcula.  n.s. 

193- 

,.          nigrinum,  ji.s. 

139. 

,,      caularis,  n.s. 

194. 

,,          callosum,  n.s. 

APPENDIX  A.~MELLIFERA. 


565 


195. 

Anthidium  unicum,  n.s. 

Epeolus,  Latr. 

196. 

.,           petechiale,  n.s. 

223. 

Epeo 

us  variegatus,  Linn^. 

197. 

cribratum,  n.s. 

224. 

transitorius,  Eversm. 

D.    CUCULLINAE. 

225. 

., 

ruficornis,  n.s. 

(I.  Stelidae.) 

, 

&.mmobates,  Latr. 

Stelidomorpha,  n.g. 

226. 

Ammobates  nigrinus,  ».f. 

198. 

Stelidomorpha  nasuta,  Latr. 

Phiarus,  Gerst. 

Stelis,  Latr. 

227. 

Phiarus  abdominalis,  Eversm 

199. 

Stelis  phaeoptera,  Kirby. 

Pasites,  Jurine. 

Dioxys,  St.  Farg.  et  Serv. 

228. 

Pasites  maculatus,  Jur. 

200. 

Dioxys  cruenta,  Gerst. 

Nomada,  Fabr. 

201. 

rufipes,  n.s. 

229. 

Nomada  ferghanica,  n.s. 

202. 

formosa,  n.s. 

230. 

Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

Coelioxys,  Latr. 

231. 

.. 

subvirescens,  n.s. 

203. 

Coelioxys  sogdiana,  n.s. 

232. 

sulphuripes,  n.s. 

204. 

brevis,  Eversm. 

233- 

;? 

tripunctata.  Mor. 

205. 

coronata,  Forst. 

234- 

ij 

Jacobeae,  Panz. 

206. 

robusta,  n.s. 

235- 

„ 

rufiventris,  Kirby. 

207. 

pulchella,  Mor. 

236. 

11 

desertorum,  n.s. 

208. 

argentea,  Lepei. 

237. 

„ 

vernalis,  n.s. 

209. 

conoidea,  Illig. 

238. 

»? 

discicollis.  n.s. 

210. 

recurva,  Schenck. 

239. 

11 

succincta,  Panz. 

211. 

tricarinata,  n.s. 

24a 

V 

subcornuta,  Kirby. 

212. 

,,          rufescens,  Lep. 

.,          acuminata,  Nyland. 

241. 

ti 

sarta,  n.s. 

213- 

242. 

11 

fucata,  Panz. 

(2.  Meledidae.') 

243- 
244. 

245- 

246. 

11 

zonata,    , , 
robusta,  Mor. 

Melecta,  Latr. 

strigicollis,  n.s. 
aurantiaca,  n.s. 

214. 

Melecta  ulurinotata,  Brull6. 

'\ 

215. 

.,         luctuosa,  Scop. 

247. 

ruficollis,  n.s. 

216. 

.,         corpulenta,  7t.s. 

obburdinensis,  n.s. 

217. 

.,         fuscipennis,  n.s. 

249. 

flavilabris,  n.s. 

Crocisa,  Jurine. 

250. 

11 

nigricollis,  n.s. 

218. 

Crocisa  afifinis,  Mor. 

251. 

5r 

bifida,  Thorns. 

219. 

.,        picicornis,  n.s. 

252. 

11 

minuta,  Fabr. 

220. 

ramosa,  Lep. 

253- 

cinnabarina,  Mor. 

221. 

,,        major,  n.s. 

254- 

„ 

ferruginata,  Kirby. 

222. 

.,        aberrans,  n.s. 

255- 

"? 

furva,  Panz. 

II.  ANDRENIDAE. 


I.   ACUTILINGUES. 

269. 

Andrena  sordida,  n.s. 

Melitta,  Kirby. 

270. 

,,         planirostris,  n.s. 

256. 

Melitta  leporina,  Panz. 

271. 

„         acutilabris,  n.s. 

257- 

melanura,  Xyland. 

272. 

„         urmitana,  n.s. 

Andrena,  Fabr. 

273- 

„         fulvescens,  Smith. 

258. 

Andrena  rufina,  n.s. 

274. 

i,         Taraxaci.  Giraud. 

259- 

,,         fulvicrus,  Kirby. 

275- 

,,         sogdiana,  n.s. 

260. 

„         quadrifasciata,  n.s. 

276. 

..         oralis,  n.s. 

261. 

„         leucorhina,  n.s. 

277. 

„         maculipes,  n.s. 

262. 

„         labialis,  Kirby. 

278. 

„         convexiuscula,  Kirby 

263. 

.,         bairacumensis,  n.s. 

279. 

„         rufilabris.  n.s. 

264. 

..         sarta,  n.s. 

280. 

„         nitidicollis,  n.s. 

265. 

combinata,  Kirby. 

281. 

„         lucidicollis,  n.s. 

266. 

,,         incisa,  Eversm. 

282. 

.,         majalis.  n.s. 

267. 

.,         funebris,  Panz. 

283. 

,,         laeviventris,  n.s. 

268. 

proxima,  Kirby. 

284. 

„         parvula,  Kirby. 

566 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


285. 

Andrena  dentiventris,  Mor. 

341- 

286. 

.,         tuberculiventris,  n.s. 

342. 

287. 

,.         Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

343- 

288. 

,,         ravicollis,  n.s. 

344- 

289. 

,,         punctiventris,  n.s. 

345- 

290. 

,,         aulica,  n.s. 

346. 

291. 

,,         comparata,  n.s. 

347- 

292. 

,,         ferghanica,  Ji.s. 

348. 

293- 

„         combusta,  n.s. 

349. 

294. 

„         analis,  Panz. 

350. 

295- 

,,         nupta,  n.s. 

351- 

296. 

„         hieroglyphica,  n.s. 

352. 

297. 

„         turkestanica,  n.s. 

353- 

298. 

,.         Lepeletieri,  Lucas. 

354- 

299. 

,,         fuscosa,  Erichs. 

355- 

300. 

.,         pilipes,  Fabr. 

356. 

301. 

,,         thoracica,    ,, 

357- 

302. 

,,         infirma,  n.s. 

358. 

303- 

,,         mordax,  n.s. 

359- 

304- 

.,        nigrita,  n.s. 

360. 

305- 

„         pannosa,  n.s. 

361. 

306. 

,.         bicarinata,  n.s. 

362. 

307. 

,,         carinifrons,  n.s. 

363- 

308. 

„         initialis,  n.s. 

364- 

309- 

,.         lateralis,  n.s. 

365- 

310. 

..         arenaria,  n.s. 

366. 

311- 

„         punctifrons,  n.s. 

312. 

.,         discophora,  n.s. 

368. 

313- 

,,         corallina,  n.s. 

369. 

3H- 

•r         temporalis,  n.s. 

370. 

315- 

„         flavitarsis   n.s. 

371- 

316. 

,,         capillosa,  n.s. 

372. 

317- 

„         viridigastra,  n.s. 

373- 

318. 

„         cineraria,  Linne. 

374- 

3'9- 

V         subaenescens,  n.s. 

375- 

320. 

„         fuscicollis,  n.s. 

376. 

321. 

r         virescens,  n.s. 

377- 

322. 

,,         ahenea,  n.s. 

378. 

323. 

,.         smaragdina,  n.s. 

379- 

324- 

..         amoena,  n.s. 

380. 

325- 

.,         mucorea,  n.s. 

381. 

326. 

,.         semiaenea,  n.s. 

382. 

Nomioides,  Schenck. 

f. 
Ilk 

327- 

Nomioides  parvula,  Fabr. 

328. 

,.           turanica,  n.s. 

329 

parviceps,  n.s. 

330. 

jucunda,  Mor. 

Halictas,   Latr. 

387- 
388. 
389- 

331- 

Halictus  leucopus,  Kirby. 

332- 

„         annulipes,  n.s. 

„         Smeathmanellus,  Kirby. 

333- 

390- 

334- 
335- 

rhynchites,  n.s. 
flavipes,  Fabr. 

391- 
392. 
393- 
394- 
395- 

336. 

„         meridionalis,  Mor. 

337- 

varipes,  n.s. 

338. 

.,         croceipes,  n.s. 

339- 

,,         pulvereus,  Mor. 

340. 

„         mucoreus,  Eversm. 

396. 

Halictus  cariniventris,  n.s. 
„         sogdianus,  n.s. 
„         aprilinus,  7t.s. 
„         desertorum,  n.s. 
„         fuscicollis,  n.s. 
„         nasica,  n.s. 
„         fucosus,  n.s. 
„         sexcinctus,  Fabr. 
„         fulvipes,  German 
„         quadricinctus,  Fabr. 
„         determinatus,  n.s. 
„         minor,  ji.s. 

palustris,  n.s. 
,.         modernus,  n.s. 
^,         funerarius,  n.s. 

longirostris,  n.s. 
\         major,  Nyland. 
^,         leucozonius,  Schenck. 
^,         scutellaris,  n.s. 
,         zonulus.  Smith. 
,         fulvitarsis,  ft.s. 

trifasciatus,  n.s. 
.,         qwadrinotatus,  Kirby. 

melanarius,  n.s. 

xanthopus,  Kirby. 
J,         equestris,  n.s. 

ferghanicus,  n.s. 
^,         cylindricus,  F'abr. 
„         picipes,  n.s. 
^.         obscuratus,  n.s. 
J,         cingulatus,  n.s. 
.,         albitarsis,  n.s. 

maculipes,  n.s. 

marginellus,  Schenck. 

laevinodis,  n.s. 

pauxillus,  Schenck. 

limbellus,  n.s. 
,,  nigrilabris.  ?t.s. 
„         vulgaris,  n.s. 

nigripes,  n.s. 

pectoralis,  n.s. 

punctulatus,  Kirl»y. 
,.         gracilis,  Mor. 

hyalinipfnnis,  n.s. 

minutissimus,  Kirby. 
„         atomarius,  n.s. 

Sphecodes,  Latr. 

Sphecodes  fuscipennis,  (Icrmar 
rufithorax,  M..^. 
gihbus,  L. 
pectoralis,  n.s. 
nigripennis,  n.s. 
subquadratus,  Smith 
similis,  Wesmaol. 
puncticeps,  Thoms. 
(leoftVellus,  Kirby. 

Nomia,  Latr. 
Nomia  diversipes,  Latr. 


APPENDIX  A.—MELLIFERA. 


;67 


397 

Nomia  edentata,  n.s. 

398 

,,       ruficornis,  Spinola. 

399 

rufescens,  7i.s. 

2.  Obtusilingues. 

CoUetes,  Latr. 

400 

Colletes  cunicularia,  L. 

401 

montana,  n.s. 

402 

arenaria,  n.s. 

403 

Daviesana,  Smith. 

404 

marginata,      ,, 

405 

picistigma,  Thorns. 

406 

caspica,  Mor. 

407 

,.        annulicornis,  n.s. 

40S 

,.       cretacea,  n.s. 

409 

flavicornis,  n.s. 

410 

clypearis,  n.s. 

Hylaeus,  Fabr. 

411 

.  Hylaeus  dolichocephalus,  n.s. 

412 

,.        pusillus,  n.s. 

413 

„        nasalis,  n.s. 

414 

,,        affinis,  n.s. 

415 

,,        punctiscapus,  n.s. 

416, 

417 
418, 
419, 

420 
421 

422 

42 

424, 

425 

426. 

427 
428, 
429 
430 
431 
432 

433 
434. 
435 
436. 
437 
438 


Hylaeus  frontalis,  n.s. 
vulgaris,  n.s. 
arenarius,  n.s. 
biareolatus,  n.s. 
turanicus,  7i.s. 
trisignatus,  n.s. 
distinguendus,  n.s. 
angustifrons,  n.s. 
nigricollis,  n.s. 
punctiventris,  n.s. 
jugorum,  n.s. 
ferghanicus,  7i.s. 
tegularis,  n.s. 
tibialis,  n.s. 
flavipes,  n.s. 
variegatus,  Fabr. 
variolaris,  n.s. 
breviventris,  Fors<. 
breviceps,  n.s. 
nigritarsis,  n.s. 
bivittatus,  n.s. 
pallidicornis,  n.s. 
laticeps,  n.s. 


568  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


SPHEGIDAE,  ETC. 

By  O.  Kertz  Radoszkovsky. 

In  carrying  out  the  wish  of  Fedchenko  regarding  tables,  I  was  obliged  to 
take  as  a  handbook  Dahlbom's  work("Hymenoptera  Europaea,"  torn,  i., 
Sphex  in  sensu  Linnaeano,  Berolini,  1845)  as  the  only  one  in  which  all  the 
Sphegidae  groups  are  reduced  to  a  general  system,  though  there  exist 
incomplete  separate  monographs  on  certain  genera  of  this  group,  for 
instance,  Sphex,  A'ysso?i,  Oxybehis,2iXvdL  Crabro.  I  myself  have  added 
three  new  genera  : — Kaufmannia,  Oxybeloides ,  and  Olgia. 

In  the  collection  described,  I  found  the  following  distribution  of 
genera  : — 

The  family  Sphegidae  has  not  many  representatives.  Of  the  genus 
Sphex  6  species  were  collected,  of  which  3  were  new ;  and  amongst 
them,  S.  Stschurofskii  is  remarkable  for  its  beauty.  The  American 
genus  Podium  has  a  representative  in  the  Central  Asian  fauna. 

The   family  Fompilidae  is  very  characteristic  ;  Aporiis  has  2  ne\ 
and  I    known,   species;  Saliiis,  3  new;    Ceropales,  out  of  4  species, 

3  are  new  ;  Fompilus,  of  16  species,  8  are  new  ;  Priocneinis,  of  7 
species,  2  are  new.     In  this  family  some  Egyptian  species  are  found. 

In  the  family  Larridae  the  very  rare  Egyptian  genus  Gastrosericus 
is  met  with.  In  Palarus,  P.  histrio  has  been,  up  to  the  present, 
found  only  in  Egypt.  Tachytes,  of  11  species,*  6  are  new.  If 
Savigny's  drawings  in  "Exp.  d'Egypte"  were  coloured,  I  have  no 
doubt  that  among  them  would  be  found  species  identical  with  several 
described  by  me.  Astata  included  i  known  and  3  new  species, 
with  very  beautiful  representatives  among  them.  From  the  want  of 
literature  on  this  family  the  difficulty  of  drawing  a  line  between  the 
species  and  the  varieties  is  increased,  and  not  a  little  labour  is  incurred 
in  the  separation  of  species  nearly  related  to  one  another.  A 
trustworthy  sketch  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  many  of  the 
species  is  quite  impossible. 

The  family  Nysso?tidae  was  well  represented.  Alyssoii  has  2  new 
species.  Stizus,  of  11  species, t  7  are  new.  Among  them,  .S".  Fedchejikot, 
S.  rujive?itris,  S.  Iutesce?is,  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty  and 
size.  S.  ?iigricornis  is  in  great  quantity,  and  must  be  very  common  in 
the  locality  where  they  were  found.  Hoplisiis,  4  known,  and  2  new 
species,  which  do  not  differ  much  from  European  forms,  are  remarkable 
for  their  beauty  and  shape.  The  ne^^  gQuns  Kaufman 71  ia  is  remarkable 
for  its  resemblance  to  the  genera  Ceramius  and  Paragia.    Nysson  has 

4  new  species,  of  which  N.  grandtssimus  is  the  largest  species  of  this 
genus  known  up  to  the  present ;  the  remaining  three  species  are 
remarkable  for  their  beauty.  Eiithomoseriais  has  a  new,  remarkable, 
and  very  rare  species. 

Bembex  might  be  expected  to  have  many  representatives  in  the 
country.     Of  11   species  found,   7  are  new.     The  majority  of  the  new 

*  Dahlbom  and  Lepeletier  each  described  17  species. 
t  Dahlbom  described  14  in  all  ;  Lepeletier  11  species. 


APPENDIX  A.—SPHEGIDAE,  ETC.  5^9 

species  are  remarkable  either  for  their  structure  or  beauty  ;  B.  dilatata 
is  remarkable  for  the  shape  of  the  front  tarsi ;  B.  bicolor,  and  B. 
fe?noralis,  are  remarkable  for  the  shape  of  the  intermediate  legs. 

Philanthidae  is  very  rich.  Philafithus  has  2  new,  beautiful  repre- 
sentatives. Of  25  species*  of  Cerceris  14  are  new.  The  majority 
resemble  Egyptian  species  in  their  colouring. 

The  family  Pemphredonidae  is  very  poor,  both  in  the  number  of  genera 
and  species. 

Lastly,  the  family  Crabro?iidae,  with  the  exception  of  Oxybelus, 
is  very  poor.  Oxybelus  has  many  representatives,  10  [sic)  new,  and  6 
known  species.f  Amongst  them,  very  beautiful  and  characteristic 
forms  are  met  with  ;  O.  Savignii,  previously  only  known  as  Egyptian, 
serves  as  another  of  the  clearest  evidences  that  the  sands  of 
Kizil-Kum  and  the  sands  of  Egypt  have  similar  inhabitants,  at  least 
among  the  insects  of  the  groups  treated  by  me.  A  comparison  of  the 
flora  of  these  two  localities  might  lead  to  more  precise  conclusions  re- 
garding their  similarity. 

Notwithstanding  the  monographs  of  Gerstacker  and  Chevrier  on  the 
genus  Oxybelus,  the  determination  of  species  of  this  genus,  and  par- 
ticularly the  identification  of  the  males,  presents  no  little  difficulty. 
However,  in  order  to  avoid  misunderstanding  and  possible  errors,  I 
must  explain  that  in  determining  the  species,  as  well  as  in  identifying 
the  males,  I  adopted,  as  a  principal  basis,  the  study  of  the  shape  of 
the  spine  of  the  metanotum,  and  the  scales  of  the  postscutellum,  and 
then  compared  the  place  and  time  in  which  the  females  and  males  were 
taken. 

The  remarkable  new  genus  Oxybeloides  differs  from  the  foregoing 
by  the  absence  of  the  spine  of  the  metanotum  in  the  male  and  female. 

Crabro  has  2  new  species. 

As  a  concluding  observation  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  valleys 
of  Ferghana  and  the  Zarafshan  do  not  present  much  speciality.  Their 
fauna  resembles  that  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Kizil-Kum  alone, 
appearing  as  a  separate  part  of  Asia,  abounds  in  new  species  and 
even  genera,  sharply  distinguished  from  known  species  both  in  the 
form  of  the  body  and  in  the  beauty  and  size  of  the  individuals.  Almost 
ail  that  were  found  in  the  Kizil-Kum  were  new,  but  at  the  same  time  the 
undoubted  similarity  between  the  species  belonging  to  the  Kizil-Kum  and 
the  Egyptian  sands  is  remarkable. 


I.  Sphegidae. 
1.    Miscus,  Jur. 

I.   Miscus  campestris,  Latr. 

2.  Ammopliila,  Dlb. 

1.  -Ammophila  sabulosa,  Lin. 

2.  ..  Heydeni,  Dlb. 

3.  ,.  holosericea,  F. 

4.  ..  rubra.  Sich. 


4.  Fsammopliila,  Dlb. 

1.  Psammophila  atrocyanea,  Eversm. 

2.  .,  affinis,  Kirby. 

3.  „  viatica,  L. 

5.  Pelopaeus,  Latr. 

1.  Pelopaeus  destillatorius,  Dlb. 

2.  ,.  tubifex.  Ltr. 

3.  ..  violaceus,  F. 


3.  Mimesa,  Shuck.  !        „   ,.       J   Podium,  Ltr. 

1.  Mimesa  unicolor,  Dlb.  I    »•   Podium  Maracandicum,  n.s.,  Rad. 

2.  .,        atra,  ,,  7.  Sphex,  Lin. 

3.  „         lutaria,      ,,  I.  Sphex  Stschurowskii,  n.s.,  Rad. 

*  Dahlbom  described  29  species  in  all  ;  Lepeletier  22. 
t  Dahlbom  described  18  ;  Lepeletier  15  species. 


570 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


Sphex  subfuscata,  DIb. 
„      desertorum,  Eversm. 
„      maxillosa,  F. 
„      Sirdariensis,  7t.s.,  Rad. 
„      conica,  it.s.,  ,, 

8.  Enodia,  Dlb. 

Enodia  albisecta,  Lep. 
micans,  Evers. 


II.       POMPILIDAE. 

9.  Aporus,  Spin. 

1.  Aporus  testaceus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

2.  „       ater,  n.s.,  ,, 

3.  „       nigritulus,  Kl. 

10.  Salius,  Ltr. 

1.  Salius  niger,  n.s.,  Rad. 

2.  „      micans,  n.s.,  ,, 

3.  „      albo-notatus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

11.  Ceropales,  Latr. 

1.  Ceropales  Solskii,  7t.s.,  Rad. 

2.  „         Bogdanovii,  n.s.,  Rad. 

3.  „         nigra,  n.s., 

4.  „         histrio,  F. 

12.  Agenia,  Schiodt. 

I.  Agenia  punctum,  F. 

13.  Pompilus,  Latr. 

1.  Pompilus  viaticus,  F. 

2.  „  argenteo-fulvus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

3.  „  quadripunctatus,  F. 

4.  „  testaceus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

5.  „  vagans,  n.s.,       ,, 

6.  „  sugillatus,  Kl. 

7.  „  trivialis.  Dlb. 

8.  „  spissus,     ,, 

9.  „  consobrinus,  Dlb. 
10.  „  pulcher,  F. 

II.  „  niger,  n.s.,  Rad. 

12.  „  maculatus,  ji.s.,  Rad. 

13.  „  ruficeps,  Eversm. 

14.  „  albo-fasciatus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

15.  „  rutiventris,  ji.s.,  ,, 

16.  „  Kizilkumii,  7i.s.,         ,, 

17.  Anoplius  notatus,  Lep. 

14.  Friocnemis,  Schiodt. 

Priocnemis  rubellus,  Eversm. 
„  varial)ilis,  Ros. 

„  nigriventris,  Costa. 

„  flavus,  Eversm. 

„  fuscus,  F. 

„  Zarafschani,  n.s.,  Rad. 

„  Moravitzi,  n.s.,       ,, 

III.  Larridae. 
15.  MiscophuB,  Jur. 

Miscophus  niger,  Dlb. 


16.  Gastrosericns,  Spin. 
I.  Gastrosericus  Maracandicus,«.j.,Rad. 

17.  Falarus,  Latr. 

1.  Palarus  flavipes,  Latr. 

2.  ,,        histrio,  Spin. 

18.  Tachytes,  Fanz. 

I.  Tachytes   pompiliformis,  Panz. 
vaga,  n.s.,  Rad. 


3- 
4- 
5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 

9- 
10. 
II. 

„         Maracandica.  n.s.,  Rad 
,,         Kizilkumii,  n.s.,        ,, 
„         uni color,  Panz.,  Dlb. 
,,         obsoleta.  Ross. 
,,    .      tarsina.  Lep. 

incerta,  n.s.,  Rad. 

oraniensis,  Lep. 

micans,  n.s.,  Rad. 

fugax,  n.s.,       „ 

19.  Larra,  Latr. 

I. 

Larra  anathema.  Dlb. 

20.  Astata,  Latr. 

2. 
3- 
4. 

Astata  maculata,  n.s.,  Rad. 
„      frontalis,  n.s.,      „ 
„      quadripunctata,  n.s.,  Rad. 
„      boops,  van.  d.  Lind. 

IV.  Nyssonidae. 

I. 

21.  Olgia,  n.g.,  Bad. 
Olgia  modesta,  n.s.,  Rad. 

I. 

2. 

22.  Alysson,  Jnr. 
Alysson  Maracandensis,  n.s.,  Rad 
„        incertus,  n.s.,                 ,, 

23.  StizuB,  Latr. 

2. 
3- 
4- 

k 

Stizus  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Rad. 
,.       nigricornis,  Duf. 
,.      rufiventris,  n.s.,  Rad. 
,,      lutescens,  n.s.,        ,, 
,,      Eversmanni,  W.J.,  ,, 
Kisilkumii,  n.s.,     ,, 

7- 
8. 

9- 
10 
II 

Uljanini,  n.s.,         ,, 
„      fulvipes,  Eversm. 
.,      unifasciatus,  n.s..  Rad. 

concolor,  Eversm. 

tiidens.  F. 

24.  Harpactus,  Shnck. 

2. 

Harpactus  formosus.  Jur. 
lunatus.  Dlb. 

I. 
2. 
3- 
4- 

k 

26.  Hoplisus,  Dlb. 

Hoplisus  punctulatus,  Costa, 
({uincjuecinctus,  F. 
,,        rufo-nodis,  n.s.,  Rad. 
laticinctus,  Lep. 
luxuriosus,  n.s.,  Rad. 
latifrons,  Dlb. 

APPENDIX  A.—SPHEGIDAE,  ETC, 


571 


26.  Kaufmannia,  n.g.^  Bad. 

I. 

Kaufmannia  Maracandica,  n.s.,  Rad. 

27.  Nysson,  Latr. 

I. 

I. 

Nysson  grand issimus.  ;/.j-.,  Rad. 

2. 

argenteo-fasciatus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

I- 

3- 

castaneus.  w.J.,                     ,, 

2. 

4- 

incertus,  n.s..                       ,, 

28.  Enthomosericus,  Dlb. 

I. 

I. 

Enthomosericus  Kaufmanni.  ii.s.,  Rad. 

V.  Bembecidae.' 

j_ 

29.     Bembex,   Fabr. 

2. 

I. 

Bembex  dilatata,  n.s.,           Rad. 

2. 

.,        bicolor,  n.s.,              ,, 

3- 

femoralis,  «..$■.,          ,, 

'• 

4- 

,,        Sarafschani,  n.s.,     ,, 

5- 

.,        lutescens,  n.s.,           ,, 

6. 

eburnea,  n.s.,            ,., 

7- 

pallida,  n.s.,              ,, 

^• 

8. 

repanda.  Dlb. 

9- 

bipunctata.  n.s.,  Rad. 

I. 

10. 

oculata,  Jur. 

II. 

sinuata,  Dlb. 

VI.      P  H  I  L  A  N  T  H  I  D  .A.  E. 

2. 
3- 
4- 

30.  Philanthus,  Latr. 

I. 

Philanthus  triangiilum,  P'abr. 

2. 

.,            Kokandicus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

5. 

3- 

Kizilkumii,  fi.s.,      „ 

6. 

31.  Cerceris,  Latr. 

7- 
8. 

9- 

I. 

Cerceris  acuta,  n.s.,  Rad. 

2. 

Sirelariensis,  n.s.,  Rad. 

3- 

Ferreri,  Van  d.  L. 

10. 

4- 

labiata,  Fabr. 

12. 
13- 

T  A 

5 

.,        octo-notata.  n.s.,  Rad. 

6 

rufo-nodis.  n.s.,       ,, 

7- 

Maracandica,  n.s.,  ,, 

8. 

maculata,  n.s.,         „ 

9- 

Freymuthi,  ti.s.,      „ 

10 

mixta,  n.s.,               „ 

ir 

quadripunctata,  n.s.,  Rad. 

J 

12 

arenaria,  Lin. 

^3 

pallido-picta,  n.s.,  Rad. 

14 

Solskii,  n.s., 

I. 

15 

Saussurei,  n.s..          „ 

2. 

16 

sabulosa,  Panz. 

3- 

17 

vagans,  n.s.,  Rad. 

4. 

18 

nobilis.               „ 

5. 

19 

dorsalis,  Eversm. 

6. 

20 

conigera,  Dlb. 

7- 

21 

•?        quadricincta.  Panz. 

8. 

22 

»»        albo-fasciata.  Ross. 

23 

55        variabilis,  Dlb. 

24 

:i        capito,  Lep. 

I. 

25 

:•        elegans,  Eversm. 

2. 

VII.    PiiMPHREDONIDAE. 

32.  Stigmus,  Jur. 

Stigmus  minutissimus.  n.s.,  Rad. 

33.  Passaloecus,  Shuck. 

Passaloecus  parvulus,  n.s.,  Rad. 

,,  Turionum,  Dlb. 

34.  Diodontus,  Curt. 

Diodontus  minutus.  Fabr. 

36.  Cemonus,  Jur. 

Cemonus  unicolor.  Fabr. 
lethifer,  Dlb. 

36.  Pemphredon,  Latr. 
Pemphredon  lugubris,  Fabr.,  Dlb. 

VIII.    Crabronidae. 

37.  Trypoxylon,  Latr. 

Trypoxylon  figulus.  Lin. 

38.  Oxybeloides,  n.g.,  Ead. 
Oxybeloides  fasciatus,  n.s.,  Rad. 
39.  Oxybelus,  Latr. 

Oxybelus  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,     Rad. 
„        Sarafschani,  n.s., 
„        parvulus,  n.s., 

elongatus.  n.s., 
„         Maracandicus,  n.s. 
„         Kizilkumii,  7i.s., 

Solskii,  n.s., 

eburneus.  n.s., 

canaliculatus  n.s.,      ,, 

albo-pictus,  7/.s.,         „ 
.,         Savignii,  Spin. 
.,        bipunctatus,  Oliv. 

pugnax,  „ 

,,        14-notatus,  Jur. 

lalro,  Oliv. 
,,        mandibularis.  Eversm. 

40.  Rhopalum,  Kirby. 
Rhopalum  clavipes,  Lin. 
41.  Crabro,  Latr. 

Crabro  sexcinctus,  Fabr. 
alatus,  Panz. 
vagus,  Lin. 
urophori,  n.s.,  Rad. 
spinipectus,  Dlb. 
varus,  Panz. 

(Thyreopus)  filiformis,  Rad. 
do.         Uljanini,  n.s.,  , 

42.  Lindenius,  Lep. 

Lindenius  albilabris,  Fabr. 
,,          Panzeri,  V.  d.  Lin. 


572  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


SCOLIIDAE. 
By  H.  De  Saussure. 

To  this  family,  as  we  understand  it,  belong  the  Hymeno^tera  Hetej'o- 
gynuj  with  the  exception  of  For?nzctdae  and  Doryllidae.  They  may 
be  called  Heterogyna  Solitaria^  as  they  do  not  live  in  communities  and 
have  only  two  sexes,  or  Heterogyna  Parasitica,  by  reason  of  the 
majority,  if  not  all  of  them,  being  parasites  of  other  insects. 

We  take,  consequently,  this  family  on  the  same  basis  as  Lepeletier 
de  St.  Fargeau,  not  separating  Thyniiii  from  it  as  does  F.  Smith ;  for 
we  view  the  family  of  Scoliidae  as  a  natural  group,  not  capable  of  being 
split  up. 

If  it  were  necessary  to  separate  any  group  from  this  family,  we  would 
prefer  to  act  thus  with  Sapygii  rather  than  Thynnii,  as  their  legs  are 
not  armed  but  smooth,  and  both  sexes  are  alike  ;  but  these  insects  are 
clearly  related  to  Scoliidae  by  the  construction  of  their  thorax,  and  by 
their  appearance  generally. 

Turkistan  Scoliidae  belong  chiefly  to  the  fauna  of  the  Mediterranean 
basin.  Among  them  are  found  all  the  eastern  species  of  this  basin,  but 
the  species  (or  varieties  of  form)  mostly  peculiar  to  the  west  are  absent ; 
such,  for  example,  as  Scolia  Jlavifrons ,  Fabr.,  bide?is,  L.,  interstijicta, 
Kl.,  hirta,  Schr.,  insiibrica^  Ross.,  Elis  sexmaculata^  and  ciliata^  Fabr. 
Instead  of  Scolia  Jlavifroiis  the  corresponding  eastern  species,  .S"^. 
haeinorrhoidalis ,  is  met  with  in  Turkistan,  and  instead  of  Elis  sexffia- 
culata  is  found  E.  tar  tar  a. 

The  species  generally  distributed  over  the  whole  basin,  as  Sc.  maura 
and  quadripu7ictata  and  Elis  villosa,  are  also  met  with  in  Turkistan. 
Species  purely  African  are  absent  from  the  Turkistan  fauna,  though 
certain  of  them  are  distributed  along  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean 
{Elis  collar  is),  or  in  Egypt  {Elis  thoracica,  F.,  Scolia  7?ie?idica,  KL, 
occulta,  Sauss.,  disbar,  Kl.,  Elis  aliefia,  Kl.,  etc.).  This  absence 
from  Turkistan  of  African  species  may,  it  seems,  be  explained  by  the 
fact  that  they  belong  to  the  torrid  zone,  and  cannot  endure  the  winter 
of  the  Asiatic  steppes. 

In  the  collections  brought  from  Turkistan  there  are  none  of  certain 
species  described  by  former  authors  as  belonging  to  the  East ;  but  from 
data  in  our  possession  we  may  conclude  that  these  species  probably 
exist  in  the  province,  and  will  be  found  there  on  further  investigation, 
as  for  instance  Scolia  bifasciata,  Rossi. 

The  species  (^S"^.  varicolor,  Luc.)  belonging  to  Barbary  is  also  want- 
ing there. 

Besides  these  species  of  the  Mediterranean  basin,  several  otheri- 
are  met  with  peculiar  to  Asia  [Scolia  Vollenhoveni),  and  also  several 


I 


APPENDIX  A.—SCOLIIDAE.  573 

new  species,  which  are  evidently  characteristic  of  the  fauna  of  Central 
Asia. 

The  family  Scoliidae  has  been  ver}-  imperfectly  known  up  to  the 
present,  and  there  exists  no  complete  work  on  the  subject,  which  is 
explained  by  the  important  difficulties  connected  with  the  dimorphism, 
as  well  as  by  the  comparative  rarity  of  very  many  species  in  collections. 

Of  a  large  number  of  species,  and  also  of  certain  genera,  only  one  of  the 
sexes  has  been  previously  known,  and  it  is  impossible  to  discover  the 
other  sex  until  we  happen  to  take  both  in  copula.  A  Z;-/?^;-/ suppositions 
are  in  many  cases  quite  insufficient  to  enable  us  to  ascribe  known 
females  to  males,  and,  evidently,  suppositions  on  like  bases  would  most 
probably  be  incorrect.  Thus,  for  instance,  who  could  have  thought 
that  two  genera  so  different  as  Me?'ui  and  Plesia  have  males  with 
similar  characters  ? 

Among  species  with  wingless  females,  the  latter  retain  the  larval  form, 
quite  distinct  from  the  same  form  of  winged  males,  and  as  in  the 
absence  of  wings  it  is  impossible  to  obser\'e  those  characters  offered  by 
the  neuration,  in  cases  where  only  the  wingless  female  is  known,  there 
remains  almost  no  character  whereby  we  might  connect  the  sexes,  or 
decide  with  exactitude  to  which  genus  a  given  species  belongs. 

Even  the  neuration  of  the  wings  does  not  always  serve  as  a  character, 
as  is  evident  from  the  following  : — In  Scolia  the  wing  of  the  male  is 
always  different  from  the  wing  of  the  female,  at  least  in  the  form  of  the 
cellula  radialis.  Among  the  males  of  Plesia  the  neuration  of  the  wings 
is  analogous  to,  but  not  identical  with,  that  of  the  females.  In  Meria 
the  neuration  of  the  wing  of  the  female  has  nothing  in  common  with 
that  of  the  male. 

In  a  series  of  genera  these  anomalies  are  combined  in  the  most 
various  ways.  Thus  in  Plesia  and  Meria  the  males  are  almost  identical, 
while  in  Cosila  ds^A  Meria,  on  the  other  hand,  the  females  are  almost 
identical,  and  the  males  are  different.  The  genera  are  distributed  quite 
differently  according  as  we  turn  our  attention  to  males  or  females. 
(This  fact  is  specially  evident  with  regard  to  Thynnii,  among  which 
the  differences  in  form  of  the  females  do  not  at  all  correspond  with 
those  genera,  which  are  established  on  the  basis  of  the  males.) 

A  classification,  therefore,  is  much  retarded  by  the  difficulties 
naturally  resulting  from  these  anomalies.  Generally  speaking,  among 
hymenopterous  insects,  it  is  necessary  to  base  the  description  on  the 
females,  as  the  characters  of  that  sex  are  marked  with  greater  clearness. 
When  the  females  are  wingless,  one  is  compelled  to  turn  to  the  males 
to  observ^e  the  neuration  of  the  wings.  In  our  investigation  of  this 
family  it  appears,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing,  that  there  is  a 
new  difficulty,  chiefly  consisting  in  the  fact  that  the  males  of  known 
genera  are  all  similar  to  each  other,  while  amongst  the  females  the 
generic  differences  are  clearly  noticeable. 

In  the  attempt  at  classification  undertaken  by  us  in  the  present  work, 


574 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


we  have  made  use  of  many  characters  which  have  not  hitherto  receive 
due  attention.  Experience  has  shown  us  that  not  one  of  these  character 
taken  separately,  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  classification,  because  mar 
of  them  are  combined,  in  the  most  opposite  ways,  with  other  character 
This  evidently  indicates  that  the  family  in  question  consists  of  seven 
parallel,  or  rather  diverging,  series,  having  points  of  contact,  in  whic 
are  repeated  the  same  modifications,  by  which  corresponding  type 
are  formed  in  different  series. 


Sapygii. 
Sapyga,  Latr. 

1.  Sapyga  clavicornis,  Lin. 

2.  ,,       exomata,  Gerst. 

M  u  T  I  L  L  I  D  A  E. 

Methoca,  Latr. 
I,   Methoca  ichneumonoides. 
Myrmosa,  Latr. 

1.  Myrmosa  melanocephala,  Fbr. 

2.  ..         Radoszkowskyi,  Jt,s. 

Mutilla,  Lin.,  F. 
Fedchenkia,  n.  gen. 
I.  Fedchenkia  grossa,  n.s. 

SCOLIAE. 

Scolia  (Sensu  latiore). 

Scolia,  Lin. 

Triscolia,  Saussiire  et  SicheL 

1.  Triscolia  haemonhoidalis,  Fabr. 

Discolia,  Sausstire  et  SicheL 

2.  Discolia  erythrocephala,  Fabr. 

3.  ..  flaviceps,  Eversm. 

4.  ..  quadripunctata,  Fabr. 

5.  ,.  infuscata,  Klug. 

6.  .,  bifasciala,  Rossi. 

7.  .,  unifasciata,  Cyrill. 


8.  Discolia  nniaura,  P'abr. 

9.  ..        Vollenhoveni,  Sauss 
10.         ,.        Indica,  ., 

Ells,  Fabr. 

Trielis,  Saussiire  et  SicheL 

1.  Trielis  Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

2.  ,,      tartara,  n.s. 

3.  ..      villosa,  Fabr. 

Dielis,  Saussure  et  SicheL 

4.  Dielis  annulata,  Fabr. 

Myzine,  Latr. 

Flesia,  Latr. 

I.   Plesia  Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

Tiphia,  Fabr. 

1.  Tiphia  morio,  Fabr. 

2.  .,      femorata,    „ 

3.  ..      minuta,  7i.s. 

Meria,  Illig. 

1.  Meria  tripunctata,  Rossi, 

2.  ,,       tarlara,  n.s. 

3.  „       radialis,  ii.s. 

4.  ..       Timurella,  n.s. 

Fseudomeria,  Saund. 

1.  Pseudomeria  Swanetiae,  Radoszl 

2.  .,  Tamerlanella,  n.s. 


% 


APPENDIX  A.—MUTILLIDAE. 


575 


MUTILLIDAE. 


By  O.  Kertz  Radoszkovsky. 


Of  the  number  of  insects  of  this  genus  collected  by  Fedchenko,  there 
are  5  species  belonging  to  the  European  fauna — M.  qiiinquefasciata 
(Greece),  cephalica  (Greece  and  Russia),  rufipes,  fuontana  (Europe), 
lugubris  (Russia,  Hungary,  Spain) — ;  4  species  of  the  fauna  of  the 
Mediterranean  basin— ^ii/.  Tujie?isis  (Spain,  Algeria,  Persia),  Hottentota 
(S.  Europe,  Algeria,  Egypt),  arenaria  (Spain,  Caucasus,  Persia, 
Mongolia),  rubrociiicta  (Algeria) — ;  3  species  purely  African — M.  con- 
ti?iua  (Egypt,  Senegal),  decorata,  and  ornata  (Egypt) — ;  3  Central 
Asian  species — M.  bicalor,  desertoriim  (Sungaria,  Syr-daria),  cre7iata 
(Sungaria) — ;  and  3  new  species  undescribed. 

The  species  M.  decorata  and  omata  were  first  collected  by  Savigny ; 
their  females  are  represented  in  his  excellent  drawings  "  Description 
de  I'Egypte,"  Hymenopteres  (Planches  sans  texte),  but  the  males  were 
unknown.  The  males  and  their  females  were  collected  by  Fedchenko  : 
— M.  decorata  in  Zarafshan  valley  and  near  the  Syr-daria,  and  M. 
ornata  along  the  Syr-daria  and  in  the  Kizil-Kum. 

As  we  have,  in  the  monograph  "Mutilla,"  published  by  Radoszkovsky 
and  Sichel,  in  HorcB  Societ.  E?itomolog.  Rosstccs,  tome  vi.  p.  139 
(1869),  a  very  complete  description  [in  French]  of  the  species  of  this 
genus  then  known,  we  borrow  thence  descriptions  of  the  species 
met  with  in  Turkistan,  but  previously  known  in  other  countries.  In 
the  description  of  new  species  found  in  Turkistan  we  always  refer  to 
the  said  work  [in  the  original]. 


Mutilla  quinquefasciata,  Oliv. 
„        cephalica,  Rad. 
„        continua,  Fabr. 
„        bicolor,  Pallas  (nee  Oliv.). 
„        Tunensis,  Fabr. 
„        decorata,  Sav. 
„        rufipes,  I.atr. 
.,        Hottentota,  Fabr. 
montana,  Panz. 


Mutilla,  Lin. 

10.  Mutilla 

arenaria,  Fabr. 

II. 

incerta,  n.s.,  Rad. 

12.        ,, 

rubrocincta,  Luc,  var. 

liv.). 

13- 

Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Rad 

14- 

lugubris,  Fabr. 

15.       .. 

anceps,  n.s.,  Rad. 

16.       ., 

ornata,  Klug. 

17- 

Zarafschani,  n.s.,  Rad. 

18.       „ 

crenata,            , , 

2. 
3- 

4- 
5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 

fin  returning  the  proof  of  the  above,  General  Radoszkovsky  is  good  enough  to 
inform  me  that  (i)  five  years  ago  Captain  Bolosoglo  made  an  entomological 
expedition  to  Turkistan,  and  found  some  new  species,  among  which  is  a 
x^m-xxVahX^  Habropoda  Bolosoglyi,  n.s.,  Hymenopt.  Apidae  ;  (2)  quite  recently 
General  Komaroff  has  made  scientific  explorations  between  Askhabad  and 
Merv,  and  among  the  Hymenoptera  collected  about  Askhabad  (the  description 
of  which  is  in  the  pre.-s)  are  the  following  Mutillidae  : — 

Agama  Blakii,  g. 

„       Komarovi,  n.s. 

Askhabadensis,  n.s.  ,,  asiaticus,  n.s. — H.  Z.] 


Agama  Kokpetica,  n.s. 
Tricholabiadcs,  n.  g. 

,,  asiaticus,  n.s. 


576  RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


FORMICIDAE  {Ants). 
By  Dr.  Gustav  Mayr,  of  Vienna. 

The  zoological  investigations  of  Fedchenko  have  brought  forward  very 
interesting  results  in  the  famil}^  of  Formicidae,  and  the  rich  materials 
collected  by  his  indefatigable  activity  have  the  more  value  because 
collected  in  a  country  the  Formicidae  fauna  of  which  was  totally 
unknown,  and  even  from  the  neighbouring  countries  we  were  acquainted 
with  only  a  very  small  number  of  species. 

It  was  anticipated  that  the  Formicidae  of  Turkistan  would  differ 
little  from  those  of  Europe,  as  the  boundar}-  line  between  Europe  and 
Asia  is  long,  though,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Urals  present  a  certain 
obstacle  to  the  distribution  of  species.  Moreover,  the  climatic  con- 
ditions of  Turkistan  do  not  very  markedly  differ  from  European,  while 
important  obstacles  are  met  wdth  on  the  road  from  Turkistan  to 
tropical  Asia;  and,  finall}',  the  known  Siberian  species  were  identical 
with  European. 

Of  36  species  collected  by  Fedchenko  in  Turkistan  only  7  are  new, 
the  remainder  inhabiting  Europe.  Of  the  latter,  Lasius  7iige7'  and 
alienus,  Formica  truncicola,  p7'atensis^  rufibarbis,  ciiierea,  and 
fusca,  Ta^inoma  erraticuTn,  Myi'mica  laeinnodiSy  rugi7iod7S, 
rugulosa.,  scabri7iodis,  and  lobicor7iis,  7etra77io7'iu77i  caespitu777,  and 
Sole7iopsis  fugax  are  distributed  over  almost  the  whole  of  Europe; 
Plagiole^is pyg77iaea  and  A;phae7iogaster  st}-ticfo7'  inhabit  Central  and 
Southern  Europe ;  Ca77ipo7iotus  sylvaticKs  and  77iargi7iatus,  Cata- 
glyphis  viatica  and  curso7',  Acatithoicpis  /7'a7ie7ife/di,  Tapi/ioma 
7iigerri7nu77i,  Both7'io7ny7'7iiex  77ieridio7ialis,  Aphae7iogaste7'  ba7'bara 
Pheidole  pusilla^  and  Cre7nastogaste7'  sordidiila,  on  the  contrar}',  onl) 
inhabit  Southern  Europe,  and  only  certain  of  these  species  are  dis- 
tributed towards  the  north  as  far  as  the  middle  of  Central  Europe. 
Cataglyphis  albica7is  was  previously  known  only  from  Spain,  and 
Cardioco7idyIa  elega7is  from  Naples  and  Portugal. 

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  Formicidae  fauna  of  Turkistan  is  ver) 
similar  to  that  of  South  Europe,  but  distinguished  from  it  by  7  nev 
species.  However,  this  is  not  astonishing,  as  the  mean  temperatun 
of  summer  in  Turkistan  differs  little  from  the  mean  summer  heat  ir 
Southern  Europe,  and  in  this  case  only  proves  once  more  that,  ir 
general,  countries  with  summers  alike  have  greater  similarity  witl 
regard  to  fauna  and  flora  than  countries  lying  under  identical  isotherm.' 
with  different  summers.  This  peculiarity  is  evident  with  regard  tt 
Formicidae,  because,  for  example,  in  Italy  and  Turkistan  they  have  ai 
identical  summer ;  and  though  the  winter  in  Turkistan  is  long  ant 
cold,  it  does  not  appear  to  have  much  influence  over  the  ants,  whicl 
are  protected  therefrom. 

Up  to  the  present  very  few  species  were  known  from  Siberia,*  viz. 
CampuTiotus  Iig7ii;pe7'd7cs  and  he7-culeamis,  Fo7'77iica  exsecfa,  7'ufa 
prateTisis^  sa7ig7ii77ea,  7'ufiba7-bis  and  gagates,  My7-777ica  laevi7iodis 
lobicorTiis,  and  g7'a7zu/i7iodis.  Of  these  only  Fo7'77iica  p7-afensis 
r7iflbarbis,  My7'777ica  laei'i77odis  and  lohico7-77is  inhabit  Turkistan. 

*  Mayr,  "  Beitrage  zur  Ameisenfauna  Russlands,"  p.  87,  Stctt.  Ettt.  Zeit.,  1859 


APPENDIX  A.—FORMICIDAE.  577 

From  the  Kirghese  Steppe  I  received  Cataglyphis  cursor,  which 
also  inhabits  Turkistan. 

From  Mongolia  I  know  only  Formica  gagates  and  rufibarbis,  the 
latter  of  which  inhabits  Turkistan. 

The  Formicidae  of  Persia,  with  the  exception  of  Catagly-phis  viatica^ 
are  yet  unknown  ;  in  Asiatic  Turkey,  principally  in  Asia  Minor,  Syria, 
and  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  are  known  the  following,  the  greater  portion 
having  been  described  by  me  : — Camponotus  sylvaficus  with  variegatics 
and  aethiops,;pubescejis,  Kiesenwette7'z,  robustus,  sericeus,  lateralis* 
Preiiolepis  ?iilens,  Plagiolepis  pygmaea,  Lasius  alienits,  brun?ieus, 
Jiavus,  Fo7'mica  gagates,  fzisca,  Catagly;phis  viatica,  bo?nbycina, 
albicans^  Aca?itholepis  Frauenfeldi,  Liometopufn  microcephalum, 
Tapinoma  erraticiim,  Aphae?iogaster  barbara,  structor,  striola, 
spieiidida,  siibterranea^  testaceo-pilosa^  rufotestacea,  dentigera,  Myr- 
mica  scabrinodis,  Leptothorax  angulatus,  Nylanderi,  TetramoriuTn 
guinee?2se,caespitu7n,  Mo7io7noriu77i  Salo77io7iis ,  gracilli77tu77i,  tore7ise, 
Pheidole  si7iaitica,  Sole7iopsis  fiigax,  Cre7nastogaster  scutellaris , 
sordidtila,  and  i7ierniis. 

From  the  Caucasus  and  Georgia  are  known  to  me  : — Plagiolepis 
Pyg77iaea,  Lasius  7iige7',  bru7i7ieus,  For77iica  exsecta^  pratcTisis, 
subrufa,  Cataglyphis  viatica,  cursor,  Po7iera  co7itracta,  AphacTio- 
gaste7'  barbara,  structo7',  MyrTTtica  rubida,  rugi7iodis ,  scabrinodis^ 
Tetra77ioriuni  caespitu7n,  Pheidole  pallidula  and  Cre7nastogaster 
sordidula,  of  which  approximately  three-fifths  are  found  in  Turkistan, 

Certain  of  the  species  inhabiting  Turkistan  and  Europe  are  also 
found  in  North  America,  viz.,  Ca77ipo7iotus  sylvaticus,  7nargi7iatus, 
Lasius  7iiger,  alie7ius,  Formica  tru7icicola,  fusca,  ci7ierea,  riifibarbis, 
MyrTTtica  rugi7iodis ,  scabri7iodis,  lobicor7iis  and  Sole7iopsis  fugax. 
The  only  species  known  in  Europe  and  N.  America,  but  not  previously 
found  in  Asia,  is  Lasius  U77ibratics. 

European  species  which  live  in  trees  and  woods, — as,  for  example, 
Campo7iotus  lig7iiperdus  dSid.  herculeanus ;  the  genus  Colobopsis,  so 
common  in  European  w'oods ;  For77zica  rufa,  w'hich  makes  high 
conical  ant-hills ;  Liometopu7n  77iicrocephalu7n,  which  in  Southern 
Europe  makes  such  exquisite  constructions  in  hollow  trees  ;  or  Lasius 
fuligi7iosus ,  which  builds  similarly  ;  and,  finally,  the  genus  HypocliTiia 
— appear  to  be  in  most  cases  absent  from  Turkistan. 

Of  the  new  Turkistan  species  IscliTiomyrmex  rhaphidiiceps  is 
specially  interesting.  Up  to  the  present,  of  this  genus  were  known  :  — 
/.  loTigipes  in  Singapore,  Borneo,  and  Celebes;  /.  exasperatus,  the 
native  country  of  which  is  unknown  ;  and  /.  lo7igiceps  in  Australia. 

As  two  of  these  species  inhabit  countries  between  the  tropical  and 
subtropical  zones  of  the  southern  hemisphere,  it  is  the  more  remarkable 
to  meet  with  species  of  this  genus  in  the  temperate  zone  of  the  northern 
hemisphere,  and  it  may  be  presumed  that  they  have  existed  here  since 
the  tertiary  period. 

To  the  characteristics  of  Turkistan  Formicidae  I  may  add  that  I  do 
not  know  of  any  country  in  w^hich  transitory  forms  between  two  species, 
and  pale-coloured  varieties,  are  so  frequently  met  with. 

As  the  new  Turkistan  species  are  described  [in  the  original]  in  detail, 

*  Smith,  in  "List  of  Hym.  coll.  by  Lord,  1871,"  indudes  Camponotus  ligni- 
ierdus  in  the  number  of  species  inhabiting  Arabia,  but  very  probably  he  has 
mistaken  some  other  for  that  species. 

VOL.  IL  IJ 


578 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


I  have,  for  the  definition  of  known  species  inhabiting  Europe,  referrec 

to:— 

Mayr,  "  Die  Europaischen  Formiciden,"  Wien,  1861  ;  and 

Forel,  "  Les  Fourmis  de  la  Suisse,"  Zurich,  1874. 

In  the  following  description  I   have  quoted  only  the  principal  sync 

nyms  ;  others  are  to  be  found  in  Mayr's  "  Formicidarum  Index  synony 

micus,"  in  the  Ver/z.  d.  k.k.  zool.  bot.  Ges.  ifi  Wien,  1863,  pp.  385-460 

1.  Camponotus,  Mayr. 

1.  Camponotus  sylvaticus,  Oliv. 

2.  ,,  Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 

3.  ,,  marginatus,  Ltr. 

4.  ,,  interjectus.  n.s. 

2,  Plagiolepis,  Ma3rr. 
I.  Plagiolepis  pygmaea,  Ltr. 


3.  Lasius,  F. 

1.  Lasius  niger,  L. 

2.  ,,      alienus,  Foerst. 

4.  Formica,  L. 
I.  Formica  pratensis,  De  Geer. 


tnmc'cola,  Nyl. 
rufibarbis,  F. 
cinerea,  Mayr. 
fu  ca,  L. 
aberrans,  n.s. 


5.  CataglypMs,  Foerst. 

1.  Cataglyphis  viatica,  F. 

2.  ,,  cursor.  Fonscol. 

3.  ,,  albicans,  Rog. 

4.  „  pallida,  n.s. 

6.  Acantholepis,  Mayr. 
I.  Acantholepis  Frauenfeldi,  Mayr. 

T.  Tapinoma,  Foerst. 

1.  Tapinoma  nigerrimum,  Nyl. 

2.  ,,  erraticum,  Ltr. 

8.  Bothriomyrmex,  Emery. 
I.  Bothriomyrmex  meridionale,  Rog. 

[In  returning  proof  of  the  above  Dr.  Mayr  informs  me  that  his  work  on  the  Ai 
of  Turkistan  has  been  translated  into  Dutch,  and  published  in  Tijdsch 
voor  Entomologie,  xxiii.  deel,  p.  17-40  (1879-80).--.-/^.  Z.] 


9.  Ischnomyrmex,  Mayr. 
I.   Ischnomyrmex  rhaphidiiceps,  n.s. 

10.  Aphaenogaster,  Mayr. 

1.  Aphaenogaster  barbara,  L. 

2.  ,,  structor,  Ltr. 


11.  Myrmica,  Ltr. 

1.  Myrmica  laevinodis,  Nyl. 

2.  ,,         ruginodis,     ,, 

3.  ,,         rugulosa,      „ 

4.  ,,         scabrinodis,  ,, 

5.  ,,         lobicornis,    ,, 

12.  Leptothorax,  Mayr. 

13.  Tetramorium,  Mayr. 
I.  Tetramorium  caespitum,  L. 

14.  Monomorinm,  Mayr. 
I.  Monomorium  barbatulum,  n.s. 

15.  Cardiocondyla,  Emery. 
I.  Cardiocondyla  elegans,  Emery. 

16.  Pheidole,  Westw. 
I.  Pheidole  pusilla,  Heer. 

17.  Solenopsis,  Westw. 
I.  Sole  nopsis  fugax,  Ltr. 

18.  Cremastogaster,  Limd. 

1.  Cremastogaster  sordidula,  Nyl. 

2.  ,,  subdentata.  n.s. 


APPENDIX   A.—CHRYSIDIFORMES.  579 


CHRYSIDIFORMES. 
By  O.  Kertz  Radoszkovsky. 

The  species  of  this  group,  generally  very  beautiful,  are  very  like  each 
other  in  their  metallic  colours  as  well  as  in  their  form.  A  definition  of 
the  differences  of  the  species  of  each  genus  presents  much  difficulty. 
The  descriptions  of  Fabricius,  Latreille,  and  Klug,  and  even  of  Lucas, 
are  so  general  and  incomplete,  that,  notwithstanding  the  beautiful 
drawings,  it  is  often  impossible  to  say  to  what  species  the  described  and 
figured  specimens  of  a  given  genus  belong.  Spinola  first  began  to 
describe  separately  the  more  characteristic  parts  of  the  body  ;  from  his 
descriptions  the  identification  is  more  practicable.  Then  Dahlbom 
pubhshed  his  monograph  ("Hymenoptera  Europaea,"  tom.  ii.,  Chrysis 
in  sensu  Linnaeano,  Berolini,  1854).  He  paid  particular  attention  to 
the  minutiae  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  to  the  form  of  the  frontal 
depression,  to  the  form  of  the  third  ventral  segment,  and  the  armature 
of  the  extremity  of  that  segment,  besides  other  parts  of  the  body. 
Dividing  the  whole  family  into  sharply-distinguished  groups,  he  gave 
synoptical  tables  for  the  definition  of  the  genera  and  species.  With 
the  aid  of  these  tables  and  detailed  descriptions,  very  often  illustrated 
by  most  excellent  drawings,  the  definition  of  each  species  is  fully 
possible. 

Regarding  the  work  of  Dahlbom  as  a  model,  and  so  far  unique,  for 
the  true  definition  of  species  of  the  family  Chrysididae,  I  have  followed 
the  system  adopted  by  him,  as  far  as  possible,  in  the  description  of  new 
species.  As  to  species  already  known  and  described  I  have 
restricted  myself  to  a  Latin  diagnosis,  inviting  the  reader  to  turn 
to  Dahlbom' s  work  for  further  details.  It  should  be  remarked, 
however,  that  notwithstanding  the  most  minute  description  of  a 
species,  the  change  of  colour  of  its  body  depending  upon  local  and 
climatic  conditions,  the  transition  from  blue  to  greenish-blue,  and 
from  golden-green  to  golden-red,  may  often  give  rise  to  doubt,  and  lead 
to  the  fabrication  of  a  supposed  new  species.  For  this  reason,  as 
far  back  as  1866,  I  considered  it  useful  to  add  to  Dahlbom's  descriptions 
explanatory  coloured  drawings  of  all  Russian  species  in  my  possession. 
For  the  same  reason  I  give  [in  the  original]  drawings  of  all  the 
species  collected  in  Turkistan,  of  which  drawings  did  not  exist.  This 
will  also  be  useful,  because,  if  a  species  identified  by  me  is,  though 
very  similar  to,  yet  really  distinct  from,  the  species  to  which  I  referred  it, 
an  exact  correction  of  my  error  will,  at  any  time,  be  possible. 

In  the  materials  collected  by  Fedchenkp  I  found  53  species,  belong- 
ing to  the  division  Chrysidiformes,  among  which  are  2  new  genera  and 
15  new  species.  I  am  sorry  that  the  locality  of  the  very  remarkable 
new  gennsPolyodontus  is  unknown  ;  it  was  received  from  the  Orenburg 
museum  without  designation  as  to  where  it  was  found. 


58o 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


I.  Cleptidae,  Dlb. 

Group  4. 

I. 

1.  Cleptes,  Latr. 

Cleptes  Morawitzi,  n.s. 

24. 

Chrysis  maracandensis,  n.s. 
„        indigotea,  Duf. 
,,       dentipes,  n.s.,  Rad. 

II.  Elampidae,  Dlb. 

v.. 

»> 
)  t 

nitidula,  Fabr. 
soluta,  Dlb. 

1.  Omalus,  Fanz. 

29. 

Ehrenbergi,     „ 

2. 

Omalus  auratus,  Dlb. 

30. 

» 

palliditarsis,  Spin. 

3- 

,,        pusillus,  Fabr. 

31- 

orientalis,  Dlb. 

4- 

„        coerule.is,  de  Geer. 

32. 

>» 

di  versa,        „ 

5- 

,,        aeneus,  Panz. 

33- 

speciosa,  n.s. 

2.  Elampus,  Spin. 

34- 

»> 

soror,  Dlb. 

6. 

7. 

Elampus  ambiguus,  Dlb. 
„         truncatus,    ,, 

35- 
36. 

ij 

kokandica,  n.s. 
sinuata,  Dlb. 

8. 

,,         femoralis,  Evers. 

37- 

)) 

cyanopyga,   ., 

38. 

»9 

superba,  n.s. 

3.  Holopyga,  Dlb. 

39- 

rutilans,  Oliv. 

9- 

Holopyga  ovata,  Pall. 

40. 

)) 

analis,  Spin. 

10. 

,,         Bogdanovii,  n.s. 

41. 

>> 

Kessleri,  n.s. 

42. 

Grohmanni,  Spin. 

III.  Hedychridae,  Dlb. 

43- 

>» 

armena,           , , 

1.  Hedychrum,  Latr. 

44. 

>» 

Uljanini,  n.s. 

II. 

Hedychrum  incrassatum,  Spin. 

45- 

>> 

impar,  Dlb. 

12. 

„            lucidulum,  Dlb. 

46. 

>» 

ignita,  Lin. 

13- 

„            Erschovi,  n.s. 

Group  5. 

14. 

,,           rutilans,  Meger. 

47- 

»> 

pulchella,  Sp. 

15 

„           flavipes,  Evers. 

48. 

JJ 

micans,  Rossi. 

16. 

,,            Solskyi,  U.S. 

49- 

J> 

sabulosa,  n.s. 
2.  Stilbum,  Spin. 

IV.  Chrysididae. 

50. 

Stilbum  calens,  Fabr. 

1.  Chrysis,  Fabr. 

3. 

Folyodontus,  n.g.,  Ead. 

Group  I. 

51- 

Polyodontus  Stchurovskyi,  n.s 

17- 

Chrysis  vagans,  n.s. 

V 

.  Euchroeidae,  Dlb. 

18. 

„        varicornis,  Spin. 

1.  Eacbroeus.  Latr. 

19. 

,,        uniformis,  Dlb. 

Group  2. 
,,        Fedchenkoi,  n.s. 
„       versicolor,  Spin. 

52. 

Euchroeus  quadratus,  Kl. 

20. 
21. 

i  "* 

2.  Brugmoia,  n.g.,  Ead. 
Brugmoia  pellucida,  n.s.,  Rad. 

22. 

,,       foveata,  Dlb. 

VI.  Parnopidae,  Dlb. 

Group  3. 

Famopes,  Fabr. 

23- 

„       cyanea,  Lin. 

54- 

Parnopes  carnea,.Ross. 

APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA.  581 


LEPIDOPTERA  [Butterjlzes  and  Moths). 

By  Nicholas  G.  Erschoff. 

The  Lepidoptera  collected  by  Fedchenko  serve  as  the  chief,  but  not  the 
whole,  of  the  materials  for  the  following  remarks  •}  for  I  made  use  of 
certain  information  concerning  the  lepidoptera  of  Turkistan  contained 
in  the  works  of  Menetries  -  and  Eversmann.^ 

It  appears  that  the  total  number  known  at  present  in  Turkistan,  and 
included  in  my  work,  is  367  species,  of  which  122  are  species  of 
Microlepidoptera. 

The  Lepidopterafurnished  to  me  by  Fedchenko,  Golike,  andDobujinsky, 
were  collected  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Syr-daria  province,  in  Kho- 
kand,  and  in  the  Zarafshan  valley,  between  66°  and  "jt^^  long.  E.  from 
Greenwich,  and  39°  and  43"  N.  lat.  The  species  described  by  Messrs. 
Menetries  and  Eversmann,  though  collected  somewhat  further  east,  and 
perhaps  to  the  north,  are  included  by  me  in  the  list,  on  account  of  the 
very  great  probability  that  they  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  province 
whence  were  obtained  the  collections  described  in  the  present  work. 

The  Syr-daria  and  Zarafshan  provinces  present  a  very  great  variety 
in  the  character  of  localities ;  we  find  in  them  a.  transition,  in  a  hori- 
zontal direction,  from  almost  barren,  sandy  waste  to  the  most  fruitful 
oases,  and,  vertically,  from  the  level  of  the  sea  to  the  perpetual  snow- 
line. Golike  and  Dobujinsky  collected  in  the  oases,  the  former  at  Hazret 
or  Turkistan  city,  and  the  latter  at  Samarkand,  while  Fedchenko' s 
expedition  visited  localities  of  diversified  character.  Since  the  various 
localities  appear  to  present  important  differences  in  the  character  of 
their  fauna,  I  have  considered  it  necessary  to  cite  the  place  where  the 
Lepidoptera  collected  in  Turkistan  have  been  found. 

The  month  and  day  (old  style)  of  capture  by  the  expedition  is  given 
for  each  specimen,  because  they  furnish  interesting  data  concerning 
the  time  of  the  appearance  of  the  various  forms  in  Turkistan.  They 
indicate  the  occurrence  sometimes  of  two  broods  of  such  forms, 
which  in  Europe  appear  in  one  brood ;  as,  for  example,  Spintherops 
spectrum^  Esp.,  Lithocolletis  comparella,  Z.,  and  others.  Finally, 
we  see  from  them  that  in  Turkistan  a  certain  number  of  Lepidoptera 
fly  even  in  the  winter  months,  since  we  find  that  five  species  were 
collected  in  February,  three    in    January,  and   three    species  even  in 

'  In  Fedchenko's  collection  there  were  in  all  321  species,  i.e.,  |-  of  all  the  forms 
here  enumerated.  Of  these,  86  species,  i.e.  27%,  appeared  to  be  new.  Specimens 
of  these,  as  well  as  of  all  animals  collected  by  the  expedition,  are  preserved  in  the 
Zoological  Museum  of  the  Imperial  University  of  Moscow.  Besides  those  collected 
by  Fedchenko,  there  were  others  in  the  collection,  caught  by  MyshenkofF,  Lovitsky, 
and  Veltsin. 

*  "  Description  des  insectes  recueillis  par  feu  jM.  Lehmann."  Some  Lepidoptera 
found  in  Bokhara  are  described  here,  of  which  four  species  were  not  found  by 
the  expedition,  namely,  Argyrospila  succinea,  Esp.,  Ligia  ciliaria,  Men.,  L.  sitni- 
liaria,  Men. ,  and  Margarodes  tinionalis,  Hb. 

^  Of  those  enumerated  by  Eversmann  there  have  not  been  found  since  : — Polyom. 
Athamanthis,  Ev.,  Lye.  Elvira,  Ev.,  Agrotis  fallax,  Ev.,  Agr.  aciiminifera,  Ey., 
Hadena  kirghisa,  Ev.,  H.  abrupta,  Ev.,  described  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  Societe 
Imperiale  des  Naturalistes  de  Moscou,  1854  and  1856. 


582  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

December — S;pinth.  cataphanes,  var.  ligaminosa,  Ev.,   Ceratophorc 
radiosella,  in.,  and  Lith.  coTnparella,  Z. 

The  present  list  contains  a  large  number  of  new  forms.  I  d< 
not  consider  it  advisable  to  reckon  them  as  peculiar  to  Turkistan,  as 
probably,  they  are  distributed  throughout  the  neighbouring  countries 
But  the  fauna  of  these  conterminous  countries  is  little  known,  a  circum 
stance  which  renders  difficult  the  formation  of  an  opinion  concernin; 
the  degree  of  completeness  of  the  collections  made  in  Turkistan,  and  a 
to  what  species  may  yet  be  found  there. 

The  territories  adjacent  to  Turkistan  are  almost  entirely  uninvesti 
gated :  only  a  few  species  from  Kopal  and  Sungaria  are  knowr 
Several  of  them  are  mentioned  in  a  forthcoming  work,^  and  to  some  Lepi 
doptera,  of  which  Eversmann  speaks,  he  assigns  a  very  indefinite  habitat 
namely,  the  Kirghese  Steppe.  To  a  certain  degree  Mangyshlak  an( 
Krasnovodsk  furnish  an  exception.  In  June,  1870.  A.  Becker,  of  Sarepta 
found  in  Mangyshlak  16  species,  which  are  enumerated  in  the  Biilleti, 
de  la  Societe  Imperiale  des  Natiiralistes  de  Moscou,  part  I.,  187c 
p.  126.  On  account  of  its  small  extent,  the  collection  of  Becker  wa 
not,  in  any  way,  characteristic  of  the  fauna  of  Mangyshlak,  and  th 
majority  of  Mangyshlak  species  appeared  in  Fedchenko's  collection 
Only  5  of  these  species  are  not  yet  found  in  Russian  Turkistan,  4  c 
which,  it  may  almost  positively  be  said,  ought  to  be  met  with  there 
viz.  : — Naclia  punctata,  var.  famula,  Frr.,  Lithosia  untta,  Hb. 
Orgyia  dubia,  Tausch.,  and  Thalpochares  respersa,  Hb.  As  regard 
the  fifth  species, — Phorodesina  {Ligia,  secundzim  'Becker)  plus  tar  ia,  B. 
— its  being  found  in  Mangyshlak  ma}-^  be  doubted,  and  it  may  b 
taken  for  granted  that  there  is  an  error  in  the  locality  assigned.  I 
1872,  Mr.  G.  Christoph  collected  at  Krasnovodsk,  but  I  only  saw  a  fe^ 
of  his  insects  and  heard  of  others.  Almost  without  exception,  th 
whole  of  them  are  met  with  in  Russian  Turkistan  ;  the  only  specie 
wanting  are  : — Lycaena  Christophi,  Stgr.  in  litt.,  Psyche  quadrangu 
laris,  Chr.,  Axiopena  maura,  Eichw.,  Agrotis  pro7iuba,  L.,  an 
Heliothis  nubigera,  H.S.,  but,  in  my  opinion,  there  should  be  n 
doubt  as  to  the  finding  of  these  latter  in  the  Syr-daria  province. 

I  think  it  sufficient  here  to  compare  only  the  diurnal  Lepidoptera  of  tb 
Turkistan  fauna  with  the  number  of  species  known  on  the  whole  Eun 
pean  territory,  and  in  certain  of  the  better  investigated  countries  of  th 
Mediterranean  province,  since,  of  all  divisions  of  Lepidoptera,  Rhopah 
cera  is  the  one  which  has  been  best  investigated,  both  in  Europea 
territory  and  Russian  Turkistan,  where  they  constitute  21%  (76  sped 
of  all  the  species  there  known. 

The  diurnal  Lepidoptera  of  Europe  [and  the  adjoining  countries 
according  to  the  latest  catalogue  of  Dr.  O.  Staudinger,  number  i 
all  456  species,  consequently  the  76  species  known  in  Turkistan  coi 
stitute  17%. 

In  Greece,  according  to  O.  Staudinger,  **  130  species,  or  aboi 
28^%,  are  met  with;  in  Amasia  and  Tokat,  according  to  J.  Leder 
and  J.  Mann,  "  162  species,  or  about  36%  ;  in  Brussa  with  Olympu 

*  Mention  is  not  made  of  the  following  which  were  taken  in  Sungaria,  ai 
described  by  Eversmann  in  the  Bulletin  de  Moscou  for  1843,  1846,  1848,  ai 
185 1 : — Farnassius DelphiuSy  P.  Clarius.  Lycaeiia  Phcretiades,  CoenonymphaSunheci 
Callimorpha  Menetriesiiy  Epiotie  acuminaria^  Gnophos  stetnt/iataria,  Hongari 
mollkularia,  and  Cidaria  fdaria.  Certain  of  these  will  probably  be  found,  at 
future  date,  in  Russian  Turkistan. 

*  For  notes  5-  il  see  original,  p.  3  (in  German  and  French). 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA.  583 

according  to  J.  Mann,  ^  133  species,  or  about.  29% ;  in  Anatolia, 
according  to  J.  Lederer,  *  ^2  species,  or  about  15^%  n  Syria,  also 
according  to  J.  Lederer,  ^  82  species,  or  about  18%  ;  in  Trans- Baikal, 
Amur,  and  Sea-coast  provinces,  according  to  O.  Bremer  and  E. 
Menetries,  '"  are  numbered  157  species,  or  about  3";%  ;  and  finally,  in 
the  Altai,  according  to  the  list  of  J.  Lederer,  "121  species,  constituting 
about  2^] %,  are  found.  Taking  the  average  of  species  for  each  of  these 
countriesat27%,  we  seethatthe  17%  of  diurnal  Lepidoptera  in  Turkistan 
only  constitutes  about  §  of  the  normal  figure.  From  this  we  may  con- 
clude with  great  probability  that  the  number  of  diurnal  Lepidoptera 
inhabiting  Turkistan  should  exceed  120. 

With  regard  to  nocturnal  Lepidoptera  or  moths,  it  is  decidedly  im- 
possible, even  approximately,  to  form  any  trustworthy  opinion,  as  of 
2,397  European  Heterocera  known  to  me,  169  species  are  found  in 
Turkistan,  and  of  3,213  Microlepidoptera  only  122  species  ;  besides,  the 
above  quoted  seven  localities  with  regard  to  Heterocera  are  too  little 
investigated  to  permit  of  the  formation  of  any  opinion  whatever. 

Concerning  the  character  of  the  fauna  of  Turkistan  Lepidoptera,  the 
collections  made  there  permit  some  deductions,  but  only  very  general 
ones,  to  be  drawn.  In  all  there  are  known  367  species  in  Turkistan. 
Of  these,  92,  or  25%,  constitute  new  species,  and  14,  or  4%,  appear  there 
in  new  forms,  some  of  which  will  in  the  future  probably  be  regarded  as 
independent  species,  and  25  species,  according  to  present  information, 
must  with  the  new  species  be  recognized  as  peculiar  to  the  fauna  of 
Turkistan. 

The  remaining  2}^^  species,  or  about  64%  (29  of  them  appear  new  to 
the  Lepidoptera  of  the  Russian  Empire),  represent  forms  already  known 
in  other  parts  of  Europe  and  Russia.  As  the  percentage  of  general 
European  species  is  very  great,  and  as  the  new  and  chiefly  character- 
istic species  do  not,  from  their  facies,  belong  to  exotic  forms,  we  may 
suppose  that  the  fauna  of  Turkistan  belongs  to  the  so-called  "  fauna 
of  the  European  territory."  According  to  the  calculation  of  Dr.  Stau- 
dinger,  the  fauna  of  the  European  territory  is  spread  over  from  500,000  to 
800,000  square  miles,  and  to  it  (in  addition  to  180,000  square  miles 
of  Europe  proper)  belong,  the  whole  of  N.  Asia,  extending  southwards, 
in  the  eastern  part,  as  far  as  Manchuria,  and  in  the  west  as  far  as  the 
south  of  Persia ;  Armenia  and  Asia  Minor ;  Algeria  and  Tangiers ; 
Greenland,  Labrador,  and  certain  other  parts  of  North  America.  The 
comprehension  of  such  a  vast  extent  under  a  general  appellation  is 
fully  justified  by  the  general  character  of  the  fauna  of  these  countries, 
and  the  great  resemblance  of  the  individual  species. 

The  fauna  of  Turkistan  furnishes  certain  new  proofs  of  the  general  cor- 
rectness of  thus  extending  the  European  territor}^,  as  in  it  are  found  such 
species  as  Colias Nastes,  var.  cocandica,  772., almost  identical  with  a  type 
living  in  Labrador  ;  LiiJienitis  Le;pechini,  m.,  similar  to  the  Californian 
Z.  Lorquinii^  B.  ;  Spilosoma  melanostigma,  771.,  similar  to  the  N. 
American  S.  acrea^  Dr.  ;  Thestor  Fedche7ikoi,  77?.,  represents  the  genus 
known  previously  in  the  south  of  Spain'  and  N.  Africa;  S77te7'inthus 
Ki7ider7na7i7ii^  Ld.,  various  species  of  SyTitoTTiidcB,  and  many  other 
forms  now  known  in  the  western  part  of  Asia  Minor. 

Respecting  the  position  that  the  fauna  of  Turkistan  should  occupy 
in  the  fauna  of  European  territory,  it  may  be  without  hesitation  assigned 
to  the  south,  or  so-called  Mediterranean  province.  The  261  known 
species,  or  71%    of  the   whole   fauna   of  Turkistan,    as   is   seen  from 


584  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

the  list,  represent  a  mixture  of  the  species  of  Asia  Minor  with  S.  Euro 
pean  and  Steppe  species  of  the  Volga  and  Ural. 

Besides  the  above-named  species,  the  following  are  particularly  in 
teresting  from  a  geographical  point  of  view  : — Pliisia  Hoche7iwarthi 
Hochenw.,  previously  found  only  in  Lapland,  Scandinavia,  Switzerland 
and  Labrador;  Hypena  revolutalis,  Z.,  first  found  in  Caifraria,  then  ir 
Syria  and  Persia  ;  Phasiane  Kippertaria,  Dup. ,  only  to  be  found  else 
where  in  Provence,  in  the  south  of  France  ;  Eurycreon  mzicosalis ,  H.S. 
allotted  to  the  Balkan  Peninsula ;  and  Staiiitonia  7?iedi?iella,  Stgr. 
known  only  in  Andalusia  ;  but  all  now  found  in  Central  Asia. 

I  should  further  mention  the  Himalayan  Colzas  Eogene,  Feld.,  founc 
by  the  expedition  at  a  great  height  in  the  Khokand  mountains  ;  and  tw( 
species  oi  Heterocera,  of  the  exotic  genera  Syneda  {^S.  Langi,  ni.)  anc 
Azelma  [A.  fnaracandaria,  m.). 

These  forms  seem  to  indicate  that  the  fauna  of  Turkistan  tend; 
towards  the  exotic,  but  Colias  Eogene  must  be  regarded  as  most 
probabl}^  a  form  spread  over  the  upper  zone  of  the  whole  central  portior 
of  mountainous  Asia,  and  the  species  of  Syneda  and  Azelma,  on  accoun 
of  their  peculiar  character,  do  not  quite  belong  to  the  exotic  forms 
Besides  these  three  species  there  are  no  others  which  would  authorizt 
us  to  class  the  fauna  of  Turkistan  as  tending  towards  the  Indian  0 
Malayan  fauna. 

Concerning  the  distribution  of  the  Lepidoptera  known  in  Turkistai 
among  various  localities  and  zones  of  altitude,  the  following  catalogue 
compiled  by  me  will  furnish  information.  As  is  seen  from  this  cata 
logue,  the  species  collected  by  Fedchenko,  within  the  borders  of  tht 
countr}^,  have  a  very  unequal  distribution.  An  important  difference 
exists,  not  only  in  a  vertical  direction  in  the  zones  of  altitude,  but  alsc 
in  a  horizontal  direction.  The  cause  of  the  latter  is  not  the  climatic 
difference  alone,  but  the  difference  in  the  general  physical  condition: 
of  the  various  localities  of  Turkistan.  The  watered  cultivated  zone,  th< 
clay  steppe,  and  the  sandy  steppe  of  Kizil-Kum  present  so  much  differ 
ence  in  regard  to  the  conditions  which  influence  animal  life,  tha 
necessarily  the  fauna  must  present  differences  in  composition.  Thes< 
differences  are  expressed  in  the  catalogue,  where  the  original  charac 
teristic  localities  are  arranged  in  separate  columns.  The  catalogue 
also  shows  in  which  of  the  other  countries  are  distributed  those  0 
the  forms  found  in  Turkistan  which  were  earlier  known.  These  dat; 
present,  without  doubt,  a  good  base  for  further  operations  in  the  sam^ 
direction.  I  consider  it  premature,  however,  to  make  now,  on  thes« 
foundations,  general  deductions  concerning  the  relations  of  the  fauna 
of  the  different  localities  of  Turkistan  among  themselves,  or  concernini 
the  relations  of  the  faunae  of  these  localities  to  the  faunai  of  othe 
countries  of  the  European  territory.  I  consider  it  sufficient  to  say  here 
that  of  the  46  species  found  in  the  sands  of  Kizil-Kum,  12,  or  mor 
than  26%,  appear  peculiar  to  them  ;  in  the  clay  steppe,  of  38  specie 
3,  or  8%  ;  in  the  border  zone,  oases,  and  hilly  country,  of  284  species 
58,  or  about  20%  ;  in  the  mountains  from  4,500'  to  8,000',  of  4 
species,  6,  or  about  15%  ;  and  finally,  in  the  mountains  from  8,00c 
to  13,000',  of  28  species  collected  there,  8,  or  about  28^%.  Comparin.: 
these  general  figures,  we  see  clearly  that  the  Kizil-Kum  and  th 
mountains  from  8,000'  to  13,000',  or  Alpine  zone,  are  the  most  peculia 
provinces  as  regards  fauna.  The  border  zone,  oases,  and  hill 
country,   or  cultivated   zone,    is  the   richest  as   regards  the   numbe 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA.  585 

of  forms  there  met  with,  and  in  addition  is  not  wanting  in  peculiar 
forms  :  the  mountains  from  4,500'  to  8,000',  or  sub-Alpine  zone,  appears 
less  peculiar,  and  the  clay  steppe  very  poor  both  in  the  number  of 
species  taken  there,  and  as  regards  peculiar  forms. 

The  following  list  of  species  is  compiled  on  the  system  adopted  by 
Messrs.  Staudinger  and  Wocke  (''Catalog  der  Lepidopteren  des 
europaischen  Faunengebiets,"  Dresden,  1871).  In  the  matter  of 
synonyms  I  have  considered  it  sufficient  to  limit  myself,  on  this  occa- 
sion, to  quotations  from  the  first  author  and  references  to  the  works 
where  they  are  inserted ;  more  detailed  indications  may  be  found  in 
the  above-quoted  catalogue  of  Messrs.  Staudinger  and  Wocke.  I  also 
referred  to  the  best  known  figures  of  the  species,  and  if  the  species 
was  described  in  the  "  Fauna  Lepidopterologica  Volgo-Uralensis  "  of 
E.  Eversmann,  I  have  made  quotations  from  it,  as  the  only  tolerably 
full  work  which  treats  of  the  fauna  of  Russian  Lepidoptera. 


Columns  i — 5  give  the  distribution  of  Turkistan  Lepidoptera  : — 

1.  (Plains.) — Kizil-Kum  sands  from  700'  to  800'  above  the  sea. 

2.  (Downs.) — Steppes  from  750'  to  2,000'  above  the  sea. 

3.  (Hills.) — Damp  places,  such  as  the  banks  and  adjoining  meadows 
of  the  Syr-daria ;  oases,  or  watered  and  cultivated  places  ;  and  hilly 
districts  from  750'  to  4,500'  above  the  sea. 

4.  (Mountains.) — Districts  from  4,500'  to  8,000'  above  the  sea. 

5.  (Peaks.) — Mountains  from  8,000'  to  13,000'  above  the  sea. 


586 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


RHOPALOCERA. 
Papilionidae. 

1.  Papilie  Machaon,  L.  .         .         .         Europe,  Siberia,  N.  Africa 

2.  Hypermnestra  Helios,  Nick Persia 

3.  Pamassius  Apollonius,  Ev. Sungaria 

4.  ,,  Corybas,  F.  v.W „ 

5.  „  Actius,  Ev ,, 

6.  ,,  Mnemosyne,  L.  Eur.,  except  S.  W.,  Altai,  As.  Minor 

Pieridae. 

Europe,  Siberia,  Persia,  Asia  Minoi 


European  Alpine  territory 
Sungaria,  Persia,  California 


7.  Aporia  crataegi,  L. 

8.  Pieris  brassicae,  L. 

9.  „      rapae,  L. 

10.  ,,      Callidice,  Esp. 

11.  ,,      Leucodice,  Ev. 

12.  ,,       Daplidice,  L. 

var.  T. ,  Bellidice,  O.    European  territory,  except  Northern 
,,   II.,  raphani,  Esp Persia 

1 3.  Colias  Nastes,  B.  var.  cocandica,  Ersch.     Polar  America,  Labrador 

14.  ,,       Erate,  Esp S.  Russia  and  Siberia 

15.  ,,       Eogene,  Feld. Himalayas 

16.  Rhodocera  rhamni,  var.  farinosa,  Z.  .         .         .        Asia  Minor 

Lycaenidae. 

17.  Thecla  mirabilis,  n.s.^  Ersch. 

18.  ,,       lunulata,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

19.  Thestor  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

20.  Polyommatus  Solskyi,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

21.  ,,  Thersamon,  Esp.     .9.^.  Europe,  IV.  Asia,  Persia 

et  (var.  II.)  Omphale,  Klug.  Asia  Minor 

22.  „  dispar,  H\v [Brussa 

var.  rutilus,  Werneb.    .      C.  &  S.E.  Eur..  Altai, 

23.  „  Phlaeas,  L Whole  of  Europe 

et  (var.  II.)  Eleus,  F.      Southern  parts  of  Europe 

24.  ,,  Athamanthis,  Ev.  .          Southern  Kirghese  Steppes 

25.  Cigaritis  Acamas,  Klug.  S.  Kirghese  Steppes,  Syria,  Persia 

26.  Lycaena  baetica,  L.    .         .         .  S.W.  Europe,  IV.  Asia,  Persia 

27.  „        aegon,  Schiff.  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  Siberia 

28.  ,,        Argus,  L.      .         .      ,, 

et  var.  maracandica,  Ersch 

29.  ,,  Zephyrus,  Friv.     lurkey,  Greece,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 

30.  , ,  Elvira,  Ev Southern  Kirghese  Steppes 

31.  ,,  Baton,  Bgstr.         .   C.  and  S.E.  Eicr.,  W.  Asia,  Persia 

32.  ,,  Tengstroemi,  n.s.,  Ersch 

33.  ,,  Astrarche,  Bgstr.  .  European  territory,  except  the  north 

34.  ,,  Eros,0.,  var.  candalus,  H.S.  Mountains  of  Asia  Minor 
35'  >>  Icarus,  Rott.  European  territory,  except  Polar  regions 
36.  ,,  Damon,  Schiff.,  var.  Damone,  Ev.  E.  Russia  and  Persia 
yj.  „  Argiolus,  L.       European  territory^  except  Polar  regions 

38.  ,,        prosecusa,  n.s.,  Ersch, 

39.  ,,        semiargus,  Rott.  Europe,  Siberia,  and  W.  Asia 

40.  ,,        Jolas,  O.        .         S.E.  Gei'many,  Hungary,  S.  France, 

{Turkey,  N.  Spain,  Asia  Mirtor 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA. 


587 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


s 

c 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

X- 

* 

«- 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

■K- 

* 

* 

* 

¥, 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

« 

* 

* 

Nymphalidae. 

Limenitis  Lepechini.  n.s.,  Ersch 

Vanessa  Egea,  Cr.,  ab.  I-album,  Esp.   S.Europe,  W.  Asia,  Persia 

„        urticae,  L 

var.  turcica,  Stgr.     Asia  Minor,  S.  parts  of  Eur.  Turkey 
,,        cardui,  L.       .....         .      Cosmopolitati 

Melitaea  arduinna,  Esp.,  var.  rhodopensis,  Frr.     Caucaszcs,  Asia 

[Minor 

„        Phoebe,  Knoch,  var.  aetherea,  Ev.       .  E.  Russia 

,,         Didyma.  O.    France.  Gerj?i.,  Hung.,  Szvitzer.,  E.Russia 

et  var.  Neera,  F.  v.  W.  ...  E.  Russia 

et  var.  caucasica,  Stgr.  ....    Caucasus 

„         Athalia.  Rott.        .         .     Europe,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor 
„        Parthenie,  Bkh.,  aberr.         ...  S.  Europe 

Argynnis  Euphrosyne,  L.    JV.  and  C.  Europe,  Caucasus,  Siberia 

.  N.  and  Alpine  Europe 
European  territoiy,  except  N. 
Do.  except  extreme  S.  and  N. 


Pales,  Schifif. 
Latona,  L.  . 
Niobe,  L.    . 
et  ab.  Eris,  Meig. 
Pandora,  Schifif.  . 


S.  Europe,  W.  Asia,  N.  Afr 


Satyridae. 

Arge  Japygia,  Cyrilli. 

var.  Suwarovius,  Hbst.  Hungary,  S.  Russia,  Persia 

Erebia  maracandica,  n.s.,  Ersch.  ...... 

Satyrus  Briseis,  L.    C.  and  S.  Eur.,  N'.  Afr.,  Asia  Minor,  Pei-sia 

,,      Heydenreichi,  Ld. Altai 

„      anthe,  O.         .       S.E.  Russia,  Siberia,  Caucasus,  Persia 
et  var.  Hanifa,  Nordm.     ,,  „  „  ,, 

,,       Kaufmanni,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,      Actaea  Esp.,  var.  parthica,  Ld.      .         .         .        Persia 

Pararge  Eversmanni,  F.  v.  \V Sungaria 

,,       Maera,  L.,  var.  Adrasta,  Hb.         .         .  ^.  Europe 

Epinephele  Dysdora,  Ld Persia 

„  narica,  Hb.        .         .         .        Steppes  of  S.E.  Russia^ 

,,  Amardaea,  Ld.,  var.  naubidensis,  Ersch.  .         Persia 

„  Lycaon,  Rott.    Europe,  except  N.,  Siberia,  W.  Asia^ 

,,  interposita,  7i.s.,  Ersch ! 

Coenonympha  Nolckeni.  n.s.,  Ersch. ! 

,,  Pamphilus,  L.  European  territory,  except  N\ 

[Eziropc,  and  S.E.  Siberia 

Hesperidae. 
Spilothyrus  alceae.  Esp.  S.  cr=  C.  Eur.,  Siberia,  A\  Afr.,  IV.  Asia 

et  var.  australis,  Z S.  Europe, 

„         altheae,  Hb j 

var.  baeticus,  Rbr.    .         S.  W.  Europe,  Italy,  Syria 
Syrichthus  alveus,  Hb.         .         C.  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Persia\ 

var.  alpina,  Ersch i 

„  Poggei,  Ld Syrici. 

„  orbifer.  Hb.       S.E.  Europe,  Altai,  Amur,   W.  Asia] 

Hesperia  Thaumas,  Hufn.  C.  and  S.  Em-ope,  Asia  Minor} 

[Persia,  N,  Africa^ 


588 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


HETEROCERA. 

Sphinges. 
Sphingidae. 

77.  Deilephila  zygophylli,  O.  .         .     S.  E.  Russia^  N.  Persia 

78.  ,,         euphorbiae,  L.        .   C.  and  S.  Europe,  Asia  Minot 

79.  ,,         livornica,  Esp.  S.  Europe,  N.  Africa,  W.  Asia 

80.  ,,         Alecto,  L Greece,  W.  Asia 

81.  Smerinthus  Kindermanni,  Ld Asia  Minor 

82.  ,,  populi,  L.,  var.  populeti,  Bienert.  .         .        Persia 

83.  Macroglossa  stellatarum,  L.       .    European  territory,  except  N. 

Sesiidae. 

84.  Sesia  chrysidiformis,  Esp.  C.  and  S.  Europe^  except  Russia 

var.  turanica,  Ersch. 


93- 

94. 


95- 
96. 


97. 
98. 

'  99- 

ICX). 
lOI. 

102. 

103. 

104. 


105. 


Zygaenidae. 

Hungary,  Sicily,  Turkey,  Asia  Mitwr 


Swiss  Alps,  Austrian  Mntns. 
Asia  Minor 


Caucasus.  Asia  Minor 


Ino  tenuicornis,  Z. 
,,    Geryon,  Hb. 

var.  chrysocephala,  Nick 
,,    obscura,  Z. 
Zygaena  pilosellae,  Esp.    . 

var.  nubigena,  Ld.     Europe,  Alpine  territory,  Ireland 
,,        sogdiana,  n.s.,  Ersch.  . 
,,        truchmena,  Ev.  . 
,,        Olivieri,  B.,  var. . 
,,        cocandica,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
et  var.  minor,  Ersch.    . 

Syntomidae. 

Syntomis  bactriana,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,         maracandina,  n.s.,  Ersch.  . 
et  var.  cocandica,  Ersch.   . 

BOMBYCES. 

Nycteolidae. 

Sarothripa  niusculana,  n.s.,  Ersch.    . 

Lithosidae. 
Lithosia  lutarella,  L.  .         .         . 

var.  pallifrons,  Z.     N.  and  C.  Eur.,  Dalniatia,  Greece 

Arctiidae, 

Deiopeia  pulchella,  L.6".  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  India,  N.  Africa 
Nemeophila  russula,  L.        Europe.  Altai,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor 

Arctia  guttata,  n.s.,  Ersch 

,,  spectabilis,  Tausch.  .  .  .  S.E.  Russia,  Altai 
Spilosoma  fuliginosa,  L.,  var.  fervida,  Stgr.      .        Asia  Minor 

„  turensis,  n.s.^  Ersch.  ...... 

,,  melanostigma,  Ersch 

„  menthastri,  Esp.        .     Europe,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor 

Cossidae. 
Cossus  campicola,  Ev S.  Kirghcse  Steppe 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA. 


589 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


.   C.  and  S.E.  Etirope 


Phragmatoecia  castaneae.  Hb.  . 

var.  albida,  Ersch 

Hypopta  caestrum,  Hb.    .         .         S.  Europe,  Kirghese  Steppt 
,,         gloriosa,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Liparidae. 

Leucoma  flavosulphurea,  Ersch 

Ocneria  dispar,  L C.  and  S.  Europe 

,,       sartus.  n.s.,  Ersch 

Bombycidae. 

Bombyx  castrensis,  L.            Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  Alia, 
Lasiocampa  sordida,  n.s.,  Ersch 


Notodontidae. 


Harpyia  erminea,  Esp. 
Pygaera  anachoreta,  F. 


C.  Europe 
N.  and  C.  Europe,  Italy,  N.  Spain, 
[6ideria,  Asia  Minor 
Noctuae 
Acronycta  centralis,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,  psi,  L.      .         .         .    Europe,  Siberia,  N.  W.  Africa 

Bryophila  maeonis,  Ld Asia  Minor 

Agrotis  nomas,  n.s.,  Ersch 
,,       flammatra,  F. 
,,      simulans,  Hufn 
,,      fugax,  Tr.      . 
,,      fallax,  Ev.    . 
,,      scripturosa,  Ev. 
,,      foeda.  Ld.     . 
,,       exclamationis,  L. 
,,      solida,  n.s.,  Ersch 
,,      tritici,  L. 

var.  aquilina,  Hb. 
,,      acuminifera,  Ev. 
,,      conspicua,  Hb, 


Switzerland,  S.  Europe.  Asia  Minor 

.  N.  and  C.  Europe,  Altai 

E.  Austria,  Hungary,  S.  Russia 

S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

E.  Russia,  Altai 
All  European  ten-it  or y 


C.  Eur.,  S.  Russia,  Caucas.,  Siberia 

.     S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

.    .S.  France,  Italy,  S.E.  Rtissia, 

\Caucasus,  Altai,  Siberia,  Persia 

Europe,  W.  Asia,  E.  Siberia 

All  European  territory 


var.  cervina,  Ev. 
Ersch. 


S.  Russia,  Caucasus 
European  territory 


„      ypsilon,  Rott. 

,,      segetum,  Schiff. 

,,      GoHckei,  Ersch 
Mamestra  siri.  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,  Leineri,  Frr., 

,,  trifolii,  Rott. 

,,  irrisoria,  n.s., 

,,  sodae,  Rbr S.  Europe 

„  chrysozona,  Bkh.     6".  S^ued,  C.  6^  S.  Eur.,  As.  Min 

,,  Serena,  F.,  var.  obscura,  Stgr.    .  ,  European  Alps 

Luperina  immunda.  Ev Ural,  Altai 

Hadena  kirghisa,  Ev S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

,,       abrupta,  Ev „  ,, 

,,       furva,  Hb.    .         .         .      N.  and  C.  Ettrope,  Pyrenees, 

\S.  Russia,  Altai,  E.  Siberia 

abjecta,  Hb.  N.  ^^  C.  Eur.,  Asia  Mi.,  Altai,  E.Siheria 

„       lateritia.  Hufn.     .         .  A",  and  C.  Europe.  Siberia 

„       leucodon,  Ev.       .         .         .     S.E.  Russia  and  Siberia 


590 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


148. 
149. 
150. 

152. 

153- 
154. 

155- 
156. 

157- 
158. 

159- 
160. 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 
170. 
171. 
172. 

173- 
174. 

175- 
176. 
177. 
178. 
179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 

183- 

184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191. 
192. 

193- 
194. 

195- 
196. 
197. 
198. 

199. 


Ersch.  .         .        .        . 

.      N.E.  Europe 

.      S.  Ural 

Ural,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 

Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Persia 


Mycteroplus  didymogramma,  n.s., 
Calamia  phragmitidis,  Hb. 
Argyrospila  succinea,  Esp. 
Leucania  conigera,F.  N.^ C.Eur. 
,,  vitellina,  Hb.    .         .  S. 

,,  Bogdanovi,  n.s..  Ersch. 

Aniphipyra  tragopogonis,  L.    Eur.,  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  Altai 

S.E.  Russia,  Altai 

N.  and  C.  Europe,  Siberia 

Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Siberia 

C.  Europe,  S.  Russia,  Altai 

Ersch 

.5".^.  Russia 


Hiptelia  miniago,  Frr. 
Dyschorista  suspecta,  Hb. 
Scoliopteryx  libatrix,  L.    . 
Xylomiges  conspicillaris.  L. 
Calophasia  Christophi,  n.s., 
Cucullia  boryphora.  F.  v.  W. 


,,         argentina,  F.       .         .         .         5.  Russia,  IV.  Siberia 

Plusia  gutta.  Gn.        .    S.  Europe,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor,  Persia 

,,       circumflexa,  L.       .         .     S.  Europe,  Asia  Minor.  Altai 

„       ni,  Hb.  .         .         .      Hungary,  S.  Etirope,  Asia  Minor 

„       Hochenwarthi,  Hochw.  Switzer.,  Lapd.,  Sweden,  Labra 

Heliothis  jugorum,  n.s..  Ersch. 

,,         dipsaceus.  L.     .         .         .         All  European  territory 
,,         peltiger,  Schiff.   C.  and  S.  Eur.,  Asia  Minor,  N.  Afr. 

„         Feildi,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Chariclea  delphinii,  L.       .         .  C.  and  S.  Europe,  Asia  Mitior 
Acontia  Hueberi,  n.s.  Ersch.      ...... 

,,       lucida,  Hufn.  S.  Europe,  Altai,  Asia  Minor,  N.  Africa 

,,       luctuosa.  Esp.          „  „  „  ,. 

Thalpochares  pallidula,  H.  — S.   S.  Kirghese  Steppe,  Asia  Minor 

„  gratiosa,  Ev.        .         .         .      S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

, ,  griseola,  Ersch.  .         .  S.  Kirghese  Steppe,  Persia 

Phothedes  kisilkumensis,  n.s.,  Ersch.         .... 

,,  secunda,  n.s.,  Ersch.         ..... 

Agrophila  trabealis.  Sc.       C.  &•'  S.  Europe,  Altai,  Asia  Minor 

et  var.  nigra,  Ersch 

Metoponia  subflava,  n.s.,  Ersch 

„  ochracea,  n.s.,  Ersch.        .         .         •        .         .         . 

Euclidia  munita,  Hb S.E.  Russia 

,,        mirifica,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Syneda  Langi,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Pericyma  albidentaria,  Frr .s.^.  Russia 

Acantholipes  regularis,  Hb.       .         .       S.E.  Russia,  Caucasus 

Leucanitis  rada,  B.    .         .         .     Caucasus,  S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

,,  sesquistria,  Ev.         .         .         .  ,,  ,, 

,,  cailino,  Lef. S.  Europe 

,,  panaceorum,  Men.  .         .      S.  Kirghese  Steppe 

„  cestis,  Men ,,  ,, 

,,  flexuosa,  Men.  .i".  Kirghese  Steppe,  Asia  Minor 

„  spilota,  U.S.,  Ersch. 

Pseudophia  syriaca,  Bugnion     .         .         .    Asia  Minor,  Spain 

Catocala  elocata,  Esp.       .         .   S.  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Altai 

,,         puerpera,  Giorna     S.  Europe,  Asia  Minor,  E.  Siberia 

,,         neonymjDha,  Esp.        .     S.E.  Russia,  Caucasus,  Altai 

Spintherops  spectrum,  Esp.     .S".  Europe,  As.  Minor,  iV.  Africa 

,,  et  var.  phantasma,  Ev.  .       Caucasus,  Siberia 

, ,  cataphanes,  H  b. ,  var.  ligaminosa,  Ev.  Caucas.  Altai 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA. 


591 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


Spintherops,  glebicolor,  n.s.^  Ersch. 

,,  dilucida,  Hb.  S.  Europe,  As.  Minor,  N.  W.  Africa 

Toxocampa  craccae,  F.     .         .     S.  Etirope,  Asia  Minor,  Altai 

Hypena  ravalis,  H.S.        .         .         .    S.E.  Russia,  Asia  Minor 

,,       revolutalis,  Z.       .         .         .       Asia  Minor,  S.  Africa 

Geometrae. 

Pseudoterpna  pruinata,  Hufn.  C.  ^  S.E.Eur.,  Catalonia,  Italy 
Phorodesma  smaragdaria,  F.  .  Europe,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor 
Eucrostis  herbaria,  Hb.,  var.  ad  volata,  Ev.  .  S.E.Russia 
Nemoria  pulmentaria,  Gn.  S.  Europe,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 
Acidalia  rufaria,  Hb.     Cen.  ■^  Nrn. parts  ofS.  Eur.,  As.  Minor 

,,        straminata,  Tr.  Finland,  C.  Europe,  Dalviatia 

,,       degeneraria,  Hb.     England,  S.E.  Europe,  Asia  Minor 

,,        adulteraria,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

5,        halimodendrata,  n.s.^  Ersch 

,,        Beckeraria,  Ld.  .         .         .S.E.  Europe,  Caucasus 

,,       marginepunctata,  Goze.  C.&' S.Eur.,  Altai,  As.  Minoi 

,,        flaccidaria,  Z.      .       S.  Russia,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 

,,        ornata,  Sc.  .    Europe,  Asia  Minor,  N.  W.  Africa 

Timandra  amataria,  L.  Europe,  Siberia,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 
Stegania  dalmataria,  Gn.  .         .         .         .      S.  E.  Russia 

Azelina  maracandaria,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
Himera  Stschurovskyi,  n.s.,  Ersch, 
EHcrinia  subcordaria,  H.S.        .         .         •  Kirghese  Steppe 

Hibernia  occataria,  n.s.,  Ersch 
Biston  cinerarius,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
Boarmia  repandata,  L.      .         .      Europe,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor 

,,         cocandaria,  n.s.,  Ersch 

,,         consonaria,  Hb.     C.  Europe,  Kirghese  Steppe,  Amur 

Gnophos  Iveni,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Phasiane  Rippertaria,  Dup.,  var S.  Fj-ance 

Eubolia  arenacearia,  Hb.        Austria,  S.  E.  Russia,  Asia  Minor 

et  var.  flavidaria,  Ev S.  E.  Russia 

Eusarca  terrestraria,  Ld. Persia 

Ligia  turanica,  n.s.,  Ersch.        ....... 

,,     ciliaria,  Men Bokhara 

,,     simiharia,  Men ,, 

Sterrha  anthophilaria,  Hb.,  albidaria,  Ersch 

Lythria  purpuraria,  L Europe,  Asia  Minor 

et  var.  rotaria,  F.  .         .         •       , , 

Lithostege  griseata,  Schiff.       C.  Europe.,  S.  Russia,  Asia  Minor 

„  Staudingeri,  Ersch.  . 

Anaitis  excelsata,  n.s.,  Ersch.    . 

,,       plagiata,  L.  ... 

Cidaria  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,        fluviata,  Hb. 

M        polygrammata,  Bkh. 
Eupithecia  innotata,  Hufn. 
„  pumilata,  Hb. 


.  Europe,  Asia  Minor 

C.  andS.  Europe,  Asia  Minor 

C.  attd  S.  Europe 

Europe,  Altai,  Persia 

C.  and  S.  Europe,  Asia  Minor 


592 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


MICROLEPIDOPTERA. 

PYR  ALIDIN  A. 


246. 
247. 
248. 
249. 
250. 

252. 

253- 
254. 

255- 
256. 

257- 
258. 

259- 
260. 
261. 
262. 
263. 
264. 
265. 
266. 
267. 
268. 
269. 
270. 
271. 
272. 

273- 
274. 

275- 
276. 
277. 


Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 


Aporodes  floralis,  Hb. 
Ephelis  cruentalis,  Hb. 


Pyralididae. 

Cledeobia  consessoralis,  Ji.s.,  Ersch. 
,,         armenialis,  Ld. 
,,         infumatalis,  n.s.,  Ersch.    . 
Hypotia  cribellalis,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

Aglossa  pinguinalis,  L.,  var.  asiatica,  Ersch.  .  Cosmopolitan 
Asopia  costalis,  F.    .      C.  and  E.  Europe,  Amur,  N.  IV.  Africa 

,,       fariualis,  L Cosmopolitan 

Talis  quercella,  Schiff. S.E.  Europe 

Scoparia  incertalis,  Dup.    ..9.  Europe,  except  Russia,  Asia  Minor 
.    S.Europe,  Asia  Minor,  Pe7'sia 
.  Turkey,  Asia  Minor 
Emprepes  pentodontalis,  n.s.,  Ersch, 
Anthophilodes  baphialis,  Stgr.  Greece,  S.E.  Russia,  EgypA 

Tegostoma  comparalis,  Hb.  .  .  S.  Russia,  Asia  Mi7ioi^ 
Aeschremon  disparalis,  H.S.  .  .  S.E.  Russia,  Asia  Mino^ 
Botys  falcatalis,  Gn.  .         .         .    Alpsof  C.and  S.  Etiropes 

sanguinalis,  L.  .  S.  part  of  N..C.,  and S.  Europe. 

fractilinealis,  n.s.,  Chr.  in  lit.  .     Turkmenia,  Persia:^ 

monialis,  Ersch Caucasus' 

cespitalis,  Schiff.,  var.  intermedialis,  Dup.        .  5".  Europe 
polygonalis,  Hb.,  var.  meridionalis,  Wk.  .         ,,         ( 

nubilalis,  Hb.  .         .         .   C.  and  S.  Europe,  Siberia 

rubiginalis,  Hb.        .         .         •       ,,  ,,  ,, 

Eurycreon  nudalis,  Hb S.  Europe 

„  sticticalis,  L.  .  Eiirope,  except  extretne  N.,  Siberia 
,,  mucosalis,  H.S.  .  .  .  European  7ui-key 
, ,  clathralis,  Hb.  S.  E.  Russia,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 
,,  verticalis,  L.  .  .  C.  Europe.  S.  Russia,  Amur, 
Noraophila  noctuella,  Schiff.  .  .  .  European  territory] 
Orobena  frumentalis,  L.    .    C  &^  6".  Eur.,  Siberia,  Asia  Minor' 

Margarodes  unionalis,  Hb S.  Europe\ 

Hydrocampa  nymphaeata,  L.    .         .    C.  Europe,  Amur,  Syrid\ 


Chilonidae. 

278.  Scirpophaga  praelata,  Sc. 

279.  Schoenobius  gigantellus,  Schiff 

280.  ,,  forficellus,  Thunb.   C. 

281.  ,,  mucronellus.  Schiff. 

282.  Chilo  phragmitellus,  Hb. . 


.  vS.  Ettropc 

.  C.  Europe,  S.  Russia 

Eur.,  N.W.&-  S.E.  Russia^ 

.    C.  Europe,  N.  IV.  Russia' 


Crambidae.  1 

283.  Crambus  craterellus,  Sc, var.  cassentiniellus,  Z.  S.  Eur.,  As.  Min.\ 

284.  „         inquinatellus,  Schiff  .         .         Europe,  Syria,  Persic^ 

285.  ,,         perleUus,  Sc i 

var.  Warringtonellus,  Staint.        N.  Europe,  Caucasus\ 

286.  Eromene  ocellea,  H\v.       .        England,  S.  Eui-ope,  Asia  Minori 

287.  ,,         funiculella,  Ev Kirghese  >tep1>e 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA. 


593 


Narne^ 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


Phycideae. 

^ioryctria  gregella,  Ev.     . 
s^ephopteryx  rhenella.  Zk. 

Dahlidla,  Tr.      . 
'empelia  semirubella,  Sc. 

var.  sanguinella,  Hb. 

,,          cyriella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,  obliteratella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,  campicolella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

,,  nucleolella,  Moesch. 

„  livorella,  ti.s.,  Ersch. 

iymnancyla  barbatella,  n.s..  Ersch. 
■^ucarphia  lixiviella,  n.s..  Ersch. 
4-)ischnia  sareptella,  H.S. 
lyelois  deserticola,  Stgr. 


.  S.E.  Russia,  Siberia 

Europe,  except  extreme  N. 

S.  Europe,  Asia  Minor 


C,  and  S.  Ewope.  Siberia 


Sarepta 


S.  France,  Sarepta 
Sarepta 


rhodochrella,  H.S..  var.  delicatella,  Moesch. 
convergens,  n.s.,  Ersch.         .         .         .         . 


C.  and  S.  Europe,  Altai,  Syria 


urbicella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
„         cribrum,  Schiff.    . 
,,         vestaliella,  n.s.,  Ersch 
,,         albistriga,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
,,         liturosella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
,,         Tengstroemiella,  n.s.,  Ersch 
ilispa  acervella,  n.s.,  Ersch.     . 
luzophera  oblitella,  L.      S.  W.  Etirope,  S.E.  Germany,  Sarepta 

lomoeosoma  sinuella.  F. S.  Europe 

dealbatella.  n.s..  Ersch 
.nerastia  lotella,  Hb.        .          C.  Europe,  N.  IV.  and E.  Russia 
ablutella,  Z.       .         .  Andalusia,  Sicily,  Asia  Minor 
phestia  ekitella,  Hb Europe,  Palestine 


Galleriae. 

lelissoblaptes  bipunctanus,  Z. 
,,  anellus.  Schiff.   . 


TORTRICINA. 

ortrix  chondrillana,  H.S. 
onchyhs  nomadana,  n.s..  Ersch. 

,,         retextana.  n.s.,  Ersch. 

„         contractana,  Z. 

,,         Manniana.  F.  v.  R.   . 
enthina  Zelleriana.  n.s.,  Ersch. 
phelia  lanceolana,  Hb.   . 
„       robustana,  Chr.     . 
raphoUta  graphana,  Tr. 

,,         foenella,  L. 


C.  and  S.  Europe 
.  S.  Europe 


Kirghese  Steppe\ 


S.  France,  Sicily,  Brussa 
E.  of  C.  and  S.  Europe 


Europe 

Sarepta 

Germany,  Hungary,  Russia 

C.  Europe,  Greece,  Caucasus 


TiNEINA. 

Choreutidae. 
horeutis  Bjerkandrella,  Thunb. 

var.  pretiosana.  Dup. 
^maethis  pariana.  CI. 

VOL.  II. 


S.  Europe,  Persia 
.  C.  Lurope 


3« 


594 


RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Names. 


Distribution  in  other  countries. 


330. 

331- 
332- 

334- 
335- 
336- 
337- 

338. 
339- 


340. 
341- 


342. 
343- 
344- 
345- 
346. 
347- 
348. 
349- 
35c- 
351- 
352- 
353- 


354- 
355- 


356. 


357. 
358. 


359- 
360. 

36'i. 
362. 


Atychidae. 

Atychia  minutula.  n.s..  Er>ch.  . 


Hapsifera  luridella,  Z. 
Tinea  cloacella.  Hw. 


Tineidae. 

.     Greece.  Asia  Minor 
C.  Europe.  S.E.  Russia.  Sardinia 


,,      fuscipunctella,  Hw.  .         .         .  Europe. Brussa 

,,       colonella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 
,,      longipennis.  n.s.^  Ersch. 
,,     (?)  caerulipennis.  n.s..  Ersch. 
Tineola  macropodella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

Acrolepidae. 

Acrolepia  exsuccella.  n.s..  Ersch. 

Hyponomeutidae. 

Hyponomeuta  padella,  L.  .         .         .       Europe.  Caucasus 

Plutellidae. 

Eidophasia  Messingiella.  F.  v.  R.    England,  Germany.,  Brussa 
Plutella  cruciferarum,  Z.    .         .         .AH  European  territory 

Gelechidae. 

Psecadia  pusiella.  Roemer.   C.  cr  .S'.  Eur..,  W.  Siberia,  As.  Minor 

,,        distigmatella.  n.s.,  Ersch 

,,        chrysopyga,  Z.     S.  Europe,  Caucasus,  Brussa,  /  eisia 

Depressaria  homochroella,  n.s.,  Ersch 
,,  despoiatella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

Bryotropha  glebicolorella,  n.s..  Ersch. 

Parasia  lappella,  L Europe,  except  extreme  N. 

Ceratophora  radiosella.  n.s.,  Ersch.  . 

Cladodes  (?)  biareatella,  n.s.,  Ersch. 

Megacraspedus  exoletelkis,  n.s.,  Ersch 

Pleurota  aorsella,  Chr. 

Oecophora  bisinuella,  n.s..  Ersch. 

Gracilaridae. 
Gracilaria  stigmatella,  F. 

,,         phasianipennella.  Hb. 
var.  auroguttella.  Stph. 

Coleophoridae. 
Coleophora  alcyonipennella.  Roll. 


Sarepta 


Eurofe\ 
Europe,  except  extreme  N. 


Lavemidae. 

Laverna  decorella.  Stph.,  var.  . 
,,        (?)  tetrazonella.  n.s..  Ersch. 

Elachistidae. 
Butalis  capitalis.  n.s..  Ersch. 
„       tabidella.  H.S.        . 

var.  inquilinella,  Ersch. 
Staintonia  medinella.  Stgr. 
HeHodines  Roesella.  L.     . 


N.  W.  Russia,  C.  Europe, 
[/ialy,  Bitissa 


.  C.  Europc\ 

Austria,  Brussa 
Andalusia- 


APPENDIX  A.—LEPIDOPTERA. 


595 


Names.                                                          Distribution  in  other  countries. 

Plains. 
Downs. 

I 

1 

Lithocolletidae. 
LithocoUetis  comparella,  Z C.  Europe 

Pterophorina. 

Agdistis  adactyla,  Hb C.  Europe,  Sarepta 

Oxyptilus  laetus.  Z.  .         .        ^S".  Europe,  Caucasus,  Asia  Minor 
Pterophorus  monodactylus.  L.  .         .         .         .  Etirope,  Persia 
Leioptilus  scarodactylus,  Hb.    .         .      C.  Europe,  S.  E.  Russia 

Total  number  of  species 

46 

38 

* 

284 

* 
41 

28 

596 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 


bi 

-^ 

^ 

X3 

ri 

fT< 

CJ 

biC 

11 

nj 

T1 

OJ 

'1  1 

0 

03 

^ 

C/l 

>, 

cu 

^ 

r  1 

rti 

(1) 

^OJ 

^H 


■v! 


0 

^ 

^ 

^1^ 

^3    O 

rt  t-  ^ 

J.£  u 
H.C.S 


spjBAvdn 
2j  ^ooo£i 


^ooozi 
—.00011 


06 


00  00 


00 

t^   00     vo  r^  t^ 

00  vo   t^oo  vo  »^    i>.    00  ^  vd 


"<i-  rood   i'^  10  rj-vO  VO   10  ^  TJ-  ^  vovO   ^rOf^fOvrjfOrfi/^Tf  rj- 


.ooo£ 


,0031 

0091 


•*        •       •       -fv.       •       •       •**        •       •       •       •♦♦*        •**  •** 

'^ 

G 

s  'I 

.      .      .  HD j; . 

O  t:  ^ 

.  ^  -^   1  ^  •  a    .    .    .    .      ^  •    .    .  i:  5i .,:  >  -S    • 
^  e^  -  i^i  1  .ri  -^  ^  o  1 W  ^.  i.i%  1  ^^^  .  7 

^  u  rt  <  ro  rt  <  Tj  5  -3;  o  .,  >:>:h  o  -5  ;s .;«       -^  'o  13  ^ 

.2  I .5-2"  =  ^^-"^  g    ,  :.§-g 

^  ^  'I  a.l    ::  :^   ::  :  =  :  ::c  g-o    = 

Ph  Ch  <JCU  <  hJU 

w  N     •   ro  ■^  tr>vO  ti.od  0\<5  **     .   N  fO  •«}-    .  »nvO  t^OO  ^  o  J; 


APPENDIX  A.—KULDJA  LEPIDOPTERA. 


597 


ood  00       L/S     vd  06      00*  \o  00*  00  vd 

CTn  t^  r^        rj-CO  lOvO  r^        t^vd         i-O  ^  t>.  t>.  !>.        >-rid 

uHvd  vd  o  CO  r~^  ^  tA  10  xiS  uo-d  lAvd  ^fo  »j-)  in  rf  rt-  vA  rovd  ^  vd  ^  -^  lAo  t>.  t>i 


!  spjEAvdn 
I  3j  ^ooo£i 


^ooozi 
,00011 

^ooooi 
,00-6 
,ooog 
pool 

0009 
^oooS 
^ooot' 

ooo£ 

OOC3 


^0091 


•** *     •* * *     • 

•**     •••* * *     •*     ••••** 


*      *      *     * 


P5  pC 
^  'n  ^aj 


:/2 


0-. - 


hJ  -^ 


3  .^ 


o  ^ 

<  g 

o 


dn  <;  ro    O-t;   vT 


fi;  w  ..2  -^  ^  X  5 


o    . 


■^    O    "^ 
i£    OJ    C    O 

d  P  ?3  S 


OM 


>> 

J 


598 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


spjBMdn 
^,ooof I 


o  ozi 
-oooii 


vd       to  r4 1>.  o  ^d  ^^o   t-^  00  vd  vd 


00 

rC   00 
i>,  \d   t^   00 


fOTJ-mvOvOvO   rJ-vO  VO  vO  i')  vi->  •^  lOOO   tJ-00  VO  tmo  lo  u^  ^  lO  iOr>- ^O  VO  I~«»r>.. 


.0006 


ooog 
ocoZ 


0009 
oooS 


oooi' 
ooo£ 


oooi 


oogi 
0091 


*•*••*•*••* 


*    *    *    * 


*    *    *    *    * 


*     •   *     •     ***** 


*     •   *     •   *    *    * 


:^**:)c        •♦*        •** 


ffl     ^- 


!2    • 


3t-J  "^ 


rt" 


a.  ^ 


C-: 


-H  S 


1/3  s 


y    (U    "'     -■    «    CW  o 


•'JO 


ti3  o 


^  'C     .  -^   rt  • «  w 


^^ 


>  cue 


B 

Oh 


,-rW 


^  -c  r2 


APPENDIX  A.—KULDJA  LEPIDOPTERA. 


599 


I        0000  30 

j     vo  vd  i>.o6  oo"  vo  vd  tA  !>.     00*  00  00  !>.     060606 


00      00 
00  t^      tA 


U-)  voo    r>.VO  ^^  vovO  vO  re. 

t>*  u~,  vnvo  00  r^t^i^iou^m-^u^rN.  tovo  rj-  r^  10  r^  to 

spjBAvdn 

5,ooo£i 

oaozi 

— ,00011 

^0000 1 

* *    *    * 

•    •    •     •  * *     •    ■ 

,0006 

* *  *  *    • 

•••** *     •• 

coog 


000^ 


,oogi 
,oogi 


*   #     •  *    *    * 


*  '^^   *    *     •  * 


••*•*• 

•     •    * 

V 

< 

•    3 

3 

.     .     . 

O 
•   > 


O-.S    o 

■Hi 


<< 


&  rt  f1^ 


'So  ^ 


^     ;3  ^    (U    (L»  , 


t«         o 

.     .      .    rt        hM  ^    rt      .     .     .      . 

o  trz  5 15  s  "  "^ 


tifl 


,^^>'^':ar<   fA-JO   l-i""^ 


_  C3  i— f    r^    in    'J^  /-s 


z;^"35H 


C    Oi  3 

Cu 

S 
>-. 

C! 
-     -  O 

d 
o 
U 


t— I     PU  >     tr. 


a^C^O^a^O^O^O^O^O   O   O   O 


6oo 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


spjBAvdn 
,ooo£i 


vO        00 
vo  '^  lO  \r\\0  t^vo  i>l  lO  U-)  LT)  in  lAvO  t>. 


^OOOZI 
OOOII 


,0006 


,ooo8 
,000^ 


^0009 
,oooS 


,OOOt' 

,ooo£ 
pooz 


/OOgI 

-^0091 


I 


<       < 

1 1  •  -I = 

< 2    ^^ 4  :i 

c/^  •  •  •    s  -^  •  ;  •  ^^ia<\  '  ' .,'  '5  :     '  '  :|    ^ 

ili-f  Nillr1li|pil:ii|.|illi2fi 

i>.od  cf\  d  •-"  N  fo  ^  >^^  f^oo  cr^  d  •-  N  f^  ■^  uS\d  r^oo  cfv  d  <-  ci  f^  ■^  *nvc 


APPENDIX  A.—KULDJA  LEPIDOPTERA. 


60 1 


s  00 

odcO^frfTf         ■rt-u'lLOu-)  t-^O  r>-.   uSo    •4'  fO^O   lO 


r^  vnoo  (->-.  i->.vo  t^  "^00 


spjB/Adn 
^,ooo£r 


^OOOZI 

-,00011 


,ooog 


IE    • 


oooZ 


^1 


,0009 
-:oS 
oooi' 

,oooe 


^oogi 
■,0091 


«*««««     ■  ^ 


*■  *    •  *  *    • 


*  *  f^-    •    •  *  * 


Jr.   3 


fa  ^ 


o  o        -^ 

Si2  <u   rt 


X    rt 


0  5 


ii.'     „<^  ^  ■"    iT    „  >   S  -ti     ..  rt   fi   c3 
Ccf    ^-S-^O   rt-Oi.£   rt.o  5  o 


rt  — ; 


r  C 


jS 


«a 


rt    fV.      C      rt      tA 


D  ■ 


rt    o  ' 


<U 


rt 


>>     1^  ti  2 


5  -'^"^ 
■^U-rt 


e  ?^ 


x^c/:  S 


0;^M     ffi     PsUc7:<<^< 


N      CO    Tf  LOVO     t^OO 


602 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


00 
void  Lo  lo  Lo  lo  r^  tJ-jo  00  lO  t^  '^t'O  vo  v£)  r«-i  lo  fOn-  r>-  vc5  r>-.   ^  t>.vO  ^  fO\0  vO 


spjBMdn 
2j  ^ooo£i 


ooosi 
.oooii 


,ooo6 


«    «    «     .   *    *    ♦ 


^  c5 


tJO 

— 

X 

<; 

,    . 

<A 

cT 

j_; 

3 

rt 

tx 

"^ 

.  Cud    . 

•  X 

rt 

0- 

£ 

X 

> 


5=^  =  -S 


2i 

—  t;  -::  r:  '^< 


rs;^ 


i=^< 


i':^:?^^<.rjf-^ 


>  .-r 


^•^^ 


.:::H 


Is 


f  2^1-3  § 


s  s  &'5  ^  x-^  ^-  §  5 


tX  rt    o  ■-  ■ 


tJO 

OJ    c/: 


o  -z  o-^  rt  o  ;•  -c 


■■aU 

o  <u  «-> 
'5  S  Si 


§1 
•9.   ri 


a.1 


^^ 


vo  t^t^i^i^r^r^t>»r-»t>.  r^oo  ooooooooooQOooooQO  <:^o^o^a^c^o^c^c^o^c 


APPENDIX  A.— KVLDJA  LEPIDOPTERA. 


603 


"^  ON  r^  r^  t>^VO   t^OO   t^vO  o-.  00    t^  vnac    t^  r^-O  ^   t^r>-.   t^  li^n-  c^.    -^  rooo  CO  r>-.  rv. 


spjcttdn 
5^ooo€i 


poozi 
-.00011 


ood6 


^0009 


,oooe 


,0031  I 
-,0091  I 


^1 


bo 


fi  .'5 

"5  > 


D    I 


^ 


G       a, 

rt  ^  .j^  .3    tJJ    ' 

O   X   u   c   r   ci 


a, 


a; 


c 
^  Fi  2  o  .c  ^-  ^  o 

^  "    -.   rt   o   s 


I    .  JI2I 

i:       H  :j  <  J 


u 


fl     Ci    D 

So; 


3    Ci 


-5  =/=  2 


03^  3 


O    3 


EXXu 


S*-"   N   ro  ■*  lOvO   t>«00   O  O   «    N   ro  ri-  uo^O   t^OO   On  O   "-•   N   ro  -^  i^vO  t>.00   On  O 
000000000'-<i-<-i'-'   —   i-i-<»-«   —   —   NNNNC^NNNMMrn 


6o4 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


spjEAvdn 
2j,ooo£i 


^OCX5ZI 
,0001 T 


pooZ 
0009 
oooS 


.oooi' 


J 


oogi 
0091 


%     if.     1^       •     lie 


*     *      *     *        •     ,)c     4c 


'^      .      .hJ 


O' 


^f 


•  w 


^    i;  _CJ 


'S'-^X     ,    -J-^'H 


=  ir-r  ti  « 


cu  Mr: 


.2 

^    fcJ3  'J    WT3 

U 

:|   _  _ 

x:  .1= 
a,  c 


£S 


u 

< 


2        o     -.is 


■  OS 


y    -    ♦  i: 


^~    <U 
«    G. 

F  J=  = 
"  c  S 

_    rt   3 

O    O    lU 


5  ii  J; 


n'  n'  n'  rj'  N    N    r<'  N    ri   C4   ^<    N    N    N    f  1    <^    r<    N    r4   N    N    C)    N   r)    N   N    n    N   N   <N 


APPENDIX  A.—KULDJA   LEPIDOPTEBA. 


605 


^paB.wdn 
3j^coo£i 

pfOOZl 

— .0001 1 


^0006 
,ooo8 
,oooL 


tv.  vo  >-o  vovd  o  ^ 

rood  OC  06  OC  n-.  vA  -^  io\o  do   loiAu^ioLorj-Tf  uor>-.    rj-  10  lA  100-.  ir^  vo  i^  t^  10  10 


,0009 
,OCX>S 

ooo> 
oooE 


*   *   *     • 


/OOgI 

.,0091 


< 


=1,     :/^  ji 


•.S  >  > 


a 


rt  .S 


^  i>%  Ch  r;  ;^     rt 


-hJH; 


o  5  .-  .si 


^  c^  S  h  rt 


9J    O    •/: 

3     O;    r^ 


c  ---  U-  ••-  ^  P 
n  ?  2  F^'rt  £  S 
^  bjoxi  o  <iJ  S  _» 

.s        s  S  g:  -  '  ^  o  o 

x       a  H  E       0!iO!^ 


>  E  C  i2  «^ 

«   rS    -g    '^3      P      S      C 


■H    !/:    rt    c3 


p.SjH  g  g^  J=:5 


"-'  '^  e  '-!  r;3 


.iii  rt 


_rt  'C  i5    G 

?^  5i  S  5 


On  O    i-i    N    ro  "^  w-ivO    t^OO    On  O    ►- 

r^OO  000000000000000000    OnOn 


6o6 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


spjBMdn 
,ooo£i 


^ooozi 
,0001  ] 


,0006 
,ooog 
,oooL 


,0009 


,ooo£ 

^oooe 

,oogi 
-^0091 


00 


u->  Tt  t^vC 

TT 

■^  u-iO 

ii-»  -f  i/^  co\0  \0 

rr  ^  CO  fo  fO  Lo  TfvO  vO 

u->vO 

-*  f 

.^^ 

' 

4. 

■■ 

•    •    •  * 

• 

* 

•     • 

•     • 

ru     . 

*    * 

*      • 

.     .     .     . 

. 

.      .      . 

* 

*      • 

, 

*      • 

. 

•      •      • 

•    *      •    * 

•    *      .    *      • 

*     • 

• 

•     •     .     •    *      • 

•    * 

.n-.^iftf      . 

•      -     ■ 

•      •      .    * 

* 

•       • 

•  iie    >::    4:   m     • 

*    *      • 

•      •    *    * 

•      •    *      •    * 

•     • 

* 

. 

*    *    *    *     •     • 

•       • 

•   *   *   *    *     • 

t 
." 

o    a- 

pi  ""  -S 


&B 


:  o  rt  g    r  c.o  S-5 

O    tS   is  "r;   e    rt 


<U      CS      Q 


C5 

■=§.i|-g 


•  ^  5  S 


i.&£^§>-|-5i:^ 


o  - 


N  cr.  h  Ch  x  u  W  0!i  W  ►=  Ch  K  cr,  p: 


O  •—  :a  •  — 


N  N   N   M   N   <S   N   CS   rOfororor<^rofOr<OrOfOrofOrO<^rororrrr.corororO 


APPEA^DIX  A.—KULDJA  LtPIDOPTERA. 


607 


spJBMdn 
j^,ooo£i 


00  10  vO  l^ 


^OOOZI 
,00011 


,000s 


pool 
,0009 

,000? 


^oooi' 
,ooo£ 
.ooos 


,oogi 
,0091 


•    *    *  "^'   *      •    *      •    *      • 


O 

c 
o 


-^Z^      ^'  <  ^  -2       o  tf  ^ 

c  n    •  c/:  1«  .5  --:  c3  5  ri  S  rt  rt  .y  -^  5  s; 


'  rt  p  .^  w*  ?;  rt  ^  ^.  ^ 


-t:    C!    C    ,7- 
=    O    o  J^ 


"C         o 

^      O 


'a.  o  rt 


r  r^  s  o  > 


O    TO 

<  ^'  H  X       ^  CJ 


P<   CO  rf  LoO  r^OO   On  O    ►-   C^   ro 
CO  CO  fO  ro  CO  ro  CO  m  co  co  co  co 


rf    .  lOMD   r-^00   0\  O   1-   N   CO  Tj-  loO   r^OO   0\  O 
'O         cOCOCOcOcO'^rJ-rfT^rJ-'<^Tf^-<d-'!^u-> 

CO     CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 


6o8 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


t 

6 

1 

vo  vO  vd  ^  u->vd  vort.  vd  >^CX)   ^vO   •^r>-.   ro  lo  lA  u^  r^vO  r>-.  \d    M-vd  uH  tJ- 

spjBMdn 
7j,oooei 

OOOZI 
^OOOII 

^OOOOI 

* 

^0006 

,ooo8 

,o~oL 

*    *    *                *          *    * 

,0009 

**      ....*      •**      ••* **      •#      .... 

,oooS 

^ooofr 

*     *  '^.    *     * *     * rv,      .      . 

^oooe 

^oooz 

^oogi 
— ,0091 

■J, 

u 

i  ■ 

in 

% 

< 

2; 

Cidaria  ferrugata,  CI.,  v.  asiatica,  Stgr.     . 
,,       tauaria,  Stgr.,  var.?  altitudinum,  Alph. 

,,       intermediaria,  Alph 

,,       tianschanica,  Alph.       .          .          .          . 
,,       riguata,  Hb.,  ab.  ?        . 
,,       cuculata,  Hufn.    .         ,         ,         , 
,,       sociata,  Bkh.,  var,  dubiosata,  Alph, 
,,       lugubrata,  Hb.     ,          ,         ,          ,         , 
,,       fulminata,  Alph,            ,          ,         ,          , 

„       funerata.  Hb 

,,       sordidala.  F 

,,       trifasciata,  Bkh 

,,       berberata,  Schifi"..  var,? 

,,       nigrofasciaria,  Goze      ,         ,         .         . 

„       comitata,  L. 

,,       polygrammata,  Bkli 

,,       vital  bata,  Hb 

Eupithecia  oblongata,  Thunb 

,,          subpulchrata,  Alph, 

,,           subnotata,  Hb 

,,          scabiosata,  Bk,,  v.  aequistrigata.Stgr,? 

,,           biornata,  Christ 

,,           lepsaria,  Stgr,?        ,          ,          ,          , 

,,          innotata,  Hufn,?  var,?     , 

,,          extensaria,  Frr 

,,          minusculata,  Alph. 

„           n.s 

APPENDIX  A.—NEUROPTERA.  609 


NEUROPTERA. 

By  Robert  MacLachlan,  London. 

The  collection  of  Neuroptera  made  by  Fedchenko  affords  a  tolerably 
well  defined  indication  of  the  character  of  the  Neuropterological  fauna 
of  the  Turkistan  countries,  which  up  to  the  present  has  remained  almost 
entirely  uninvestigated. 

Notwithstanding  the  fulness  of  this  collection,  it  is  certainly  im- 
possible to  draw  from  it  any  conclusions  regarding  the  number  of 
species  to  be  found  in  those  regions  ;  and  in  order  that  such  conclusions 
should  be  possible,  we  require  more  continuous  and  special  investiga- 
tions by  persons  not  burdened  with  the  diversified  and  fatiguing  labours 
always  connected  with  travel  in  unknown  countries. 

The  character  of  the  Turkistan  Neuroptera,  so  far  as  we  may  judge 
from  the  materials  collected  by  the  expedition,  is  decidedly  European  ; 
a  great  many  of  the  species  collected  in  Turkistan  are  not  only  European, 
but  even  West- European  species.  This  similarity  of  the  Turkistan  to 
European  fauna  is,  however,  less  sharply  defined  than  that  of  the 
Siberian  Neuroptera,  which  I  had  occasion  not  long  ago  to  investigate. 
In  the  Turkistan  collection  there  is  an  important  number  of  new  species 
which  belong  to  European  genera.  On  the  other  hand,  in  that  collec- 
tion is  remarked  an  unimportant  mixture  of  the  Indian  element, 
which  is  shown  in  a  species  of  the  genus  Idricerus,  family 
Ascalaphidae,  and  a  species  of  the  genus  Dinarthrnm  of  the 
famil}^  Tricho;pte7'a.  Representatives  of  these  genera  have,  up  to  the 
present,  been  found  only  to  the  south  of  the  Himalayas.  This  unim- 
portant mixture  of  Indian  forms  does  not,  however,  really  alter  the 
thoroughly  marked  European  character  of  the  collection. 

There  are  as  many  as  36  species  of  PlamJ)eu?iia  in  the  collection,  of 
which  17  are  new.  Doubtless  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  species  of 
this  family  is  the  above-mentioned  new  species  of  the  genus  Idricerus. 
Another  species  of  the  same  family  is  common  in  Eastern  Europe — 
Asc.  Kolyjanensis.  Myrmeleonidae  3ire.  represented  by  15  species,*  of 
which  7  are  new  (in  that  number  one  new  genus). 

The  presence  in  the  collection  of  Gymnocnemia  variegata,  a  very 
rare  species  inhabiting  Italy  and  Greece,  is  very  interesting.  Among 
the  Chryso^idae  the  representative  of  the  new  genus  Chryso;pisca  is 
very  remarkable.  The  Henierobiidce  are  comparatively  few.  The  genus 
Mantissa  is  represented  by  one  new  species.  Of  the  interesting 
genus  Dilar,  one  specimen  is  found  in  the  collection  belonging, 
perhaps,  to  the  species  described  from  Turkey.  Of  the  Pa?zorpidae, 
Sialidae,  Raphididae,  and  Nemopteridae,  there  are  none  at  all  in  the 
collection. t  The  prominent  speciality  of  the  collection,  with  regard 
to  Plainpennia,  is  without  doubt  its  richness  in  Mymieleonidae. 

More  than  one  half  Of  all  the  specimens  of  Neuroptera  collected  by 
the  expedition  belong  to  the  Iricho-ptera,  of  which  there  are  in  the 

*  In  addition  to  the  species  enumerated  below,  there  is  Acanthaclisis  occitanica, 
Ramb.  from  Kuldja,  accidentally  omitted  from  the  list. 

t  One  specimen  of  Boretis  was  taken  by  Fedchenko  in  the  environs  of 
Samarkand,  in  the  early  spring  of  1869.  This  specimen  was  unfortunately 
destroyed  during  the  transit  of  the  collection  from  Moscow  to  London. 

VOL.  11.  39 


6io  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

collection  as  many  as  40  species,  in  the  majority  of  instances  new. 
One  is  struck  with  the  small  number  of  species  of  Phryganeidae  and 
LiTnnophilidae  in  the  collection,  and  by  the  predominance  of  species 
of  the  genus  Hydropsyche,  which  generally  live  in  slowly-running 
water.  As  many  of  the  localities  visited  by  Fedchenko  are  exceedingly 
elevated,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  large  number  of  Hydropsyche 
found  by  him,  and  the  almost  total  absence  from  the  collection  of 
Rhyacophila,  which  live,  as  is  known,  generally  near  swiftly- running 
water.*  The  examination  of  the  vast  materials  collected  by  Fedchenko, 
belonging  to  Irichoptei'a,  cost  me  great  labour.  Notwithstanding  my 
wish  to  treat  in  detail  as  far  as  possible  all  the  materials  sent  to  me,  1 
have  unfortunately  been  obliged  to  leave  some  species  of  Ti^ichopter-a 
undefined  and  undescribed. 

The  family  Ephemeridae  is  represented  in  the  collection  by  about  80 
specimens,  belonging  to  the  genera  Ba'etis,  Cloeon,  Heptagenia, 
Leptofhlebia,  and  Centroptilnm.  A  detailed  description  of  the  species 
I  consider  impossible,  on  account  of  the  specimens  being  greatly 
changed  by  drying.  Eaton,  who  also  saw  the  Turkistan  Ephemerae, 
similarly  declined  to  make  a  description  from  dry  specimens.  One 
species,  the  identification  of  which  is  certain,  is  the  common  European 
Leptophlebia  marginata,  L. 

Oi  Psocidae  one  species  of  Caecilius,  is  found  in  the  collection,  and 
one  wingless  species,  apparently  an  undeveloped  Clothilla. 

On  taking  up  the  examination  of  the  Neuroptera  collected  by  Fed- 
chenko, I  foresaw  that  the  Perlidae  would  present  the  greatest 
difficulty  to  me,  as  even  the  largest  European  species  are  yet  far  from 
being  sufficiently  investigated,  not  to  speak  of  the  multitudinous  small 
forms.  Not  having  yet  decided  to  undertake  a  monograph  on  the 
Perlidae  of  the  British  Isles,  I  was  very  doubtful  of  my  ability  tc 
properly  treat  those  of  Central  Asia.  In  the  course  of  time,  on  2 
closer  acquaintance  with  the  collection,  I  quite  convinced  myself  that  1 
should  act  very  wisely  in  confining  myself  to  the  indication  of  tht 
probable  number  of  species  in  each  genus,  and  only  in  a  few  exceptiona 
cases  permit  myself  to  describe  certain  new  forms.  Altogether  in  tht 
collection  there  are  more  than  180  specimens  oi  Perlidae,  all  belonging 
to  European  genera.  The  greater  portion  of  the  Perlidae  collected  b^ 
the  expedition  belong  to  the  genus  Ne^noura,  and  to  the  little-knowi 
allied  forms. 

Finally,  the  Termitidae  are  represented  in  the  collection  by  some  in 
completely  developed  specimens,  which  I  am  not  in  a  position  tt 
determine. 

NEUROPTERA,  s.  str. 


PLANIPENNIA. 

M  V  R  M  E  L  E  O  N  I  D  A  K . 

1.  Creagris,  Hagen. 
I.  Creagris  plumbeus,  Olivier. 

2.  Gjrmnocnemia,  Schneider. 
I.  Gyninocnemia  variegata,  Schneider. 
3.  Maracanda,  MacLachlan,  n.  gen. 
I.   Maracanda  amoena,  MacLachl.,  u.s. 

*  In  Turkistan  mountains  there  are  exceedingly  few  rivers,  compared  wii 
European  mountains,  the  cultivated  zone  being  watered  by  slowly-running  canal 
Does  not  this  explain  the  fact  which  struck  the  author? — Editor s  note. 


4.  Formicaleo,  Braner. 

1.  Formicaleo  tetragrammicus,  Fabr. 

2.  „  lineatus,  ,, 

5.  Myrmecaelurns,  Costa,  Hagen. 

1.  Myrmecaelurus  trigrammus,  Palla^ 

2.  „  major,  MacLach..;. 

3.  „  Fedchenkoi.        M 
Lachlan,  n.s. 


APPENDIX  A.—NEUROPTERA. 


6ii 


6.  Macronemurus,  Costa. 

1.  Macronemurus paulus,  iMacLach..?^.^. 

2.  ,,  clarus,        ,,  ,, 
7.  Myrmeleon,  Lin.,  Hagen. 

I.   Myrmeleon  Ulianini,  MacLach.,  n.s. 
1.  „  fanaticus,       ,,  ,, 

ASCALAPHIDAE. 

1.  Idricerus,  MacLachlan. 

I.  Idricerus  sogdianus,  MacLachl.,  n.s. 

2.  Ascalaphus,  Fabr.  (sens.  str.^. 
I.  Ascalaphus  kolyvanensis,  Laxm. 

MAiNTISPIDAE. 

1.  Mantispa,  Illig-. 

I.   Mantispa  scabricollis,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

Hemerobitdae. 
1.  Hemerobius,  Lin, 

1.  Hemerobius  nitidulus,  Fabr. 

2.  ,,  orotypus,  Wallengren. 
„            humuli,  Lin. 

4-  M  subnebulosus.  Stephens. 

5-  M  conspurcatus,  Mac 

Lachlan,  n.s. 
6.  „  triangularis,  MacLch.,«.x. 

Osmylidae. 
1.  Dilar,  Rambur. 

Chrysopidae. 
1.  Chrysopa,  Leach. 

1.  Chrysopa  vulgaris,  Schneider. 

2.  „         microcephala,  Brauer. 

3-  ,,  aspersa,  Wesmael. 

4-  „  abbreviata.  Curtis  (?) 

5-  u  dasyptera,  MacLachl., «.j-. 
6.  ,,  centralis,             ,,  ,, 
7-  M  sogdianica,          ,,  ,, 
.8.  ,,  sybaritica,           ,,  ,, 
9-  M  Fedchenkoi,      .,  ,, 

2.  Chrysopisca,  MacLachlan,  n.  gen. 
I.  Chrysopisca  minuta,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

CONIOPTERYGIDAE. 

1.  Coniopteryx,  Haliday. 

TRIG  HOPTERA. 

Phryganeidae. 
1.  Agrypnia,  Curtis. 
I.  Agrypnia  Pagetana,  Curtis. 

Limnophilidae. 

1.  Colpotaulius,  Kolenati. 

I.  Colpotaulius  asiaticus,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

2.  Limnophilus,  Leach. 

1.  Limnophilus  (Chaetotaulius)  striola, 

Kolenati. 

2.  Limnophilus    (Gqniotaulius)    subni- 

tidus,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 


3.  Stenophylax,  Kolenati. 

Stenophylax  pilosus,  Pictet,  Brauer. 

4.  Apatidea,  MacLachlan,  n.  gen. 

Apatidea  elongata,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 
„        copiosa,  ,,  „ 

S  KRICOSTOM  ATIDAE. 

1.  Dinarthrum,  MacLachlan. 

Dinarthrum  pugnax,  MacLach.,  n.s. 
Maniconeura,  MacLachlan,  n.  gen. 
Maniconeura  penicillata.  MacL.,  n.s. 

3.  Mormonia,  Curtis. 
Mormonia(?)  parvula,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

4.  Brachycentrus,  Curtis. 
Brachycentrus    maracandicus,     Mac 

Lachlan,  n.s. 

Leptoceridae. 
1.  Leptocerus,  Leach. 

Leptocerus  cinereus,  Curtis. 

„  bifasciatus,  Olivier. 

2.  Triaenodes,  MacLachlan. 

Triaenodes  interna,  MacLachl.,  n.s. 

3.  Setodes,  Rambur. 
Setodes  similis,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 
„       paula,  ,,  ,, 

Hydropsychidae. 
1.  Hydropsy che,  Pictet. 

Hydropsyche  erythrophthalma,  Mac 
Lachlan,  7i.s. 
„  carbonaria,  MacL.,  n.s. 

„  ardens,  ,,         ,, 

„  straminea,       ,,         ,, 

2.  Psychomyia,  Latreille. 

Psychomyia  usitata,  MacLachl.,  n.s. 

3.  Wormaldia,  MacLachlan. 

Wormaldia  occipitalis,  Pictet. 
4.  Ecnomus,  MacLachlan. 
Ecnomus  tenellus,  Rambur  (?) 
Rhyacophilidae. 
1.  Rhyacophila,  Pictet. 
2.  Glossosoma,  Curtis. 
Glossosomadentatum,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

3.  Agapetus,  Curtis. 

Agapetus  bidens,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 
„        tridens,         ,,  ,, 

,,        cocandicus,  ,,  ,, 

4.  Beraea,  Stephens. 
Beraea  dira,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 

Hydroptilidae. 
1.  Agraylea,  Curtis. 
Agrayleapallidula,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 


6l2 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


PSEUDO  NEUROPTERA. 


Term  iTi  DAE. 

Ephemeridae. 

Leptophlebia  marginata,  Lin. 

Psocidae. 

Perlidae. 

1.  Dictyopteryx,  Pictet. 

Dictyopteryx  Olgae,  MacLach.,  n.s. 

2.  Perla,  Geoffroy. 
Perla  cocandica,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 


cadaverosa, 
immersa. 


3.  Chloroperla,  Newman,  Pictet. 
4.  Isopteryx,  Pictet. 

1.  Isopteryx  montana,  Pictet. 

2.  „         tripunctata,  Scopoli. 

3-  ,,         curta,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 

5.  Capnia,  Pictet. 
6.  Taeniopteryx,  Pictet. 
I.  Taeniopteryx      maracandica, 
Lachlan,  n.s. 
7.  Nemoura,  Latr.,  Pictet. 

1.  Nemoura  variegata,  Olivier. 

2.  ,,        ornata,  MacLachlan,  n.s. 


Mac 


O DON ATA. 

By  Dr.  F.  Brauer,  of  Vienna. 


5.  OpMogomphus,  De  Selys. 
I.  Ophiogomphus  serpentinus,  Charp. 

6.  Onychogomphus,  De  Selys. 

I.  Onychogomphus  flexuosus,  Ramb. 

Agrionidae. 

Calopteryginae. 

1.  Calopteryx,  Leach. 

I.  Calopteryx  spiendens,  Harris. 

Agrioninae. 
2.  Lestes,  Leach. 

1.  Lestes  virens,  Charp. 

2.  ,,       harbara,  Fabr. 

3.  Sympycna,  Charp. 

1.  Sympycna  fusca,  Vanderl. 

2.  ,,      paedisca,  Brauer,  non  Eversm. 

4.  Erythromma,  Charp. 
I.  Erythromma  viridulum,  Charp. 

5.  Ischnura,  Charp. 

1.  Ischnura  pumilio,  Charp. 

2.  „        senegalense,  Ramb. 

6.  Agrion,  Fabr. 

1.  Agrion  pulchellum,  Vanderl. 

2.  „       cyathigerum,  Charp. 

[There  is  no  introduction  to  Odo7iata  in  Fedchenko's  work,  but  there 
exists  an  article  in  German  (giving  the  localities  of  the  species,  and  a 
full  description  of  Sympycna  paedisca,  Eversm.),  entitled  "  Verzeichniss 
der  von  Fedtschenko  in  Turkistan  gesammelten  Odonaten,"  bearbeitet 
von  Prof,  Friedr.  Brauer,  in  the  Verhandlungen  der  kaiser  lid 
koniglichen  zoologisch-bota^iischen  Gesellschaft  i7i  IVien.  Jahrganj 
i88o,  XXX.  Band,  Wien,  i88i  ;  and  p.  75,  1SS2.—//.  Z.] 


Libellulidae. 

LibdluUnae. 

1.  Libellula,  L. 
Libellula  quadrimaculata,  \.. 

2.  Libella,  Brauer. 
Libella  brunnea,  Fonsc. 
„       albistyla;  De  Selys. 

3.  Crocothemis,  Brauer. 
Crocothemis  erythraea,  Brulle. 

4.  Diplax,  Charp. 
Diplax  pedemontana,  Allioni. 
„      depressiuscula,  De  Selys. 
,,      Fonscolombii,         ,, 
„      meridionalis,  ,, 

Aeschnidae. 
Aesihninac. 
1.  Aeschna,  Fabr. 
Aeschna  affinis,  Vanderl. 

2.  Anax,  Leach. 
Anax  formosus,  Vanderl. 

„      parthenope,  De  Selys. 

Go'inphinae. 

3.  Cordulegaster,  Leach. 

Cordulegaster  insignis,  Schneider. 

4.  Gomphus,  Leach. 
Gomphus  flavipes,  Charp. 


APPENDIX  A.—ORTHOPTERA.  613 


ORTHOPTERA. 
Bv  H.  De  Saussure. 

The  collection  of  Orthoptera  made  by  Fedchenko  in  Turkistan  is  so 
far  complete  that  it  enables  us  to  give  a  pretty  clear  idea  of  the  character 
of  the  Orthopterous  fauna  of  these  hitherto  little  investigated  regions. 
The  mingling  therein  of  European  species  with  Indian  forms  is  surprising, 
as  also  the  comparatively  small  number  of  species,  the  distribution  of 
which  is  limited  to  Turkistan  and  the  neighbouring  countries. 

The  species  most  common  in  Western  and  Central  Europe  are  through 
Russia  and  the  Cis-Caucasian  steppe  distributed  as  far  as  Turki- 
stan, where  they  apparently  attain  their  extreme  limit  towards  the 
east,  and  constitute  the  chief  and  fundamental  element  of  the  local 
fauna  of  Orthoptera. 

Other  species,  which  appear  only  in  South  Russia,  and  extend  as  far 
as  Turkistan  [Fischei'ia  b7'achyptera,  etc.),  apparently  have  the  steppe 
as  the  centre  of  their  distribution  ;  from  the  Caspian  Sea,  as  from  a 
centre,  these  forms  are  distributed  over  European  Russia,  Siberia, 
Turkistan  and  Asia  Minor. 

There  are  much  fewer  Indian  than  European  species  in  the  Turkistan 
fauna,  which  may  be  explained  by  the  difference  in  climate  of  India 
and  Turkistan.  The  non- European  species  found  in  Turkistan  are 
those  exclusively  belonging  to  S.  Asia  {Hierodula),  which  have  either 
only  reached  Turkistan,  or  are  distributed  further  to  the  West — to  the 
Caucasus,  and  Asia  Minor. 

With  these  South-Asiatic  species  others  from  more  distant  countries, 
particularly  from  Africa,  are  mingled.  Such  forms,  for  instance, 
as  Mantis  sacra  and  the  genus  Oxythes^pts,  proper  to  Senegal, 
extending  to  Turkistan  probably  through  Central  and  West  Africa  and 
Arabia,  are  especially  remarkable. 

The  Orthopterous  fauna  of  Turkistan  presents  a  very  strange  resem- 
blance to  the  European  fauna  ;  it  is  particularly  like  the  fauna  of  South 
Russia,  and  contains  a  large  quantity  of  West-European  species.  It  is 
distinguished  not  so  much  by  forms  exclusively  peculiar  to  it,  as  by  the 
concurrence  of  species  which  are  not  found  together  in  other  countries. 
This  fauna,  together  with  that  of  the  Caspian,  South-Siberian  and  Aral 
steppes,  and  probably  that  of  Asia  Minor,  might  be  called  the  "  fauna 
of  the  Asiatic  steppes." 

The  species  treated  of  below  by  me  were  chiefly  collected  by 
Fedchenko.  Further,  I  have  included  the  material  in  my  possession 
relative  to  Turkistan  Orthoptera,  collected  by  Colonel  Kushakevitch, 
and  forwarded  to  me  by  Mr.  Moser.  In  the  list  given  by  me  are  also 
included  the  species  described  by  various  authors  from  the  countries 
lying  near  Turkistan,  and  which  it  is  necessary  to  regard  as  belonging 
to  the  same  fauna. 


DERMATOPTERA. 


FORFICULINA.      EaTwigs. 

1.  Labidura,  Leach. 
I.  Labidura  riparia,  Pall. 

2.  Labia,  Leach. 
I.  Labia  minor,  L. 


3.  Forficula,  L.,  et  auct. 

1.  Forficula  auricularia,  L. 

2.  „        biguttata,  Latr. 

3.  „        decipiens,  Gene. 

4.  „        Fedchenkoi,  ri.s,,  Sauss. 


6i4 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


ORTHOPTERA 

Cockroaches. 


1.  Blattina 

1.  Ectobia,  Stephens. 
.  Ectobia  lapponica,  L. 

2.  Aphlebia,  Brunner  de  W. 

.  Aphlebia  tartara,  u.s.,  Sauss. 

3.  Loboptera,  Bmnner  de  W. 

.  Loboptera  tartara,  n.s.,  Sauss. 
4.  Blatta,  L.,  et  auct. 
Blatta  germanica,  L. 

5.  Periplaneta,  Burm. 

Periplaneta  ( Stylopyga)  orientalis,  L 
„  tartara,  n.s.,  Sauss. 

6.  Polyphaga,  Brulle. 
Polj^haga  aegyptiaca,  L. 

II.  Mantodea. 
1,  Hierodula,  Burm. 

Hierodula  tenuidentata.  Sauss. 

2.  Mantis,  L. 

Mantis  religiosa,  L. 

„        sacra,  Thunberg. 

3.  Ameles,  Burm. 

Ameles  alata,  Sauss. 

„       Wagneri,  Kittary. 
„      ?  pusilla,  Eversm. 

4.  Iris,  Saussure. 
Iris  oratoria,  L. 

5.  Fischeria,  Sauss. 

Fischeria  baetica,  Ramb. 
„        caucasica,  Sauss. 
„        brachyptera,  Pall. 
„         Moseri,  Sauss. 

6.  Ozythespis,  Sauss. 
Oxythespis  Turcomaniae,  Sauss. 

7.  Empusa.  Illig..  et  auct. 
Empusa  pennicornis.  Pall. 

III.  Phasmodea. 
1.  Bacillus,  Latr. 
Bacillus  Rossii,  Fabr. 


;.  str. 

IV.  Gryllodea.     Crickets. 

Gryllotalpii. 
1.  Gryllotalpa,  Latr.,  et  auct. 

Gryllotalpa  unispina,  n.s.,  Sauss. 
„  vulgaris,  Latr.,  et  auct. 

2.  Tridactylus,  Oliv. 

Tridactylus  tartarus,  Sauss. 
„  variegatus,  Latr. 

„  digitatus,  Coqueb. 

„  Savignyi,  Guer.  I 

,,  fasciatus,  Guer.  ' 


Gryllii. 

3. 

Gryllus,  L,,  et.  auct. 

I. 

Gryll 

as  pipiens,  Dufour. 

2. 

M 

capensis,  Fabr. 

3- 

, 

desertus,  Pall. 

4- 

> 

domesticus,  L.  ,Latr. 

et  auct 

5- 

Cerisyi,  Serv. 

6. 

> 

campestris,  L.Latr. 

et  aucr 

7- 

melas,  Charp. 

8. 

1 

tartarus,  n.s..  Sauss. 

9- 

frontalis,  Fieb. 

lO. 

, 

tomentosus,  Ev. 

4.  Nemobius,  Serv. 

Nemobius  tartarus,  n.s.,  Sauss. 
„  lineolatus,  Brulle. 

Oecanthii. 
6.  Oecanthns,  Serv. 

Oecanthus  pellucens,  Scop. 

V.    LOCUSTIDAE. 

1.  Onconotus,  Fisch.  de  W. 

Onconotus  Laxmanni,  Pallas. 

2.  Ephippigera,  Serv. 

Ephippigera  taunis,  Eversm. 

„  vacca,  Fisch.  de  W 


3.  Odontura,  Ramb. 
I.  Odontura  serricauda,  Fabr. 
4.  Fhaneroptera,  Latr. 
I.  Phaneroptera  falcata,  Scopoli. 

6.  Saga,  Charp. 
I.  Saga  serrata,  Fabr. 


APPENDIX  A.— VERMES. 


b\^ 


6.  Xiphidium,  Serv. 

Xiphidium  fuscum,  Fabr. 

7.  Locusta,  Fabr. 
Locusta  cantans,  Fuessly. 


viridissima,  Lin. 
caudata,  Charpentier. 
thoracica,  Fisch.  de  W. 


8.  Gampsocleis,  Fisch.  Ft. 
I.  Gampsocleis  glabra,  Herbst. 

9.  Thamnotrizon,  Fisch.  Fr. 

1.  Thamnotrizon  cinereus,  Lin. 

2.  ,,  tartarus,  n.s.^  Sauss. 


10.  Decticus,  Serv. 

Platycleis,  Fieber. 
Decticus  (Platycleis)  griseus,  Fabr. 

,,  intermedius,  Serville. 

„  montanus.  Kollar. 

„  Trockii,  Kittary. 

„  bicolor,  Fisch.  de  W. 

,,  vittatus,  Eversm. 

„  brevipennis,  Charp.     " 

„  Fedchenkoi,  n.s.,  Sauss. 

„  brachypterus,  Lin. 

„  Tamerlanus,  n.s.,  Sauss. 
,,       striatus,  Kitt. 

Decticus,  sens,  str, 

Decticus  albifrons,  Fabr. 
,,         verrucivorus,  Linn. 


r  M.  de  Saussure,  who  has  kindly  revised  the  above,  informs  me  that  his  second 
part  of  Orthoptera  cannot  yet  be  printed. — H.L.'\ 


VERMES  ( Worms). 

By  Dr.  H.  Krabbe,  of  Copenhagen. 

Cestodes  {Entozoa^  Intestinal  Worms). 

In  the  collection  of  intestinal  worms  made  by  Fedchenko,  there 
were  140  bottles  with  Cestoidea.  About  40  of  them  contained  badly 
preserved  or  imperfect  specimens,  but  among  the  others  might  be 
distinguished  and  determined  47  species,  of  which  14  were  new.  The 
new  species  were  obtained  from  those  animals  regarding  which  there 
were  either  no  known  Cestoidea  special  to  them,  or  they  were  little 
known  previously.  In  man  and  the  domestic  animals  were  found 
those  which  infest  them  in  Europe. 


I. 

Taenia  saginata,  Goeze. 

18. 

Taenia  gracilis.  Zed.  (Kr.) 

2. 

.. 

marginata,  Batsch. 

19. 

5' 

laevis,  Bloch  (Diesing). 

3- 

.. 

coenurus,  v.  Siebold. 

20. 

villosa,     ,,                   [Duj.) 

4- 

,, 

crassicoUis,  Rud. 

21. 

11 

serpentulus,   Schrank     (non 

5- 

., 

echinococcus,  v.  Siebold. 

22. 

11 

angulata  Rud.    (T.   serpen- 

6. 

?? 

cucumerina,  Rud. 

tulus,  Duj.) 

7- 

V 

elliptica,          ,, 

23. 

11 

Petrocinclae,  n.s. 

8. 

expansa,          ,, 

24. 

11 

constricta,  Mo) in. 

9- 

•  ) 

denticulata.     ,, 

25. 

11 

affinis,  Kr. 

10. 

11 

mamillana,  Mehlis. 
(T.  perfoliata,  Duj.,  non 

Goeze) 

26. 

undulata,  Rud.  (T.  angulata, 
Duj.) 

II. 

11 

transversaria,  n.s. 

27. 

11 

polyarthra,  n.s. 

12. 

11 

microphallos,  Kr. 

28. 

11 

intricata,  n.s. 

13 

variabilis,  Rud. 

29. 

11 

planirostris.  n.s.           [Duj.). 

14. 

innominata,  n.s. 

30. 

11 

infundibuliformiSjGoeze  (non 

15- 

„ 

paradoxa,  Rud. 

Z^' 

11 

orientalis,  n.s. 

16. 

11 

obvelata,  n.s. 

32. 

11 

praecox,  n.s. 

17 

11 

malleus,  Goeze. 

33- 

dehiscens,  n.s. 

6i6 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


34.  Taenia  Caprimulgi,  n.s. 

35.  ,,         cesticillus,  Moliii. 

36.  „         tetragona.      ,, 

37.  „         Urogalli  (T.  tumens,  Mehlis; 

T.  microps,  Dies.). 

38.  „         crassula,  Rud.  (incl.  T.  sphe- 

nocephala,  Rud.) 

39.  „        perlata,  Goeze. 


40.  Taenia  mastigophora,  n.s. 

41.  ,,         megalops,  Nitzsch. 

42.  „         truncata,  n.s. 

43.  „         Pseudopodis.  n.s. 

44.  „         osculata.  Goeze. 

45.  Bothriocephalus  latus.  Rud. 

46.  Bothridium  s. 

47.  Ligula  s. 


List  of  the  species  (of  Cestodes)  found  in  Turkistan,  in  man  and  various  animals. 


MAMMALIA. 


I. 

45- 


Homo.  Man. 
Taenia  mediocanellata. 
Bothriocephalus  latus. 

Canis  familiaris.     Dog. 
Taenia  marginata. 
„        coenurus. 
,,        cucumerina. 

Felis  catus.     Cat. 
Taenia  crassicoUis. 
elliptica. 

Equus  caballus.     Horse. 
Taenia  mamillana. 


Bos  taurus.     Ox. 
9.  Taenia  denticulata. 

Ovis  aries.     Sheep. 
2.  Taenia  marginata  (Cysticercus). 
5.      „         echinococcus  (scolex). 
8.      „         expansa. 

Capra  hircns.     Goat. 
2.  Taenia  marginata  (Cysticercus). 
8.      „         expansa. 

Arctomys,  s.     Marmot. 
[I.  Taenia  transversaria. 


AVES. 


14. 


Anas.     Dtick. 
Taenia  malleus. 
„        gracilis. 
„        laevis. 
„        tetragona  ? 
„        megalops. 

Genus  et  spec,  ignot. 
Taenia  innominata. 


Scolopax,  s. 
Taenia  paradoxa. 
Vanellus  cristatus 


Snipe. 
Lapwing. 


Taenia  microphallos. 
variabilis. 


Gallus  domesticus.    F^wl. 
30.  Taenia  infundibuliformis. 

35.  „         cesticillus. 

36.  „         tetragona. 

Perdix  graeca.     Greek  Partridge. 

37.  Taenia  (Urogalli  ?) 
Megaloperdix  NigellL    NigelFs  Snaiv- 

Partridge. 
20.  Taenia  villosa. 
37.      ,,         Urogalli. 


Pterocles  alchata.     Sand-Grouse. 
16.  Taenia  obvelata. 

Colomba  livia.     Rock-Dove. 
38.  Taenia  crassula. 

Columba  turtur.     Turtle-Dove. 
38.  Taenia  crassula. 

Upupa  epops.     European  Hoopoe.. 
28.  Taenia  intricata. 

Corvus  comix.     Hooded  Crotv. 
21.  Taenia  serpentulus. 
26.      „         undulata. 

Corvus  frugilegus.     Rook. 
25.  Taenia  afTinis. 

Corvus  monedula.     Jackdaw, 

21.  Taenia  serpentulus. 
24.      ,,         constricta. 

Pica  caudata.     Magpie. 
24.  Taenia  constricta. 

Alauda  cristata.     Crested  Lark. 

22.  Taenia  angulata. 


APPENDIX  A,— VERMES. 


617 


Alauda,  s. 
29.  Taenia  planirostris. 
Fetrocincla  cyanea.  Bhie  Rock-  Thrush. 
23.  Taenia  Petrocinclae. 
Turdus  viscivorus.  Mistletoe  Thrush. 
22.  Taenia  angiilata. 

Turdus,  s. 

26.  Taenia  undulata. 

Cinclus  aquaticus.     Dipper. 

27.  Taenia  polyarthra. 
33.      „         dehiscens. 


Caprimulgus,  s.     Goatsucker. 
34.  Taenia  Caprimulgi. 

Saxicola  oenanthe.     Wheatear. 

31.  Taenia  orientalis. 

Ruticilla  erythrogastra.     Red- bellied 
Redstart. 

32.  Taenia  praecox. 

Falco  cenchris.     Lesser  Kestrel 

39.  Taenia  perlata. 

Milvus  ater  (Milvus  melanotis  ?) 
Black  Kite. 

40.  Taenia  mastigophora. 


Agama  sanguinolenta. 

42.  Taenia  truncata. 


Pseudopus  Pallasii. 
43.   Taenia  Pseudopodis. 


PISCES. 

Silurus  glanis.     Silurus. 
44.  Taenia  osculata. 

[In  returning  the  proof  of  the  above,  Dr.  Krabbe  is  good  enough  to 
inform  me  that  his  part  of  Vermes  collected  by  Fedchenko  embraced 
only  the  Ceotoidea,  and  that  the  JVe?natoidea ,  Trematoda^  and  Acan- 
thoce;phala  have  been  described  by  Dr.  von  Linstow,  of  Hameln,  in 
Germany,  and  published  in  the  Aj'chiv  fiir  N'aturgeschichte,   1883. 

M.  Grube,  of  Breslau,  undertook  the  description  of  certain  other 
worms,  external  parasites  of  birds  {Pediculma),  etc.  He  did  not 
survive,  however,  to  complete  his  work  for  the  "  Travels  in  Turkistan," 
though  Madame  Fedchenko  informs  me  that,  after  his  death,  the 
description  of  the  parasites  was  published  in  some  German  periodical 
of  Natural  Histor}\ — H.L.'\ 


APPENDIX    B. 


THE    FLORA     OF   RUSSIAN    TURKISTAN. 

IN  considering  the  flora  of  Turkistan, — if  we  start, 
with  its  fauna,  from  the  north-east,  we  begin  with  th( 
Russian  botanist  Sivers,  who  at  the  end  of  the  last  century 
penetrated  to  the  Tarbagatai  mountains.  We  have  nexl 
Ledebour,  who,  in  1826,  travelled  up  the  Irtish  to  Lakt 
Zaisan,  and  14  years  afterwards  published  an  enumeratior 
of  plants  in  "  the  whole  Russian  Empire."  Dr.  Schrenk  also 
from  1840  to  1843,  collected  plants  in  Sungaria  in  th( 
Tarbagatai,  Ala-Tau,  and  about  the  Ala-Kul,  which  wen 
described  first  by  Fischer  and  Meyer,  and  afterwards  b} 
Schrenk,  to  the  number  of  937  species.  Further,  ir 
1 841,  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Ala-Kul,  and  the  uppe: 
courses  of  the  Lepsa,  Sarkan,  and  Baskan  rivers,  to  the 
snow  line  in  Eastern  Sungaria,  were  visited  by  Karelin  anc 
Kiriloff,  whose  collection  numbered  932  species. 

Thus  matters  remained  until  Semenoff,  in  1857,  crossed  th( 
Hi,  and  pushed  on  to  the  northernmost  range  of  the  Thiai 
Shan,  called  the  Trans-Ili,  or  Southern  Ala-Tau.  Hi 
collection  of  plants  of  1,234  species  was  described  by  Rege 
and  Herder,  and  to  this  I  shall  presently  recur.  Ten  year 
later  a  journey  was  made  further  to  the  south  by  Osten 
Sacken,  and  as  a  result  about  250  botanical  species  wen 
described  by  Ruprecht  in  74  pages  of  the  Memoirs  of  th 
Academy  of  Sciences  in  Petersburg. 

If  next  we  approach  Turkistan  from  the  north-west,  w< 
have  Alexander  Lehmann  crossing  the  Urals,  and   proceed 


APPEXDIX  B.— PREFACE   TO   THE  FLORA.        619 

ing  to  the  Aral  Sea,  Bokhara,  and  Samarkand,  and  returning 
through  the  Kirghese  Steppe  (1839-42).  His  plants, 
numbering  1,523  species  in  cxv.  orders,  were  described  by 
Bunge  in  1850-52.  Further  west  we  have  an  enumeration 
of  plants  collected  by  Gr.  Karelin,  in  Turkmenia  and 
Northern  Persia — a  simple  list  extending  to  973  species. 
Two  other  names  occurring  in  connection  with  plants  in 
Turkmenia  are  Grodekoff,  who  gave  "  two  small  lists  of 
plants  "  ;  and  Maloma,  who  adds  a  list  of  plants  to  his  de- 
scription of  the  route  from  Krasnovodsk  to  Dekcha.  There 
should  also  be  noticed  Borszov,  who  published  in  1865  his 
"  Materials  for  the  Botanical  Geography  of  the  Aralo- 
Caspian,"  in  an  appendix  to  vol.  vii.  of  the  Journal  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  at  Petersburg. 

Fedchenko's  name,  though  not  so  great  in  flora  as  in 
fauna,  must  not  be  omitted  in  connection  with  the  botany 
of  Turkistan,  for  when  he  came  back  with  his  5,000  species 
of  animals,  he  brought  also  1,800  species  of  plants.  Under 
his  direction,  attention  was  turned  first  to  the  scientific 
investigation  of  plants  cultivated  in  Central  Asia,  and  more 
especially  such  as  had  a  practical  value,  of  which  there  were 
more  than  jo*  The  bulbs  and  seeds  he  brought  were  planted, 
to  the  number  of  100  species,  in  the  botanical  garden  of 
Moscow  University,  with  satisfactory  results.  One  volume 
of  Fedchenko's  "  Travels  in  Turkistan  "  consists  of  "  Descrip- 
tions of  new  and  rare  plants  collected  by  Madame  Fedchenko," 
by  E.  Kegel  ;  there  is  another  on  "  Astragali,"  by  Bunge  ; 
and  a  third  on  "  Primulaceae  et  Liliaceae,"  by  E.  Regel. 

A  more  recent  traveller,  who  has  been  further  than  Fed- 
chenko  to  the  south  and  west,  is  Dr.  Capus,  who  is  now 
publishing  his  "  Indications  sur  le  climat  et  vegetation  du 
Turkistan  "  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Natnrelles. 

But  the  name  that  stands  above  others  in  Central  Asian 
botany,  as  Fedchenko's  does  in  zoology,  is  that  of  Regel 
— father  and  son.  The  father,  E.  Regel  (who  has  kindly 
looked     over     this    preface     for     me)     is    Director    of    the 

*  I  have  alluded  to  most  of  them  in  vol.  i.,  chap,  xxxii  ,  as  also  in  chap,  xxxvii., 
P-  5575  to  some  of  the  list  of  plants  and  vegetable  products  of  Turkistan  drawn  up 
by  the  Committee  in  the  "  Instructions  "'  to  the  Expedition. 


620  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

Botanical  Gardens  in  Petersburg,  and  the  son,  Dr.  Albe 
Kegel,  a  district  surgeon  in  Turkistan.  In  1879,  Dr.  Albe 
Kegel  made  a  famous  journey  beyond  the  Kussian  border  t 
Turfan.  He  has  explored  botanically  the  regions  east  ( 
Kuldja,  also  Semirechia,  Sungaria,  the  entire  Thian  Shan,  an 
all  the  Ala-Tau,  the  districts  about  Tashkend  and  Samarkan 
Eastern  Bokhara  as  far  as  Darwaz,  Shignan,  etc.,  and  we: 
as  far  as  Merv.  Whilst  the  younger  Kegel  has  thus  wide! 
gathered,  the  elder  Kegel  has  given  descriptions  of  Turkists 
collections.  He  published,  in  1875,  "New  Plants  Growin 
in  the  Turkistan  Region,"  and  later  have  appeared  sever; 
monographs  (Rosaceae,  Berberideae^  etc.)  from  his  pen  in  tl" 
Gartenflora,  the  TransactioJis  of  the  Botanical  Gardens  of  i 
Petersburg,  and  the  "Description  of  new  and  rare  Turkists 
plants  collected  by  Madame  Fedchenko,  as  well  as  t 
Korolkoff,  Kuschakewicz  (who  visited  the  Pamir),  A.  Keg( 
and  Krause "  ;  but  a  complete  list  of  the  plants  of  Centr 
Asia  has  yet  to  be  compiled.* 

For  the  present  it  will  be  seen  that  our  available  infc 
mation  concerning  the  Turkistan  flora  is  more  fragmenta 
than  that  relating  to  its  fauna  ;  and  accordingly,  when 
went  to  Kew  to  ask  for  a  list  of  plants  that  would  give  son 
idea  of  the  flora  of  Kussian  Central  Asia,  I  was  told  th 
no  such  list  existed,  and  that,  were  I  a  botanist,  it  would  tal 
me  two  years  to  make  one.  I  found,  however,  at  the  Linne; 
Society's  library,  which  was  most  kindly  placed  at  my  s( 
vice,  the  list  of  Semenoff's  plants  as  described  by  Kegel  ai 
Herder.  I  was  told  that  the  list  was  so  far  representati 
that  it  might  probably  be  used  for  a  foundation  by  anyo 
desiring  to  make  a  fuller  list,  and  I  therefore  give  it  beloil 


ENUMRRATION  OF  PLANTS  COLLECTED  BY  P.  SEMENOl 
NORTH  AND  SOUTH  OF  THE  ILI,  IN  1857. 

By  E.  Kegel  and  F.  von  Herder. 

Semenoff's  journeys  touched  three  extensive  districts : — (>1)  'J 
Northern,  or  Sungarian  Ala-Tau  ;  (fi)  The  Southern,  or  Trans-Ili  A 
Tau  ;  and  (C)  The  Thian  Shan,  about  Issik-Kul. 

*  Madame  Fedchenko  informs  me  that  she  has  commenced  to  make  a  Hst  of 
Turkistan  plants,  which,  though  not  more  than  half  done,  numbers  940  specie 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA.  621 

(/l)  l^he  Norther 71  Ala-Tau  at  its  western  extremity  sinks  into 
the  broad  low  country  of  the  Steppe,  which  extends  at  an  altitude  of 
between  1,500  to  500  Paris  feet  to  the  Balkhash  basin.  The  highland 
proper  extends  easterly  to  the  low  country  between  the  Ala-Kul  and 
Hi,  and  has  a  central  crest  with  an  average  height  of  6,000',  with 
peaks  exceeding  12,000'.*  It  embraces  the  Arassan  chain,  the  Djonke 
plateau,  the  Kopal,  Djangys  Agach,  Altyn-Immel,  Alaman,  and  the 
Kalii  chains.  Only  three,  however,  of  the  numerous  rivers  and  streams 
of  this  district  reach  the  Balkhash  Lake,  the  others  losing  themselves 
in  the  extensive  sandy  downs  and  reed  marshes  of  the  Steppe. 

(fi)  The  Southern  Ala-Tau,  between  the  Hi  depression  and  the 
Issik-Kul  plateau,  rises  at  a  distance  of  about  40  miles  south  of  the 
Hi,  as  a  colossal  range,  the  central  portion  of  which  reaches  high 
above  the  snow  line.  Its  crest  has  an  average  height  of  8,000',  and  its 
peaks  of  nearly  15,000'.  This  mountain  chain,  of  about  130  miles  in 
length,  consists  of  two  about  equally  lofty,  parallel,  crystalline-formed 
crests,  which  in  the  middle  are  joined  by  a  bold  granitic  cross-yoke. 
The  interval  between  the  crests  is  filled  with  layers  of  sedimentary 
stone  trending  from  east  to  west.  The  upper  part  of  these  strata  is 
formed  of  mountain  limestone,  the  lower  of  silicious  and  clay  shales, 
probably  belonging  to  the  transition  period  of  the  mountain  range. 
The  most  important  section  of  this  chain  is  the  Talgarnyn-Tal-Choku, 
which  attains  a  height  of  14,000'.  To  the  west  of  this  mountain  are 
situated  the  Keskelen  and  Almaty  passes,  to  the  east  the  Chinbulak 
and  Maibulak  passes,  all  of  them  at  a  height  of  from  7,000'  to  10,000'. 
The  most  important  rivers  of  this  district,  and  southern  tributaries  of 
the  Hi  are  the  Chilik  with  its  confluent  the  Jenishke,  then  the  Talgar 
rising  in  the  Talgarnyn-Tal-Choku,  with  the  two  Almaty  rivers.  , 

{C)  The  ^portion  of  the  Thian  Shan  visited  by  Semen  off  is  separated 
from  the  southern  Ala-Tau  by  a  plateau  about  50  miles  broad  and  150 
long,  in  which  there  is  spread  out  the  basin  of  the  Issik-Kul.  The 
climate  of  the  surrounding  plateaus  is  considerably  rougher  than  that 
of  the  low  countr}^  of  the  Hi,  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  since  the 
Thian  Shan  attains  an  average  height  on  its  crest  of  11,000,  and  on  its 
peaks  of  nearly  20,000  Paris  feet  Fine  mountain  streams,  more  than 
40  in  number,  rising  in  the  southern  Ala-Tau  and  in  the  Thian  Shan, 
run  straight  across  these  valleys,  and  transform  the  usually  sterile 
Steppe  soil  into  fertile  arable  land.  Amongst  the  streams  may  be 
mentioned  the  Kokdjar,  the  Karkara,  the  Tiib,  the  Turgen-Aksu,  the 
Kachka-su,  the  Zauku,  the  Sary-Djas,  and  a  few  sources  of  the  Naryn. 
All  the  mountain  spurs  on  both  banks  of  the  lake  consist  of  crystalline 
rocks,  namely,  granite  and  syenite,  which  are  themselves  generally 
overlaid  with  a  sedimentary  conglomerate.  The  main  crest  of  the 
Thian  Shan  again  is  not  uniform  throughout  its  whole  length,  but 
appears  between  the  Sary-Djas  gorge  and  the  easterly  sources  of  the 
Naryn  to  fork  out,  and  run  further  to  the  west  in  two  parallel  crests, 
separated  by  the  important  longitudinal  valley  of  the  Naryn.  Amongst 
the  most  important  of  the  passes  of  this  range  of  mountains  which 
Semenoff  visited,  is  the  Zauku  pass,  the  absolute  height  of  which 
reaches  10,430',  and  the  Kokdjar  pass  attaining  a  height  of  10,800  feet. 

In  all  three  districts  (>1,  B,  C,)  maybe  clearly  distinguished  five  (and  if 
the  snow  zone  is  included,  six)  natural  zones  :- (i)  The  Steppe  zone, 
south  of  the  Balkhash  Lake,  of  500'  to   1,500',  occasionally  2,000  feet, 

*  Pari.>  feet  {ixt  English),  and  so  throughout  this  appendix  on  Flora. 


622  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

includes  the  best  winter  stations  of  the  nomads,  in  consequence  of  i 
mild  climate,  and  the  almost  total  absence  of  snow.  This  zor 
possesses  quite  the  characteristic  flora  of  the  Aralo-Caspian  depressio 
in  its  Halophytes,  Artemis /as,  Astragali,  Tamarisks,  etc.  {2)  77. 
cultivated  zo)ie  of  from  1,500'  to  4,000'  contains  the  finest  arable  land: 
In  its  herbaceous  plants  this  zone  has  much  more  resemblance  1 
those  of  the  European,  Russian,  and  West  Siberian  lowlands.  Neve 
theless,  amongst  them  occur  also  some  genuine  Asiatic  forms,  such  £ 
Sophora  alopecicroides.  Rheum  cuiieatum,  etc.  (3)  The  Pinc-tn 
zoiie  of  4,000'  to  7,600'  contains  timber  suitable  for  fixed  settlement: 
The  Pijius  Schrenkiana  is  a  characteristic  of  this  zone.  The  n 
mainder  of  the  tree  vegetation  consists  of  Populus  tremula,  I 
suaveolens,  Betula  microphylla,  Sorbus  Aucuparia,  and  some  specie 
of  Salix.  (4)  The  Alpine  meadow  zone  of  from  7,600'  to  9,00- 
includes  the  healthiest,  and  for  the  nourishment  of  cattle  the  riches 
summer  stations  of  the  nomads.  Of  bushes  there  are  found  Juniperh 
Pseudosabina,  Caragana  jubata,  some  Spireas  and  Poteittilla: 
The  Alpine  plants  consist  not  onl}^  of  its  own  peculiar  descriptions,  bi 
also  of  the  Altai,  Caucasian,  European,  and  even  Himalayan  form; 
(5)  2 he  High  Alpine  and  glacier  zone,  from  9,000'  to  11,200',  cor 
tains  the  following  distinguishing  high  Alpine  plants  : — Oxygraph, 
glacialis,  IIegemo7ze  lilacina.  Ranunculus  altaicus,  var.  f rater nu. 
Draba  pilosa,  stellata,  etc.  (6)  The  s?ww  zone  from  the  line  of  pei 
petual  snow  (11,200  feet)  up  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains. 


[In  the  following  lists,  the  Rev.  W.  W.  Tyler  has  kindly  supplied  th 
English  equivalents,  and  after  each  order  the  number  of  species  therei 
found  respectively  in  Central  Asia  and  f bracketed)  \n  Britain.     "B 
comparison  of  these,"   Mr.  T3der  remarks,   "it   is   interesting  to  not 
how  orders  represented  by  numerous  species  at  home  ma}'^  be  looke 
for  in  similar  proportions  in  Turkistan.''     It  should  be   rememberer 
however,  that  the  figures  relating  to  Great  Britain  are  furnished  b}'  man 
labourers  working  for  many  years,  whereas  the  Central  Asian  list  reprt 
sents  the  collection  of  one  traveller  only,  during  one  journey,  and  mu'^ 
therefore, be  regarded  as  incomplete.     Bearing  this  in  mind,  however. 
may  be  noticed  from  the  materials  before  us  that  the  number  of  ordc. 
found  in  Great  Britain,  btit  absent  in  Turkistan^  is  about  25,  whereas  th 
number  of  orders  found  in  Turkistan,  but  absent  in  Britain,  is  only  9 
and  each  of  these  contains  a  very  limited  number  of  species.     Man 
hundreds  of  Lichens,  Mosses,  Hepatica^,  etc.,  found  in  great  Britair 
are  barely  mentioned  in  the  Cryptogamous  plants  of  SemenofFs  lis' 
which  latter,  it  may  be  observed,  contain  several  plants  new  to  scien( 
It   should  also  be  added  that  one  locality  only  is  given  here  to  ea- 
species  or  variety  named,  whereas  in  the  original  there  are  sometir 
several;  and  varieties  of  a  species,  often  numerous  in  the  original,  a 
here  usually  confined  to  one  line. — H.  Z.] 

ABBREVIATIONS  : 

A.  Northern  Ala-Tau.  M.    Mountain. 

B.  Southern  Ala-Tau.  Ch.  Chain. 

C.  Thian  Shan,  about  Issik-Kul.  V.  Valley. 
P.  Pass  or  passes.  St.  Steppe. 
R.  River. 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA 


623 


I.— RANUNCULACEAE  69  (49),  Crowfoot  Family. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-      Eleva- 
som  or  fruit.       tion. 


;)lematis  soongorica,  var.  integrifolia  Traveller's  Joy  B    Kara  Su 

Turkistan 
Takyr  . 
River  Lepsa , 
River  Bukon 
B  River  Almaty 


,,        et  var.  serratifolia 

,,        integrifolia 

,,        orientalis,  var,  vulgaris 

,,  ,.         var.  acutifolia 

^tragene  alpina,  var.  sibirica  . 
rhalictrum  alpinum 

,,  isopyroides     . 

,,  minus,  var.  procerum 

var.  virens 

,,  foetidum  var. 

,,  genuinum  cinereum 

,,  var.  glabruni 

,,  rnajus,  var.  genuinum 

,,  simplex /3  striatum 

Vnemone  Falconeri 

,,         biflora    . 

,,         narcissiflora    . 

,,         /3  monantha   . 

,,         micrantha 
Pulsatilla  patens,  j3  Wolfgangiana 

,,         albana,  y  parviflora  . 
\.donis  aestivalis,  y  parviflora  . 
,,     vernalis,  y  villosa 
,,     d  bipinnatifida 
Jeratocephalus  orthoceras 
■ianunculus  platyspermus 

,,  a  genuinus    . 

,,  y  filiformis     . 

,,  pulchellus,  var,  longicaulis 

,,  Cymbalariae 

,,  hyperboi-eus,  /3  natans 

,,  altaicus,  /3  fraternus 


,,  sulphureus,  a  altaicus 

,,  altaicus,  y  trilobus 
'?  ••  •' 

,,  auricomus,  /3  cassubicu 

,,  polyrhizos 

,,  songaricus     . 

,,  acris,  ji  Stepheni  , 
,,  ••      ^  borealis    . 

,,  polyanthemos 

,,  /3  glabrescens 

,,  lanuginosus   . 

,,  gelidus,  j3  dasycarpus 

,,  sceleratus 
Oxygraphis  glacialis 

Callianthemum  nataefolium 
Caltha  palustris 
TroUius  altaicus 


Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


Meadow  Rue  B  Kurmenti  Pass 
Do.            \ 

B  Turaigyr  Pass 

B  Kurmenti  Pass 


May, 

August 
April 


8,000' 


Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Anevioth 
Do. 
Do. 
Do 
Do. 
? 


\B 


June 
June,    I 

June 

March 

April 


Turkistan 
C    River  Karkara 
\B    Tabulgaty  Pass 
j-4    Arassan  Chain 
B  Various  Passes  May,"7,5oo'-8.ooo 
!       Djil-Karagai 


5,500 

6,000' 

April  and  Ma) 


Pheasant'' s  Eye 

Do. 

Do. 

? 

Crowfoot 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

? 

? 

? 
Marsh  Marigold 
Globe  Flo7ver. 


Kokdjar  Pass 


June, 

April 

May, 

May 

April 


8,000' 
6,400' 


Aral-djel  Pass 
/4    Hi  Valley      . 

Kirghese  Steppe 

River  Cherganak 

Kirghese  Steppe  .  April 
/4    Djangys-Agach  Chain    May 

Zaisan  district 

Zaisan  district 
B   Assyn-Bulak 
0  Tuz-Kok        .         ,  June 
^    Karatau  Chain 
B  Djasjyl-Kal  .         .  May, 
G  Zauku  Pass    . 

Sartau  Mountain  . 
A    Karatau       ,. 
B  Kurmenti  Pass 

Altai  Mountain     , 

Kirghese  Steppe  ,  April 
B  Keghen. 
B  Almaty  Pass  . 
B  Tschilik  Valley 
B  River  Djenishke 
\A   Karatau  Mountain 
B   Vierny  .         .         ,  May 
G  Tuz-Kok        .         ,  July, 
B  Almaty  Valley 
G  Zauku  Pass    .         .  June, 
G  Kokdjar  Pass.        .  June. 
ABC  Mountain  Passes   May 
B  River  Kaldjir         .  May 
B  Almaty  Pass  .  May,    7,500 


8,000' 
10,500' 


9,000' 


.  Aug.,  6,000' 

.July 

•  June 


9,000 

10,000' 
8,000' 


624 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 

Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

^-y-     ^rof  S: 

37- 

Trollius  asiaticus,  ^  typicus     . 

Globe  Flower 

A   Karatau  Chain 

38. 

,,        patulus,  d  sibiricus 

Do. 

B  River  Almaty         .  May 

2,9(1- 

Hegemone  lilacina 

? 

ABC  Mm  Passes     July.  8  to 

39^- 

Eranthis  longistipitata    . 

Winter  Aconite 

Mogol-Tau  .         .  Marcl 

40a. 

Isopyrum  anemonoides  . 

? 

B  C  Mtn.  Passes      July,  7  tc 

40^, 

,.         fumarioides     . 

? 

Gurjewsk 

41. 

.,         grandiflorum  . 

? 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes     July,  8  t 

42a. 

•Aquilegia  glandulosa,  var.  jucunda 

Columbine 

Ivanovsky-bielak  . 

A2b. 

„         lactiflora,  a  leucantha 

Do. 

C  Issyk-Kul      . 

42c. 

..         hybrida  .... 

Do. 

Kopalka  and  Assijberg  I 

43^- 

vulgaris  .... 

Do. 

ABC  Issyk-Kul,  Karatau    ] 

43^- 

Nigella  integrifolia 

Love  in  a  Mist 

Mogol-Tau  .         .  April 

44. 

Delphinium  camptocarpum,  y  songoricum    Larkspur 

Tschingildy  .         .  May 

var.  dasycarpum 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  May 

.,            var.  rugulosum 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  May 

45. 

.,            caucasium,  h  hirsutum  . 

Do. 

Uba  Valley  . 

dictyocarpum,  var.  glaberrinium, 

et  pubiflorum 

Do. 

Kokpekty  Town    . 

46. 

Aconituui  Anthora. 

Monk's  Hood 

Uba  Valley  . 

47- 

Lycoctonum,  t  vulparia    . 

Do. 

River  Djenishke    .  July 

48. 

rotundifolium   . 

Do. 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes      .  July 

49. 

,.          Napellus,  I  racemosum     . 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Pass          ,  Aug. 

50- 

/3  alpinum 

Do. 

B  Keskelen  Pass        .  Aug. 

51- 

Paeonia  anomala,  var.  hybrida 

Pceo)iy 

A  B  Balykty       .         .  May 

II.— BERBERIDEAE  5  (2),  Barberry  Family. 


52. 
53. 

Berberis  heteropoda 
integerrima 
sibirica 

Barberry 
Do. 
Do. 

\B  C  Almaty  Pass,  Tiib  Valle 

\A    Hi  Valley       .         .  May 

S.E.  Altai  Mountains 

54- 

Leontice  vesicaria     . 
altaica 

? 

A   Hi  Valley       .        .  xMay 
River  Albabek      . 

11^.— NYMPH AEACEAE  i.  (3),  Water-lily  Family. 
34.  Nymphaea  Basniniana      .         .         .     WtUer  LJly.      |      River  Kokpekty 


III.-PAPAVERACEAE  12  (10),  Poppy  Family. 


Papaver  alpinum,  var.  crocanthum 

0  nudicaule 

pavoninum 
56.        ,,        arenarium   . 
57a.  Chelidonium  majus 
57<^.  Roemeria  hybrida  . 
57^.  ..        refracta   . 

57^.  ..        l)ic()lor     . 

58a.  Glaucium  squamigerum 
58/;.  ,,       elegans     . 

»>  j> 

59.  Chiazospermum  pendulum 


Poppy 

A  B  Mabulak  Pass 

•  June 

Do, 

Kasu  Mountain 

Do. 

Altai  Mountains 

Do. 

B   River  Turaigyr 

Celandine 

B   Almaty  Pass  . 

Poppy 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  Apri 

Do. 

Turkistan 

.  Apr 

Do. 

Turkistan 

.  May 

Horned  Poppy 

A   Araldjel  Pass 

.  Ma^ 

Do. 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  Mar 

Do. 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

.  May 

? 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

.  May 

APPENDIX  B.— FLORA 


625 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-       Eleva- 
som  or  fruit.        tion. 


IV.— FUMARIACEAE  10  (8),  Fumitory  Family. 


orydalis  rutaefolia  . 

Ledebouriana 
Sewerzowi 
glaucescens 
longiflora  . 
nobilis 
Semenowii 
Gortschakovii 
capnoides 
Fumaria  Vaillantii  . 


Fumitory 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


Near  Ayagus  .  April 

Bugun  .         .         .  March 
Karatau  Pass         .  March,  3,0(X)' 
Mountain  Springs,  May 
Ayagus,  and  Bien  Valley,  April 
Bukonbei  Mountain,  April 
Kurmenti  Pass       .  June,    6,000' 
Kokdjar  Pass         .  June,    8,000' 
Bien  Valleys  .  May 

Bien  Valleys  .  May 


V.  -  CRUCIFERAE  129  (73),  Mustard  Family. 


Barbarea  vulgaris,  var.  arcuata 

„       /3  stricta  . 
Nasturtium  palustre 

, ,  brachycarpum 

Matthiola  runcinata 
,,  Fischeri 

Turritis  glabra 
Vrabis  fruticulosa 

,,      pendula 
;!lardamine  impatien? 
„  parviflora 

^arrya  stenocarpa 

,      nudicaulis,  L.,  /3  linearifolia 
,      flabellata 
vieniocus  linifolius 
'  arsetia  spathulata 
3erteroa  incana 
^silonema  dasycarpum 

>>  >> 

„  longistylum 

\lyssum  minimum    . 
,,       vSzovitsianum 
,,       alpestre,  a  tortuosum 
,,  ,,       a.  microphyllum 

M  ,,        b.  vulgare 

)raba  pilosa,  a  oreades    . 

M  ,,       7  commutata 

„      repens,  var.  legitima 

„      Wahlenbergii 

,,      lactea     . 

J,      stellata,  a  nivalis    . 

„  >i       i3  hebecarpa 

„      rupestris,  a  leiocarpa 

,,      hirta,  a  leiocarpa,  var. 

,,      incana,  L.,  y  hebecarpa 

)i  ,,       Q  confusa  . 

,,      nemorosa,  var 

»  ,,         /3  hebecarpa 

,,      muralis . 
3ochlearia  grandiflora     . 

VOL.  II. 


Rocket 

Do. 

Water  Cress 

Do. 

Stock 

Do. 

Tower  Mustard 

Rock  Cress 

Do. 

Bitter  Cress 

Do. 

? 


? 
? 
? 
? 
? 
? 

Madwort 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Whitlow  Grass 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Scurvy  Grass 


Djassyl-Kul  .         .  May 

Chimkent 

River  Kokpekty    . 

Neighbourhood  of  Salair 

Near  Khojend       .  May 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  September 

Rivulet  Merke        .  April 

Keyssyk-Aus  Pass    May 

River  Djenishke     .  June 
B  C  Rivs,  Talgar,  Tiib.    May,  June 

Zaisan  district. 
A    Araldjel  Pass ;  C  Sary-djas,  May 
B   Rivulet  Merke 
G   S.  Thian  Shan  Mts.  July 

Sources  of  Mai-Dschilik,  May 

Arganaty  Mountains     May 
A  B  Kopal,  Vierny     .  September 

Arganatinsk  .         .  May 

Turkistan       .         .  May,    4,000' 

Kasu  Mountains    . 

Sources  of  Mai-Dschilik,  May 

Mogol-Tau    .         .  April 

Zmeinogorsk  in  Altai 

Banks  of  the  Irtish 

Kasu  Mountains 
C   Turgen  Pass  .         .  [10,000' 

C  Turgen  and  Zauku  Passes,  June, 

Sartau  Mountain 

Sartau  Mountain 
G   Kokdjar  Pass          .  June,    9,900' 
G   Kokdjar  Pass  .June 

A    Karatau 
B   Tschin-Bulak         .  June,    8,000 
A    Alaman  Chain 

Marka-Kul    . 

Sartau  Mountain 
B   River  Merke . 

Syrjanowsk   . 
A    Kara  Su         .         .  May 
A    Hi  Valley       . 

40 


626 


RUSSIA2V  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No.                                  Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Tr.f-^l,>,-              Timeofblos- 
Locahtj.              som  or  fruit. 

88.  Thlaspi  cochleariforme     . 

Penny  Cress 

C   Kokdjar  Pass 

„      ceratocarpum 

Do. 

Zaisan  district 

8            ,,      arvense.  L.           ... 

Do. 

B   Djenishke      . 

.  June 

,,      perfoliatum.  L.    . 

Do. 

Syrjanovsk    . 

.Jan.,M 

90.  Megacarpaea  laciniata 

Kossuldur 

gigantea      . 

Siuliukti-Tau 

.  May, 

91.  Euclidium  syriacum 

A    Hi  Valley       . 

.  May. 

92a.        .,           tataricum 

B  Aschtschy-bulak 

.  May 

92^.  Chorispora  Bungeana 

C  Tiib  Valley    . 

.  June 

,,           /3  pilulosa     . 

B   Vierny  . 

.May 

93.            „           tenella 

Keyssyk-Aus 

.  May 

„                J,      « glabriuscula 

Khojend 

.  May 

..            hispida 

Chimkent 

94.            .,            sibirica 

^    Araldjel 

95.  Malcolmia  africaiia 

/I    Hi  Valley       . 

.,            /3  stenopetala  . 

Djil-Karagai  Pass 

.  Apri: 

„            y  intermedia   . 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  Apri 

runcinata 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  Apri 

Ledebouri 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  Apri 

Bungei    . 

Turkistan 

.,            /3  lasiocarpa    . 

.. 

.  April 

96.  Hesperis  matronal  is 

.  Dame's  Violet 

B   Talgar  . 

.  May 

„         aprica 

Do. 

Gurjewsk 

. 

,,         pachyrhiza 

Do. 

B  Rivulet  Merke 

„        Kunawarensis,  var.  hirtula 

Do. 

B  Vierny  . 

.  April 

97.  Leptaleum  filifolium 

? 

k  B  Ayagus  and  Almaty,  Ma 

98.  Sisymbrium  junceum 

Hedge  imistard 

B    Vierny  . 

.  May 

j3  soongoricum    . 

Do. 

River  Kalgutty 

99.            .,            brassicaeforme    . 

Do. 

B    River  Djenishke 

.  June 

100.            ..            heteromallum     . 

Do. 

/4     Kuian-Kus    . 

.  May 

loi.            ..            Loesellii     . 

Do. 

B    Vierny 

Sophia 

Flixweea 

River  Kokpekty 

*.  May 

nudum,  Sewerzowi,  e 

t  alliaria       ? 

Siuliukti-Tau 

.May 

102.            ,.  ,         contortuplicatum,var. 

parviflorum  ? 

^    River  Hi 

.  May 

103.             ,.            brevipes      . 

? 

k    Ayagus 

.  May 

104.             ..            Thalianum 

? 

B    Vierny . 

.  May 

105.  Erysimum  Cheiranthus,  y  humillir 

tium       IVonnseed 

k  C  Mtn.  Passes 

June, 

,,        versicolor,  /3  dentatum 

Do. 

River  Kalgutty 

,,                ,,            y  integerrin 

aum          Do. 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  April 

,,        collinum 

Do. 

B    Vierny  . 

.  May 

,,        sisymbrioides 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe . 

.  May 

106.            ,,        Cheir.,  a  subviride 

Do. 

B    Talgar 

.  May 

,,            ,,      (i  subincanum 

Do. 

Zaisan  district 

.May 

,,        cheiranthoides 

Do. 

River  Kokpekty 

1,        virgatum 

Do. 

Neighbourhood  of  Salair 

„               „         /5  strictum 

Do. 

Djei-Tau  Mtn. 

107a.          ,,        canescens,  var.  subinte§ 

jerrimum  Do. 

B    Vierny  . 

'.  May 

107^.          ,,        repandum 

Do, 

Turkistan      . 

lo^c.  Tetracme  quadricornis,  /3  longico 

mis               ? 

Mogol-Tau   . 

.  April 

108.  Taphrospermum  altaicum 

? 

C    Kokdjar  Pass 

109.  Camel  ina  microcarpa     . 

.  Gold  0/ Pleasure 

B    River  Merke 

.  April, 

,,        /3  brevistyla     .         t 

Do. 

'      Ural  Steppe . 

.  July 

no.  Eutrenia  Edwardsii 

? 

\C    Schaty. 

.  June 

III.          „        alpestre    . 

? 

\B  C  Karkara      . 

.  June 

112.  Capsella  procumbens 

Shepherd's  Purst 

'\B    Arassan 

.  May 

113.          ,,       Bursa  pastoris 

Do. 

1      Everywhere,  road 

sidf-,  e 

I 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA, 


627 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Tor-iHtv               Time  of  bios-    Eleva- 
L°*^'^'''>-               som  or  fruit.       tion. 

Hutchinsia  pectinata,  y  densiflora  .  Rock HutchinsiaO 

Kokdjar  and  Keskelen  Passes. 

,,         calycina,  var.  incana     . 

Do. 

Altai  Mts.     . 

[6  to  10.000' 

,,                ,,       var.  pectinata 

Do. 

i 

Sartau  Mountain 

,,         alba,  a  typica 

Do. 

'5 

River  Merke 

Lepidium  Draba,  ^  longistylum 

Pepper 

Wort^ 

Karatau 

.  July 

,,          coronopifolium  var. 

Do. 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  xMay 

.,         latifolium,  /3  acutum 

Do. 

B 

Almaty 

•  June 

„          ruderale 

Do. 

B 

Almaty 

,,          perfoliatum    . 

Do. 

A 

Near  River  Lepsa 

May 

,,         latifolium,  y  platicarpum 

Do. 

Zaisan  district 

,,         amplexicaule 

Do. 

River  Kokpekty 

,.          cordatum 

Do. 

Dolon  Kara  Mts. 

,,          crassifolium    . 

Do. 

Mts.  of  Tort-Kel 

Sept.,  3,500' 

,,          Aucheri,  ^  Borszczowi   , 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe 

Physolepidium  repens     . 

? 

Chimkent 

Aethionema  sagittatum  . 

? 

Karatau 

3,000' 

Hymenophysa  pubescens 

? 

i 

Aral  Steppe . 

May-July 

z.  Isatis  sibirica        .... 

Dyer''s 

Woad 

Kirghese  Steppe 

,,      laevigata     .... 

Do. 

River  Kokpekty 

,,      tinctoria,  L.         .         .         . 

Do. 

B 

River  Talgar 

,,      emarginata 

Do. 

Mtns.  of  Syr-daria 

May 

,,      minima        .... 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe,  Kara-Kum,May 

'.  Pachypteris  multicaulis 

A 

River  Ayagus 

..                /3  dasycarpa 

Mogol-Tau    . 

April 

.,                 y  leiocarpa 

District  of  the  Syr 

-daria,  June 

I.  Goldbachia  laevigata    . 

B 

Turaigyr  Chain 

May,    6, 100' 

,,           /3  adscendens      . 

? 

Chimkent 

May 

'.  Tauscheria  desertorum,  a  lasiocarpa 

? 

i 

Aral  Steppe  . 

April 

"           i^  gymnocarpa     . 

? 

' 

Khojend 

.May 

.  Sterigma  tomentosa 

? 

Djus-Agach  . 

.  July 

/.  Lachnoloma  Lehmanni 

? 

Mogol-Tau    . 

.  April 

.  Spirorhynchus  sabulosus 

? 

1 

Aral  Steppe  . 

May 

'.  Brassica  Besseriana 

Rape 

Kirghese  Steppe 

May 

n  Bunias  cochlearioides   . 

? 

1 

The  Black  Irtish 

[May 

;.  Eruca  sativa         .... 

? 

1 

Khojend,  Bugun, 

.     Jan.,  Feb.. 

.  Crambe  Sevverzowi 

Seakal 

e         1 

Spur  of  Kcharli-T 

au,  May 

VI.— CISTINEAE  I  (6),   Rockrose  Family. 
Helianthemum  soongoricum  .         .  Rock-rose    \  A  B  \X\  Valley.  Turaigyr  2  to  4,000' 


VII.— VIOLARIEAE  9  (8),    Violet  Family. 

Viola  Gmeliniana,  /3  glabra    . 

Violet,  Pansy 

C    Zauku  Pass  .         .  June,   10.000' 

,.    hirta      .... 

Hairy  Violet 

A    Alatau  7  Rivers    . '             3,000' 

..    montana.  a  elatior 

Violet 

On  heath  lands      . 

/3  pratensis      . 

Do. 

Syrjanovsk    . 

..    canina,  var.  rupestris     . 

Dog  Violet 

A    Arassan         .         .  May,     3,000' 

..    biflora,  /3  acutifolia 

Do. 

B  C  Almaty,  Zauku    .  May.  June 

.,    uniflora 

Do. 

Zarevno-Alexandrovsk 

;.    grandiflora    . 

Do. 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes    May,      7-9,000 

.     tricolor 

Heai-tsease 

Village  Mjakoticha 

628 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-       El 
som  or  fruit.        ti' 


127. 
128. 


VIII. 

Parnassia  palustris. 
Laxmanni, 


■DROSERACEAE  2  (4),  Sundeiv  Family. 
Grass  of      \      In  Marshlands 


var.  subacaulis   [  Parnassus     \A  B  C  Streams 


IX.— POLYGALEAE  i  (3),  Milkwort  Family. 
[29.  Polygala  vulgaris,  j3  comosa  .         .  Milkivort    \  BO  Turaigyr 


X.— SILENEAE  30  (25),  Pink 


130. 

Diant 

lius  campestris,  /3  glaber 

131- 

,, 

alpinus,  var.  Semenovii 

132. 

»> 

crinitus 

133- 

j> 

superbus  (fl.  alb.)  . 

5J 

,,        var.  subobtusus 

134- 

»> 

recticaulis 

135- 

Gysophila  muralis           .         .         . 

136. 

jj 

acutifolia,  var.  Gmelirii . 

137- 

5> 

paniculata      . 

138. 

,, 

altissima 

139- 

Vacca 

ria  vulgaris   .         .         .         . 

140. 

Silene  inflata  var.  .... 

141. 

?) 

graminifolia  var. 

142. 

»> 

repens          .         .         .         . 

143- 

J} 

Otites,  var.  Wolgensis 
,,      var.  parviflora  . 

144. 

>> 

lithophila    .         .         .         . 

145- 
146. 

55 

5» 

holopetala  .         .         .         . 
multiflora,  et  var. 

147. 

»> 

Semenovii  .         .         .         . 

148. 

,, 

viscosa         .         .         .         . 

149. 

>> 

,,      /3  quadriloba     . 

150. 

,, 

nana   .         .         .         .         . 

150a 

j> 

nutans          .         .         .         . 

151- 

>> 

altaica          .         .         .         . 
chlorantha  .         .         .         . 

152. 

>» 

saxatilis       .         .         .         . 

153- 

Lychnis  apetala      .         .         .         . 

5» 

,,      /3  caespitosa    . 
,,      f  uralensis 

i53« 

Floscuculi. 

153^ 

>) 

sibirica      .         .         .         . 

154. 

Acanthophyllum  spinosum    . 

155- 

,,              paniculatum 

Pink 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


Catchjly 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Campion 

Do. 

Do. 
Raf^s^ed  Robin 
Campion 
■> 

? 


Family. 

River  Kokpekty 

Kopal  Chain 
0  Aksu  Valley 

Djel-Tau       . 

River  Keskelen 

Vierny  . 

Vierny  . 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Kirghese  Steppe 

River  Karkara 

Valleys  in  Alatau , 

Issyk-Kul  Plateau 

Kurmenty  Pass 

Near  Salair  . 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Zaisan 

Kurmenty  Pass 

Kopal  Chain 

River  Kokpekty 

River  Tabga 

Near  Kopal 

Toert-Koel   . 

Hi  Valley      . 

Near  Salair  . 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Grantiboden 

Chilik  Valley 

Kurmenty  Pass 

River  Tekes 

Alaman  Chain 

On  Heathland 

Gurjewsk 
B  Hi  Valley     . 

Sary-bulak    . 


Tune 
June 


June 


May 


3  to 


XL— ALSINEAE  22  (38),  Chickiveed  Family. 


156.  Sagina  Linnaei       ....  Pearlwort 

^57*        »»      globulo^a    ....  Do. 

158.  ,,  verna.  /3  vulgaris,  var.  micropetala  Do. 
,,  ,,  var.  macropetala  .  Do. 
,,      alpestris  var.       .         .         .  Do. 

159.  Alsine  biflora, /3  carnulosa     .         .  Sandwort 

160.  ,,      Villarsii,  /3  psilosperma       .  Do. 


I      Tarbagatai  Mtns.  .  June 
B    River  Chilik 
A    Kopal  Chain 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mnts. 
'^  B  Kopal  Chain 
I      Kurmenty  Pass     .  Jn; 

River  Zauku 


APPENDIX   B. —FLORA. 


62g 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T  ^^oi.-f,-              Time  of  bios-       Eleva- 
Localit>.              som  or  fruit.        tion. 

.  Arenaria  longifolia 

Sandwort 

Kirghese  Steppe  . 

,,       graminifolia  var. 

Do. 

Riddersk       . 

,,       serpyllifolia 

Do. 

B    River  Djenishke   . 

.  Moehringia  laterifolia,  (i  intermedia 

Do. 

River  Kaldjir 

,,                „          6  angustifolia 

Do. 

Islands  in  River  Obi 

,,                ,,           6  umbrosa     . 

Do. 

B    River  Tabulgaty   . 

,,                ,,           ?  gracilis 

Do. 

Marka-Kul    .         .  Jmie 

a.  Stellaria  nemorum.  et  vars.  . 

Stitchwort 

Village  Osotschicha 

,,       glauca,  et  vars. 

Do. 

B    River  Kurmenty   .  May,6-6,5co' 

.  Cerastium  pilosum 

Mouse-ear 

Zarevno-Alexandrovsk 

,,         trigynum,  et  vars.  . 

Do. 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes       .  May,    7-900' 

,,         maximum,  /3  falcatum    . 

Do. 

A    River  Lepsa . 

,,         lithospermum  var. 

Do. 

B    River  Turgiien      .      8  to  9,000' 

,,         dahuricum 

Do. 

ABO  River  Karkara  . 

,,         vulgatum,  /3  glandulosum 

Do. 

Marka-Kul    .         .  May 

,,         alpinum  var. 

Do. 

0    River  Karkara       .    5,500-6,500' 

,,         inflatmn 

Do. 

B    River  Almaty        .              6,000' 

,,         arvense  var.   . 

Do. 

k    Kopal  Chain 

XII.— LINEAE  I  (5),  Flax  Family. 
Linum  perenne       ....  Flax        \  B    River  Almaty 

XIII.— MALVACEAE  5  (8),  Mallai^  Family. 


Lavatera  thuringiaca 
Althaea  officinalis  . 

„  /3  pallida 

„       nudiflora    . 
Malva  borealis 


Tree  Mallow 

Marsh  Mallow 

Do. 

Do. 

Malloav 


B    Vierny  . 

B    Near  Vierny 

Town  Kokpekty 
B    Vierny  . 
B    Vierny  . 


June, 
June 


XIV.— HYPERICENEAE 


Hypericum  Asycron 
,,  perforatum  . 

,,  hirsutum 

,,  scabrum  var. 

,,  hyssopi folium,  et  vars. 


5  (13),  St.  John's  Wort  Family. 

St.  John's  Wort 
Do. 
Do. 


Do. 
Do, 


Uba  Valley  . 
Chilik  Valley 
Boggy  clay  ground 
River  Kaldjir 
Zaisan  district       .  May 


7,500 


3,000 

3,000' 
3,000' 


5,000 


XV.— ACERACEAE  i  (2),  Maple  Family. 
Acer  Semenovii     ....  Maple       \  B   Almaty  Valley 

XVI.— GERANIACEAE  10  (16),  Craneshill  Family. 


3  to  4,000 


Geranium  sibiricum 
, ,         tuberosum 
,,         albiflorum 
,,         pratense 
,,         affine 
,,         saxatile  . 
,,         collinum  vars, 
,,  rectum  var. 

,,         divaricatum 

Erodium  Semenovii 


Cranesbill 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 
Storksbill 


Kopal  . 

Near  Barnaul 

River  Zauku 

River  Kopalka 

River  Albabek 
A  B  River  Kopal 

Bukon  . 
B  C  River  Almaty 

Steppe  near  River  111 

Steppe  near  River  Hi 


5,500-7,000' 
4,000' 
2,000' 


XVII.— BALSAMINEAE  i  (2),  Balsam  Family. 
Impatiens  parviflora  vars.       .         .  Balsam    \  A  B  Mtn.  Passes 


4  to  5,000' 


630 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-       El 
som  or  fruit.        ti 


XVIII.— ZYGOPHYLLACEAE  4 

195.  Zygophyllum  brachypterum   . 

,,  macropterum     . 

196.  Tribulis  terrestris  .... 

197.  Zygophyllacea  (incog.)  . 


(o),   Bean,  Caper,  and  Guiacum  Family. 


Zaisan  district       .  May 
Mtns.  of  Dolon-Kara 

A    River  Hi 

A    Hi  Valley     .         .  2, 


XIX.— RUTACEAE  3  (o),  Rue  Family. 

198.  Peganum  Harmala          ...                 ?  ^    Hi  Valley      . 

199.  Haplophyllum  Sieversii          .         .                 ?  ^  5  Near  River  Lepsa 
2CX).               „             latifolium        .         .                 1  A    Near  Baskan 


•500-3- 


201. 


XX.— DIOSMEAE  i  (o),  allied  to  Rue  Family. 
Dictamnus  Fraxinella     ...  ?  |       Near  the  River  Kaldjar 


XXI.— CELASTRINEAE  i  (2),  Spindletree  Family. 
202.  Euonymus  Semenovii     .         .         .        Spindletree     \  B    River  Djenishke 


XXII.— RHAMNEAE  2  (2)  Buckthorn  Family. 

203.  Rhamnus  catharticus 

Buckthorn 

B    River  Turguen 

204.  Nitraria  Schoberi  .... 

? 

Zaisan  Plateau 

XXIII.— PAPILIONACEAE  124  (78),  Pulse  Family. 

205.  Thermopsis  lanceolata    . 

? 

C    Santasch  Pass 

5 

206.           „            alpina 

? 

B    River  Almaty 

7,800  to  9 

207.  Medicago  platycarpa 

Lucerne 

G    River  Karkara 

7 

208.           „         falcata    .... 

? 

A    Hi  Valley      . 

„        var.  desertorum 

? 

Kirghese  Steppe 

209-  Trigonella  cancellata 

? 

The  Black  Irtish 

210.           „          polycerata     . 

? 

A  B   River  Talgar 

3 

211.  Melilotus  alba 

■     Melilot 

A    Hi  Valley      . 

212.          „         officinalis 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

213.          ,,         pratense 

Do. 

B    Vierny. 

214.           „         fragiferum 

Do. 

A    Arassan  Chain 

215.          „         lupinaster,  et  vars. 

Do. 

B    Vierny. 

216.           „         repens     . 

Do. 

B    Vierny  . 

217.  Lotus  corniculatus .         .         .       / 

lird's  Foot  Trefoil 

C    Issyk-Kul      . 

218.  Glycirrhiza  asperrima     . 

Liquorice 

A  B    Arassan  Chain 

219.          „            /3  desertorum 

Do. 

Near  Sergiopol 

220.           „            ^  intermedia 

Do. 

Tschingyldy  . 

221.          „            ^typica 

Do. 

Djus-agach    . 

222.  Caragana  arborescens     . 

Zaisan  district 

223.           „        frutescens 

Kirghese  Steppe 

224.           „        ,5  mollis . 

Tschakyl-rys 

225.           „        y  intermedia   . 

B   Tschilik  Valley 

226.           „        pygmaea 

Arkalyk 

227.           „        traganthoides,  et  vars. 

B  C  Merke,  Issyk-Ki 

1            5 

228.           „        jubata     . 

C    Zauku  Pass  . 

229.  Halimodendron  argenteum     . 

A    Hi  Valley      . 

230.  Sphaerophysa  salsula      . 

River  Kolgutty 

APPENDIX  B.— FLORA, 


631 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Tnralitv               Time  of  bios-    Eleva- 
Locahty.                ^^^  ^^  ^^^^       ^^^^ 

.  Oxytropis  glabra    .... 

Mt/^  Vetch 

Algissan-adyr 

'•                    ?5 

floribunda,  et  vars. 

Do. 

Balchat  Valley      .  May 

)'                   *? 

cana  («.j-.) 

Do. 

/I 

Alaman 

\'            ;? 

heteropoda  (w.j-.)    . 

Do. 

B 

Kurmenti  Pass  July,  8  to  10,000' 

kashemiriana 

Do. 

B 

Kurmenti  Pass      .  July,     7,000' 

>•            » 

amoena,  et  vars.      . 

Do. 

Issyk-Kul      .         .  July 

'•            » 

ochroleuca  Qn.s.)     • 

Do. 

C 

Karkara        .         .  June,     5,500' 

>.             „ 

fruticulosa  (n.s.)     . 

Do. 

A 

Karatau 

)•                    M 

rupifraga  (n.s.) 

Do. 

Sartau  Mountain  .  June 

J-                   5» 

algida  (n.s.) 

Do. 

A 

Karatau 

I-                   >J 

merkensis  (n.s.) 

Do. 

B 

River  Merke          .  June 

Semenovii  (w.j.)     . 

Do. 

Near  Mai-tiibe      .  May 

)• 

macrocarpa    . 

Do. 

Sartau  Mountain  .  June 

\'                   »» 

platysema 

Do. 

Schaty  Pass  .         .  June 

)•                   5> 

melaleuca 

Do. 

Sartau  Mountain  .  June 

3-         „ 

songorica 

Do. 

Near  River  Takyr,  May 

7- 

uralensis 

Do. 

River  Obi,  near  Barnaul,  June 

3. 

chionophylla  . 

Do. 

Lake  Marka 

?•          .» 

frigida    . 

Do. 

Tabulgaty     . 

3- 

nutans  («.x.)  . 

Do. 

Balyktinschen  Valley,  May 

'•             j> 

pilosa      . 

Do. 

Near  Schlangenberg 

2.             » 

oligantha 

Do. 

A 

Schaty  Pass       June,  7  to  9,000' 

3.  Astragal 

as  alpinus  var.  . 

Do. 

B 

Djenishke      .         .  July 

4-          ;j 

var.  glacialis 

Do. 

Tabulgaty  Pass      . 

brachytropis 

Do. 

c 

Kokdjar  Pass         .  June,  10,000' 

5.          „ 

hemiphaca     . 

,  Do. 

B 

Tschilik  Valley      .  July 

7. 

hypoglottis    . 

Do. 

Tschilik  Valley     .  July 

8. 

cognatus  var. 

Do. 

Near  Kara-Su       .  August 

9- 

brachypus 

Do. 

A 

Ayagus 

0.         „ 

iliensis  (n.s.) 

Do. 

A 

Hi          ...  May 

I-         » 

Halodendron  {n.s.) 

Do. 

A 

Hi          .         .         .  May 

2.          „ 

Semenovii  {n.s.)    . 

Do. 

Mai-tiibe       .         .  May 

3- 

spartioides     . 

Do. 

A 

River  Hi       .         .  May 

4-            ;» 

Turczaninowii 

Do. 

A 

River  Hi        .         .  May 

5- 

arcuatus 

Do. 

River  Tschangly-bulak 

6. 

arganaticus    . 

Do. 

Arganatinsk  .         .  May 

7- 

petraeus 

Do. 

A 

Arassan          .         .May 

8. 

stenoceras     . 

Do. 

Smeinogorsk          .  May 

9- 

stenoceras  (?) 

Do. 

Arganatinsk  . 

0.         „ 

compressus    . 

Do. 

Zaisan  district        .  April 

!•             J» 

unilateralis    . 

Do. 

Sergiopol 

2.             „ 

arbuscula 

Do. 

Zaisan  district        .  May 

3-         " 

sulcatus 

Do. 

Zaisan  district 

4-           M 

vicioides 

Do. 

A 

Sergiopol,  Kopal  .  July 

5- 

Onobrychis   . 

Do. 

Schuljba 

6. 

filicaulis 

Do. 

Near  Karatek        .  May 

7- 

sesamoides    . 

Do. 

Near  Karatek        .  May 

8. 

sphaerophysa 

Do. 

A 

Hi          ...  May 

9. 

Sieversianus 

Do. 

A 

Kopal  . 

0.         J, 

Alopecias 

Do. 

Kara-Su        .         .  August 

I.         )> 

lagocephalus 

Do. 

Sandy  soils  . 

2.          >, 

Schrenkianus 

Do. 

Kara-turuk   .         .  June 

3- 

ellipsoideus   . 

Do. 

A 

Kopal  . 

4-          " 

leuocladus     . 

Do. 

B 

Merke  .         .         .  June 

5*         " 

nivalis  . 

Do. 

Mountain  Passes  .  July    ' 

6.          „ 

altaicus 

Do. 

Near  River  Irtish  .  July 

632 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-       E 
som  or  fruit.         t 


287 
288 
289 
290. 
291 
292 

293 
294 

295 
296 

297 
298 

299 
300 
301 
302 

304 
305 
306 

307 
308 

309 
310 

311 

312 
313 

314 
315 
316 
317 
318 


319 
320 
321 
322 
323 


Astragalus  lithophilus 
„  buchtormensis 

,.  farctus 

,.  flexus 

„  chlorodontus  {n.s.) 

,,  lanuginosus 

,.  lasiopetalus 

..  scabi-isetus 

,,  hypogaeus 

.,  testiculatus 

,,  Pallasii 

Cicer  songoricum  var. 
Vicia  sepium 
..       megalotropis 
,,       Cracca 
,,       lilacina 
„       sylvatica 
„       costata  . 
.,       multicaulis    . 
„       altaicus 
„       tuberosus 
„       pratensis 
Lathyrus  pisiformis 
,,         palustris  • 
Orobus  lathyroides 
„       vemus 
„       subvillosus 
„       Semenovii  (n.s.') 
„       luteus 
,,       albus  var. 
Hedysarum  splendens  var 
„  songoricum 


polymorphum,  et 
neglectum    . 
obscurum     . 
Semenovii  (n.s.) 
sativa,  et  vars. 
j^j.  ,,  pulcliella     . 

324.  Alhagi  Camelorum 

325.  Sophora  alopecuroides   . 

326.  Ammodendron  Sieversii 


Mt^k  Vetch 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

? 
Vetch,  Tare 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Vetchling 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

French  Honeysuckle 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

? 

? 

? 


Tschilik  Valley 
Ayagus 
Ayagus 
Near  River  Lepsa 
Arganatinsk . 
Hi 

Incog. 
Mai-tiibe 
Bajan-Dshuruk 
Near  Barnaul 
Arassan 
River  Karkara 
Kirghese  Steppe 
Salair   . 
River  Karkara 
Kirghese  Steppe 
Salair   . 
Bukunbai 
Salair   . 
Albabek 
Kokpekty 
River  Karkara 
River  Almaty 
Isles  of  River  Obi 
Syrjanowsk  . 
Salair    . 
Arganatinsk  . 
Hi  Valley      . 
River  Almaty 
Near  Barnaul 
Bukunbai 
Kopal   . 
Gurjewsk 
Near  Kopal  . 
B  Mln.  Passes 
Arganaty 
Tarbagatai    . 
Vierny  . 
Hi  Valley      . 
Arassan  Chain 
Hi  Valley      . 


July 


May 

May 
May 

May 


! 


i 


5,Soo  to  8, 


327- 
328. 

329- 
330. 


XXIV. 

Amygdalus  nana 
Prunus  Armeniaca 


prostrata  var 
Padus 


AMYGDALEAE  4  (4) 

Almond 

Cherry 

Do. 

Do. 


Almond  and  Plum  Family. 

District  of  Zaisan 
B    Vierny  . 
k  B  Keyssyk-Aus 

District  of  Zaisan  Mountain 


XXV.— ROSACEAE  47  (93), 

331.  Spiraea  trilobata     ....  Meadow  Sweet 

332.  „         hypericifolia,  j3  microphylla  Do. 

333.  „  oblongifolia       ...  Do. 

334.  „         crenata      ....  Do. 


Rose  Family. 

I      Arkat  Mountains  . 

\A    Kirghese  Steppe   . 

\B  C  In  the  Valleys     7,500  to  9,1 

I      District  of  Zaisan 


APPENDIX  B. —FLORA. 

633 

Name  in  Latin  and  English, 

T        ,^                Time  of  bios- 
Lo<:^^^tV.              som  or  fruit. 

Eleva- 
tion. 

Spiraea  media 

.   Meadow  Sweet 

District  of  Zaisan 

May,  J 

une 

„       laevigata   . 

Do. 

C    Kokdjar  Valley     . 

8,000' 

,,        Ulmaria    . 

Do. 

B    Vierny  . 

Dryas  octopetala    . 

Mountain  Avens 

Near  Riddersk 

Geum  strictum 

Wood  Avens 

C    River  Karkara      5,500  to 

6,00c' 

„       rivale   .... 

Do. 

District  of  Zaisan 

Sanguisorba  officinalis    . 

Great  Burnet 

North  Kirghese  Steppe 

„             alpina 

Do. 

Pi  B  C  Alaman  Mountains 

Alchemilla  vulgaris 

Lady's  Mantle 

Marka-Kul   . 

Agrimonia  eupatoria 

Agrimony 

B    Vierny  . 

„           pilosa    . 

Do. 

Bukon  in  Kirghese 

Stepp 

e 

Sibbaldia  procumbens    . 

? 

Mnts.  in  Tarbagatai 

9,000' 

Dryadanthe  Bungeana    . 

? 

BG  Valleys 

8  to 

10,000' 

Chamaerhodos  erecta      . 

? 

Djil-Tau 

Potentilla  supina    . 

Cinque-foil 

B    Vierny  . 

„         norwegica 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe  . 

„         pensylvanica,  et  vars. 

Do. 

B    Arkat  Mountains  . 

„         sericea,  et  vars. 

Do. 

^BG  Marka-Kul      . 

3  to 

9,000' 

„         viscosa   . 

Do. 

0    Akkia  . 

„         multifida  var. 

Do. 

B  G  Seyrek-tas 

5  to  8,000' 

„         bifurca,  et  vars. 

Do. 

B    Bukonbai 

„         fragarioides     . 

Do. 

Gurjewsk 

„         recta 

Do. 

B    Turaigyr 

„         /3  obscura 

Do. 

C    River  Karkara      5 

500  to  6,000' 

„         inclinata 

Do. 

B    Turaigyr 

6,000' 

,,         argentea 

Do. 

Salair    . 

„         dealbata 

Do. 

B    Kirghese  Steppe  . 

„         chrysantha 

Do. 

Lake  Marka-Kul  . 

„          opaca     . 

Do. 

Kopal  Chain 

8,000' 

„         desertorum     . 

Do. 

River  Kulun-Ketsen 

„         cinerea  var.     . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe  . 

„         nivea  var. 

Do. 

A  B  Turaigyr 

5  tc 

8,000' 

„         fragiformis,  et  vars. 

Do. 

A  B  Tarbagatai. 

8  to  10,000' 

„         fruticosa,  et  var.      . 

Do. 

A  G  Kirghese  Steppe 

7,000' 

Comarum  Salessowii       .         .        i 

Marsh  Cinque-foil 

B  G  Zauku  Valley      . 

6  to 

9,000' 

Fragaria  moschata 

Strawberry 

B    River  Kaldjir 

.  Rubus  caesius 

Bramble 

B    Vierny  . 

Hulthemia  berberifolia  . 

? 

A    Kirghese  Steppe   . 

.  Rosa  pimpinellifolia  var. 

Rose 

B    Bukunbai 

„     platyacantha 

Do. 

A  B  Kopal 

„     acicularis  var. 

Do. 

A    River  Kara-Su 

,,     cinnamonea  . 

Do. 

G    Aksu  Valley 

.      „     laxa       .... 

Do. 

River  Schulba 

..      Gebleriana  var. 

Do. 

A    Hi  Valley      . 

XXVI.— POMACEA] 

I  7  (II),  ^///^ 

and  Pear  Family. 

.  Crataegus  sanguinea 

Hawthorn 

A    River  Baskan 

,,          pinnatifida 

Do. 

B    Issyk-Kul  Valley . 

.  Cotoneaster  vulgaris 

Cotoneaster 

Kalgutty 

,,            nummularia  var. 

Do. 

B  G  Tub  Valley 

,,            multiflora     . 

Do. 

B  Turaigyr  Pass 

.  Pyrus  Malus  .... 

.       Crab  Tree 

B  G  Valleys        . 

5.500' 

„       aucuparia      .          Mountain 

Ash,  Rowan  Tree 

B  G.  Valleys      . 

7,500' 

634 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


No. 

Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

ToraUtv              Time  of  bios-    E 
Locality.              ^^^  ^^  j-^j^      ^ 

385. 
386. 
387. 
388. 

389. 

XXVII.— ON AGRARIAE  5  (17),  Evening  Primrose  Family. 

Epilobium  angustifolium         .         .     Willo7u  Herb     B  Chilik  Valley 

,,          lalifolium      .         .         .            Do.             B  Kebin  Valley          .              6. 
,,          hirsutum,  et  vars.          .            Do.             A  Keyssyk-Aus 
palustre         .        .         .            Do.             B  Chilik  Valley 
,            roseum          .         .         .            Do.             B  Valleys 

XXVIII.— HALO  RAGE  AE    i  (4),    Allied   to  Evening   Primrose  Family,  but  aqu: 
sometimes  called  Mare's  Tail  Order  (Balfour). 

390.  Myriophyllum  verticillatum    .         .     Water  Milfoil     \  Kirghese  Steppe    . 


XXIX.— LYTHRARIAE   i   (3),  Loosestrife  Family. 
391.  Lythrum  virgatum  .         .         .       Loosestrife        \  Kirghese  Steppe    . 

XXX.— TAMARISCINEAE  6  (i),    Tamarisk  Family. 


392.  Myricaria  alopecuroides 

? 

A   River  Bion     . 

393.           ,,         davurica 

? 

C  Kokjar  Pass  . 

394.  Tamarix  elongata   . 

Tamarisk 

A  Hi  Valley      . 

395.          „        laxa 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

396.          ,,        Pallasii  var. 

Do. 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

397.                   hispida 

Do, 

A  Hi  picket-station    . 

XXXL— PORTULACEAE  1(1),  Purslane  Family. 

398.  Claytonia  Joanneana       ...  ?  |  Ivanovsky  Bjelok 

XXXIL— PARONYCHIEAE  i  (12),  Knotwort  FamAly. 

399.  Hemiaria  glabra     .         .         .         .  Rupture  Wort   \  Jil-Tau    . 


XXXIIL— CRASSULACEAE  14  (15),  Stonecrop  Family. 


400.  Umbilicus  affinis     . 

Navekvort 

401.          ,,          Lievenii 

Do, 

402.          ,,          leucanthus 

Do. 

403.           ,,           spinosus 

Do. 

404.           ,,           platyphyllus 

Do. 

405.          ,,          alpestris 

Do. 

406.          „           Semenovii  (« 

s.) 

Do. 

407.  Sedum  quadrifidum 

Stonecrop 

408.        „       gelidum 

Do. 

409.        ,,       coccineum  . 

Do. 

410.        ,,       Rhodiola  var. 

Do. 

,,       7  tenuifolium 

Do. 

411.        „        3urpureum 

Do. 

412.        ,,       Ewersii 

Do. 

413-       M       hybridum 

Do. 

I    Jil-Tau  . 

j^   Tamgaly-tas  . 

1^   Arassan 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 
B  Jassyl-Kul      . 
A  Kopal  Chain . 
B  Keskelen  Pass 

Ivanovsky  Bielok  . 
B  Turguen-basch 
G  Zauku  Valley         .  S 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountains 
A  Tamgaly-tas  . 

Salair     . 
A   Kopal  Chain  .  % 

A  B  Jil-Tau 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


635 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T  ^r.  i,v„              Time  of  blos- 
Locahty.              ^^^  ^^  ^^^^j^ 

Eleva- 
tion. 

XXXIV.— GROSS UL ARTE AE  5  (4),   Gooseberry  and  Currant  Family. 

Ribes  aciculare       .... 

Currant 

Tarbagatai      . 

,.      Diacantha     . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

,,      heterotrichiim 

Do. 

B  Seyrek-tas 

,,       atropurpureum 

Do. 

B  C  Merke  Valley      . 

„      /3  Ledeb.,  fl.  alt.  . 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

4,500' 

„       rubrum 

Do. 

C  River  Karkara 

XXXV.— SAXIFRAG 

ACEAE  6  (22), 

Saxifrage  Family, 

Saxifraga  flagellaris 

Saxifrage 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes 

8  to 

11,000' 

,,        hiiculus 

Do.  ' 

A  B  Turaigyr  Chain 

6tc 

8,000' 

,,        crassifolia 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountains 

,,        punctata 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountains 

,,        sibirica   .... 

Do. 

ABC  Mtn.  Passes 

7  tc 

9,000' 

Chrysospleniutn  nudicaule 

Golden  Saxifrage 

BC  Mtn.  Passes 

9  to 

11,000' 

XXXVI.— UMBELLI 

FERAE  46  (69^ 

,  Parsley  Family. 

Eryngium  macrocalyx     . 

Sea  Holly 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

„          planum .         .         • 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

Trinia  Kitaibelii     . 

Hone  Wort 

Solonowka 

Aegopodium  Podagraria 

Gout  Weed 

Salair     . 

Carum  Carui .... 

Carazvay 

B  Keskelen  Valley 

,,      setaceum     . 

Do. 

B  Kara-turgai    . 

„      tricophyllum 

Do. 

River  Bukon  . 

,,      bupleuroides 

Do. 

B  Mai-bulak      . 

,,       indicum,  var. 

Do. 

B  Tabulgaty  Pass 

„       {s.)       .... 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

7,500' 

Chamaesiadium  albiflorum,  var. 

? 

B  Tschin  Bulak 

Schultzia  crinita      . 

? 

Ivanovsky 

•  Slum  lancifolium    . 

Water  Parsnip 

Kokpekty       . 

Bupleurum  aureum 

Haies  Ear 

1  .ake  Ko  yvan 

„           multinerve    . 

Do. 

Near  Riddersk 

,,           ranunculoides 

Do. 

B  Kurmenty  Pass 

,,           exaltatum      . 

Do. 

A   Kara-Su 

„           falcatum,  et  var.  . 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

beseli  Hyppomarathrum,  var. 

Mtn.  Spi^nel 

Kokpekty 

,,      tenuifolium  .         . 

Do. 

Arkalyk 

.  Lomatopodium  Lessingianum,  var 

■? 

B  Keskelen  Valley 

.  Libanotis  montana 

? 

Kokpekty 

„         sibirica    . 

? 

A   Altyn-Immel  Pass 

„         condensata 

? 

B  Kurmenty  Pass 

.  Cenolophium  Fischeri    . 

? 

Salair     . 

.  Neogaya  simplex,  var.    . 

? 

B  River  Chilik  . 

.  Angelica  sylvestris 

Angelica 

Salair     . 

,,         decurrens 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

,,        /3  alpina  . 

Do. 

C  Kokjar  Valley 

8,000' 

a.  Hyalolaena  Severzovii  {n.s.). 

? 

Turkistan 

.  Ferula  songorica     . 

Fennel 

Jil-Tau  . 

- 

,,       rigidula,  var. 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

,,      /3  songorica 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

.  Peucedanum  transiliense 

Sea  Hog's  Fennel 

Kurmenty  Pass 

7»ooo 

.  Semenovia  {n.g.).  transiliensis  {n.s.'' 

)               ? 

B  Chilik  Valley 

636 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 

Name  in  Latin  and  English 

Locality.             Time  of  bios-       ] 

457- 

Heracleum  dissectum      .         .         .    Cow  Parsnip 

River  Bukon  . 

458. 

Pachypleurum  alpinum  . 

? 

Marka-Kul     . 

459. 

Daucus  carota 

Carrot 

^   Vierny   . 

460. 

Scandix  pinnatifida,  var. 

Shepherd:  s  Needle 

B  Hi  Valley       . 

461. 

Anthriscus  sylvestris 

Chervil 

B  Vierny  . 

462. 

, ,           nemorosa 

Do, 

District  of  Zaisan 

463- 

Chaerophyllum  Prescottii 

Rough  Chervil 

Jil-Tau  . 

464. 

,,                sphallerocarp 

us 

Do. 

B  Kurmenty  Pass 

7 

465- 

Cachrys  odontalgica 

? 

Kirghese  Steppe 

466. 

,,        macrocarpa 

? 

k   Kara-Chek    . 

467. 

Pleurospermum  austriacum 

? 

Salair     . 

468. 

Aulacospermum  anomalum 

? 

B  Keskelen  Valley 

469. 

Schrenkia  vaginata         ...                 ? 

G  Kokjar  Valley 

XXXVII.— CAPRIFOLIACEAE  9  (5), 

Honeysuckle  Family. 

470. 

Adoxa  moschatellina      .         .         .        Moschatel 

Tarbagatai     . 

une 

471. 

Viburnum  Opulus  . 

Guelder  Rose 

B  Talgal  Valley 

May 

472. 

Lon 

cera  tatarica    . 

j    Honeysuckle 

B  Vierny  . 

May 

473- 

Xylosteum 

1      Woodbine 

B  Jenishke  Valley 

July 

/3  macrocalyx  . 

Do. 

/I   Bugun  Valley 

May 

474- 

hispida     . 
/3  hirsutior 

Do. 
Do. 

k  B  Merke  Valley 
C  Karkara  Valley 

July 

y  alpina  . 

Do. 

0  Zauku  Pass    . 

June,    8 

475- 

caerulea,  var.  . 

Do. 

B  Jenishke  Valley 

July 

/3  villosa  . 

Do. 

Kaldjir  . 

May 

476. 

microphylla,  var.      . 

Do. 

A  B  Valleys       . 

May 

477- 

humilis    . 

Do. 

C  Jassyk-Kul     . 

May 

478. 

,         Karelini  ....               Do. 

B  Karkara  Valley 

June,    6 

XXXVIIL— RUBIACEAE  10  (21), 

Madder  Family. 

479- 

Asperula  Aperine  ....         Woodruff 

A  B  Mai-Bulak  . 

.  May,  Ju 

480. 

,,          humifusa,  var. 

Do. 

B  River  Almaty 

481. 

Galium  saxatile,  var. 

Bedstraw 

B  Ak-kia  . 

"july,    8 

482. 

,,        rubioides,  var. 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

.  June 

483- 

, ,        boreale 

Do. 

B  Vierny   . 

.  May.  Ju 

,,        /3  latitolium 

Do. 

Boggy  clay  ground 

June,  Ju 

484. 

,,        verum,  et  var. 

Do. 

A   Chilik    . 

.  June 

485. 

„        cruciatum,  var. 

Do. 

Salair     . 

486. 

,,        tenuissimum 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

487. 

„        songoricum 

Do. 

C  Sary-jas  glacier 

( 

488. 

,,        verticillatum,  var.      .         .             Do. 

B  Mountain  Spurs 

.  June 

XXXIX.— VALERIANEAE  7  (10), 

Valerian  Family. 

489. 

Patrinia  sibirica      ....               ? 

Ivanovsky  Snow  ^ 

lountain 

490. 

,,        rupestris,  et  var. 

? 

B  Turaigyr 

.  June 

491. 

Valerianella  plagiostephana 

Com  Salad 

A   Keyssyk-Aus 

.May 

492. 

Valeriana  tuberosa 

Valerian 

District  of  Zaisan 

.May 

493- 

,,         globulariaefolia 

Do. 

C  Zauku  Pass       Jur 

le.  9  to  I 

494. 

,,         petrophila 

Do. 

A   Keyssyk-Aus 

.  May 

495- 

„         officinalis,  et 

v^ar. 

Do. 

A  B  Talgar  Valley 

.  May, 

APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


^^7 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


rime  of  bios-       Eleva 
som  or  fruit.         tion. 


XL.— DIPSACACIEAE  6  (6),    Teasel  Family. 


Morina  kokanica    . 
Dipsacus  azureus    . 
Cephalaria  syriaca 
Scabiosa  caucasica,  et  var. 
,,        Olivieri   . 
ochroleuca 


Teasel 

? 

Scabious 
Do. 
Do. 


Khojend 
\A   Keyssyk-Aus 
\p  Boroldai  and  Arys  May 
5  Turaigyr 
\A   Kara-Su 
\b  Chilik    .         .         .  June 


XLI.— COMPOSITAE  23  (15),    Composite,  or  Sunflower  Family. 


Tussilago  Farfara  . 
Aster  alpinus 
,,      flaccidus 
,,      Tripolium 
Galatella  grand  iflora 

dracunculoides 
Hauptii   . 
„  ,,        y  tenuifolia 

Calimeris  altaica     . 
Rhinactina  limoniifolia  . 
Erigeron  canadensis 
,,         acris,  var. 
,,         asteroid  es 
,,         serotina   . 
,,         uniflorus 
Solidago  Virgaurea 
Brachyactis  ciliata  . 
Linosyris  scoparia  . 
Karelinia  caspia 
Inula  Helenium 
,,       Britannica    . 
,,      grandis 
,,      rhizocephala 


Coltsfoot 
Staiivort 
Do. 
Do. 

? 

? 

? 

? 

? 

? 

Fleabane 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Golden  Rod 

? 
Goldilocks 

? 

Elecampane 

Samphire 

Do. 

Do. 


\B  Issyk  Valley  .         .       6  to  7.000' 

p  C  Mountain  Passes  June 

\A  B  0  Alaman  Chain     8  to  10,000' 

A   Arassan 

\B  Chilik  Valley 

j     Kirghese  Steppe 

I     Kirghese  Steppe 

Salair  . 
B  C  Zauku 
ABC  Tiib  Valley 
B  Vierny  . 
B  Jenishke 
B  Vierny  . 
C  Issyk- Kul 
A  B  Kopal 
B  Almaty  Valley       .  3, 800' 

B  Ak-kia  . 
A  Chubar-Agach 

Saline  soils     . 

Almaty  Valley        .  4,000' 

District  of  Zaisan 

Sergiopol 

River  Karkara 


XLII.— SENECIONIDEAE  53  (48),   Groundsel  Family. 


Xanthium  Strumarium    . 

Burwecd 

B  Vierny   . 

Bidens  tripartita 

.     Water  Bidens 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

Richteria  pyrethroides    . 

? 

A  0  Sary-djas     . 

.   Achillea  impatiens 

Yarrow 

Salair 

,,         Ptarmica,  var.  . 

Sneezewort 

Kokpekty 

,,        millefolium,  et  var.   . 

Milfoil 

Town  of  Chimkent 

5.500 

,,        decumbens 

Do. 

G  Boroldai 

,,         trichophylla 

Do. 

A   Hi  Valley       . 

.  Tanacetum  inodorum,  vars.    . 

Tansy 

A   Kopal  Chain 

„            Gmelini 

Do. 

Gurjewsk 

,,            Leucanthemum    . 

Do. 

Salair     . 

,,            Ledebourii  . 

Do. 

C  Sary-djas 

8,500 

,,            vulgare 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

,,            fruticulosum 

Do. 

A  B  Aras.san 

,,           tc)mentosum 

Do. 

A  Alaman  Chain 

8,000' 

,,            tauricum,  vars. 

Do. 

Kolgutty,  Hi  . 

,,            pulchrum 

Do. 

B  C  Saryd-jas     . 

8  to  10.000' 

638 


RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA 


No.                             Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T  ~.<,i;»,r              Time  of  blos- 
Locahty.             ^^  ^^  ^^^^^ 

542.  Tanacetum  alatavicuni    . 

Tansy 

B  Seyrek-tas      . 

543- 

transiliense  . 

Do. 

B  C  Valleys        .         .      6  to 

544-          M 

Semenovii  (w.  s. ) 

Do. 

B  Seyrek-tas      . 

545.  Artemisia    Dracunculus. 

Wormivood 

B  Kurmenty 

546.          „ 

glauca  var.  . 

Do. 

Salair     . 

547. 

commutata  var. 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountain;- 

548. 

scoparia 

Do. 

B  Jenishke 

549- 

Oliveriana    . 

Do. 

A  Hi  Valley       . 

550-         » 

maritima 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

>» 

X,  Lercheana 

Do, 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

>» 

t]  monogyna 

Do. 

Ala-Kul 

551- 

juncea 

Do. 

A  Keyssyk 

552-         „ 

sacrorum  var. 

Do. 

B  Chilik  Valley 

553- 

pontica  var. 

Do. 

Salair     . 

554- 

vulgaris 

Do. 

B  Valleys 

555- 

annua 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

556- 

sericea 

Do. 

B  Turguen  Pass 

557- 

rupestris 

Do. 

B  Kebin  Valley 

558. 

frigida 

Do. 

Arkalyk 

559. 

Sieversiana  . 

Do. 

Salair     . 

560.  Helichrysum  anatolicum 

Everlasting  Flower 

C  Boroldai 

561.  Gnapha  ium  sylvaticum 

Cafs  Foot  Cud  Weed 

Gurjewsk 

>j 

)3  subalpinum 

Do. 

B  Kurmenty  Pass 

562. 

dioicum 

Do. 

Sartau    . 

•              »> 

/3  corymbosum 

Do. 

Gurjewsk 

563- 

leontopodium  va 

r.       .         Edelweiss 

B  C  Karkara       .         .       6  tc 

564.  Filago 

arvensis 

Cudweed 

B  River  Talgar  . 

565.  Ligularia  altaica     . 

? 

Takyr    . 

566. 

macrophylla    . 

? 

A  Kopal,  Arassan 

567.  Aronicum  altaicum 

'? 

A  Kopal  Chain  . 

568.  Doronicutii  oblongifolium  var 

.  Leopard's  Bane 

ABC  Kopal       . 

569.  Cacalia  hastata 

? 

Ulba  Valley  . 

570.  Senecio  vulgaris  var. 

Groundsel,  Ragwort 

B  Jenishke 

571- 

subdentatus 

Do. 

Marka-Kul     . 

572. 

praealtus    . 

.         .             Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

573- 

Jacobea     . 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

574- 

sibiricus     . 

Do. 

B  C  Turaigyr 

575- 

paludosus  . 

Do. 

B  Chilik  Valley 

576.        „ 

nemorensis 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountain; 

577.  Cineraria  campestris 

Marsh  Flea  Wort 

Jel-Tau                               i 

XLIIL— CYNAREAE  93  (93),   7/iistle  Family. 


578. 

579- 
580. 
581. 
582. 
583. 
584. 
585. 
586. 

587. 
588. 
589. 


Acanthocephalus  amplexifoliu 

s       .               ? 

fiMerke    ...           1 

Echinops 

Ritro 

? 

Sandy  soil                           1 

„ 

sphaerocephalus 

? 

B  Almaty  Valley                   1 

Saussurea  pygmaea,  et  vars. 

Alpine  Saw-wort 

ABO  Kopal  Chain     .       5  to 

>j 

pycnocephala 

Do. 

B  Jenishke 

If 

coronata  var.  . 

Do. 

B  Lepsa     . 
Arkalyk 

crassifolia 

Do. 

,^ 

latifolia  . 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountain 

)« 

discolor  . 

Do. 

Salair     . 

)> 

salicifolia,  et  vars. 

Do. 

A  B  Tarbagatai  . 

»> 

rigida 

Do. 

Arkalyk 

»> 

Semenovii  (n.s.) 

Do. 

A  Hi  s'alley       . 

APPENDIX  B. —FLORA. 


639 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Locality.             "^''"^^  ^^  ^los-       Eleva- 
^                 som  or  fruit.         tion. 

Saussurea  sorocephala    .         .         .Alpine  Saw-^vort 

G  Sary-djas 

,,         glacialis 

Do. 

C  Sary-dias  Glacier 

10.000' 

Cousinia  tenella 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

uncinata  . 

? 

B  Almaty  Valley 

4,800' 

,,        Semenowii 

? 

B  j^ara-Turuk    . 

3,000' 

,,        affinis 

? 

/I  5  Hi  Valley     . 

.    1,500-3,000' 

,.        platylepis 

? 

A  Hi  Valley       . 

2.000' 

,.        microcarpa 

? 

A  River  Tetayan 

,,        /3  spinosior 

? 

A  River  Lepsa  . 

,,        Sewerzowi 

'.               ? 

Chirchik 

*July 

,,        centauroidcs     . 

? 

C  Near  Bugun  . 

,.        decurrens.  et  van 

? 

Afghanistan  . 

,,        scariosa    . 

? 

Afghanistan  . 

,.        buphthalmoides 

'.               ?   . 

Afghanistan  . 

,.        anthacantha     . 

? 

Afghanistan  . 

Ancatha  igniaria     . 

? 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Crupina  vulgaris     . 

? 

B  Almaty  Valley 

3,000' 

Amberboa  odorata 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

1.500' 

Centaurea  pulchella 

Knapweed 

Hi  Valley        . 

.     1,500-2,500' 

,,          ruthenica 

Do 

B  River  Jenishke 

5.500' 

, ,          glastifolia 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

,.          sibirica,  et  var. 

Do. 

Barnaul 

,,          Scabiosa,  et  var. 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

,,          squarrosa 

Do. 

A  Kara-Su 

Onopordum  Acanthium 

Cotton  Thistle 

B  Keskelen  Pass 

3,000' 

Carduus  crispus 

Thistle 

District  of  Zaisan 

Cirsium  lanceolatum 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

2,500' 

,,      nidulans   . 

Do. 

C  Kokjar  Pass   . 

9  to  JO,ooo' 

,,      Semenowii 

Do. 

fiCAkkia  Pass. 

7  to  7.500' 

,,      arvense,  et  vars 

Do, 

Kirghese  Steppe 

,,      aciiule  var. 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Echinais  Siversii    . 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

I  to  2,000' 

Acroptilon  Picris    . 

p 

A  Kara-Su          , 

1 

Leuzea  carthamoides 

? 

Near  Iwanow  Sno 

w  Mountains 

Alfredia  cernua 

> 

Quarries  of  Salair 

,,         acantholepis 

? 

B  G  Mountain  Passes 

6,500-8,000' 

„         nivea 

? 

A  Kopal  Chain 

3.000' 

Serratula  coronata 

Saza-woj-t 

Quarries  of  Salair 

,,        lyratifolia 

Do. 

B  Mai-bulak 

,,         procumbens 

Do. 

CTekes     . 

8,000' 

,,         nitida,  et  var. 

Do. 

C  and  Kirghese  Step] 

)e            5,000' 

, ,       dissecta    . 

Do, 

B  and  Kirghese  Step] 

3e 

, ,        tenuifolia 

Do. 

5Merke    . 

Jurinea  suffruticosa 

Do. 

A  Karatau 

8.000' 

,,       chaetocarpa,  et 

var. 

Do. 

G  Tasma    . 

4,500-8,000' 

Koelpinia  linearis  . 

Do. 

G  Bugun    . 

1,300-2.000' 

Cichorium  Intybus 

Sticcory,  Chicory 

B  Vierny    . 

2.500' 

Achyrophorus  maculatu 

? 

District  of  Zaisan 

June 

Tragopogon  pratensis 

Goat's  Beard 

B  Chilik  Valley 

July,  6-7.000' 

, ,            floccosus 

Do. 

Jil-Tau 

,,            /3  caespitosus 

Do. 

Astrachan 

„            ruber . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

Scorzonera  purpurea 

Scorzonera 

B  River  Jenishke 

4  to  8,000' 

,,           (5  subincana. 

Do. 

B  River  Merke  . 

4.000' 

,,           austriaca 

Do. 

Altai  Mountains     . 

,,           (3  linearifolia 

Do. 

Barnaul,  Susun 

640 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL    ASIA. 


No.                                Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T^raliVv              Time  of  bios- 
^*^^"y-               som  or  fruit. 

Scorzonera  y  intermedia 

Scorzonera 

B  C  Mountain  Passes 

8tc 

640.            ,,          Marschalliana 

Do. 

B  C  Vierny 

641.            ,,          tuberosa  j3    . 

Do. 

Kly  in  Zaisan  Mou 

ntains 

,,           y  crispa 

Do. 

B  Keyssyk- Aus . 

642.  Picris  hieracioides 

Yellozv  Succory 

Kokpekty 

643.  Lactuca  undulata   . 

Lettuce 

AIM           .         . 

May 

644.          ,,       viminea.  van  /3 

Do. 

A  River  Hi 

645.          „      songoi-ica  . 

Do. 

B  River  Assy     . 

646.  Chondrilla  juncea  /3 

? 

A  IH  Valley       . 

647.          ,,          brevirostris    . 

? 

Chinguildy    . 

648.  Taraxacum  ofificinale 

Dandelion 

District  of  Zaisan  , 

649.             ,,         caucasicum  . 

Do. 

Kly        .         . 

„         /3  glabrum    . 

Do. 

C  Sary-djas  Glacier  . 

650.             „         glaucanthum 

Do. 

Chinguildy    . 

651.             „         Steveni    .     . 

Do. 

C  Sary-djas  Glacier 

8,5a 

652.  Streptorhamphus  hispidulus   . 

? 

Tamgaly  Pass 

653.  Crepis  rigida,  j8  songorica 

Hazu/cs  Beard 

Kirghese  Steppe 

654.        ,,     tectorum      . 

Do. 

Gurjewsk 

655.        ,,     multicaulis  . 

Do. 

A  B  Tekin-Bulok 

4  t> 

,,     /3  congesta  . 

Do. 

C  Sary-djas 

656.         ,,     sibirica 

Do. 

C  Karkara  Plateau 

5  I' 

657.         ,,     lyrata 

Do. 

Quarries  of  Salair 

658.  Heteracia  Szovitsii 

? 

A  Zailijsay  Piquet 

i,8o( 

659.  Sonchus  oleraceus . 

So7uthistle 

Quarries  of  Salair 

660.         ,,        arvensis  var.     . 

Do. 

B  R'n  er  Almaty 

661.  Youngia  diversifolia 

■? 

South  Altai    . 

662.         ,,          flexuosa    . 

? 

C  River  Tekes  . 

663.  Mulgedium  azureum 

Sowthistle 

B  River  Almaty 

5t^ 

664.           ,.            tataricum 

Do. 

B  River  Almaty 

,,           /3  floccosum 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

,,            7  integrum  . 

Do. 

River  Hi 

665.           ,,            sibiricum 

Do. 

Quarries  of  Salair 

666.  Hieracium  vulgatum 

Hawkiveed 

C  Karkara  Plateau 

6.50 

667.          ,,           unibellatum 

Do. 

Quarries  of  Salair 

668.          ,,           virosum 

Do. 

B  Almaty  Valley 

XLIV.— CAMPANULi! 

^CEAE  10(15),  Campanula  Family. 

669.  Glossocomia  clematidea  . 

? 

B  C  River  Merke 

5  t 

670.  Phyteuma  argutum 

Rampi-ons 

C  Chirchik 

July 

671.            ,,        Sewerzowi 

Do. 

Turkistan 

672.  Campanula  sihirica 

Bell-Flotver 

S.  Altai 

673.           ,,          glomerata     . 

Do. 

B  Quarries  of  Salair 

June, 

674.           , ,          rapunculoides  /3    . 

Do. 

River  Bukon 

675.           ,,          Steveni,  et  vars.   . 

Do. 

5(?Issyk-Kul    . 

676.            ,,           rotundifolia 

Hair  Bell 

Quarries  of  Salair 

June 

677.           r,           Sewerzowi    . 

? 

C  Boroldai 
B  Ak-kia  . 

678.  Adenophora  polymorpha,  et  vars 

? 

679.  Pyrola  rotundifolia 

680.  .,      secunda 

681.  Moneses  grandiflora 


XLV.— PYROLACEAE  3  (6),    IVinter  Green,  or  Fyrola,  Family. 
Winier  Green  A  Kopal  Chain  . 
Do.  Ifl  River  Almaty 

Do.  '5  River  Almaty 


APPENDIX  B,— FLORA. 


641 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T„    ,.^                Time  of  bios-      Eleva- 
Lo<=^l'^y-               som  or  fruit.         tion. 

XLVL— PRIMULACEAE  16  (18),  Primrose  Family. 

2.  Primula  cortusoides 

Pri?nrose 

B  C  Kopal  Chain 

7  to  10,000 

3.         ,,       macrocalyx 

Do. 

Marka-Kul     . 

6  to  7.000' 

4.         „       nivalis,  /3  farinosa      . 

Do. 

B  C  Kurmety  Pass 

6  to  9,000' 

5.         ,,       algida  var. 

Do. 

A  Sartau    . 

3,500-7.000' 

3.         ,,       longiscapa 

Do. 

C  et  Kirghese  Steppe 

5-500' 

7.  Androsace  viilosa  .... 

B  C  Aral-djel  Pass 

7  to  9.000 

S.          ..              ..       V.  latifolia  . 

A  B  Alaman  K. 

8  to  10,000' 

9,          ..         septentrionalis 

A  Kopal  Chain 

7,000' 

D,          ..                    „              V.  lactifolia 

ABC  Turguen  Pass 

6  to  8.000' 

I.           ,.         maxima 

B  Turaigyr 

6  to  8,000' 

2.           ..         filiformis 

Chinguildy     . 

3.  Cortusa  Matthioli  .... 

A  B  Kopal  Chain 

8.000' 

\.        .,       Semenovii 

B  Schaty  Pass    . 

10,000 

5.  Glaux  maritima      ....  Black  Salt  Wort 

B  G  River  Chu  Valle> 

5.  Lysimachia  vulgaris 

Loosestrife 

River  Kokpekty 

7.  Anagallis  arvensis  .... 

Pimpernel 

B  C  Vierny 

XLVII.— OLEACEAE  i  (2),   Olirn  Family. 
3.  Fraxinus  potamophila  {n.  s.)  .  Ash  Tree    I  A  Hi,  Bugun 


I  to  2.500 


XLVIIL— APOCYNACEAE 

Apocynum  venetum 


(2),  Dogbane  and  Periwinkle  Family. 
Fly  Trap    \      Kirghese  Steppe    . 


XLIX.— ASCLEPIADEAE  2  (o),  Milkweed  Family 

Cynanchum  acutum         ...  ? 

^  longifolium  .  ? 


Chinguildy     . 
Mountains  of  Dolonkara 


L.— GENTIAN  ACE  AE  20  (14),  Gentian  Family. 


?.  Erythraea  pulchella  /3     .         . 

Centaury 

A  Arassan  Sources     .               3.000' 

5.  Gentiana  Amarella 

Gentian 

Salair     . 

\.          „        falcata     . 

Do. 

ABC  Chin-bulak        .       8  to  9.000' 

;.          ,,       tenella      . 

Do. 

Riddersk        .         .    4,500-5,500' 

3.          „        aurea,  var.  /3    . 

Do. 

ABC  Mai-bulak         .       8  to  9,000' 

^          ,,        barbata    . 

Do. 

A  B  and  Salair  .         .    2,500-4,000' 

5.          ,,        verna,  j3  alata  . 

Do. 

Kasu  Mountains     .               7,000' 

).          ,,       altaica     . 

Do. 

Riddersk        .         .               7,000' 

5.          „        prostrata  var.  . 

Do. 

A  C  Kopal  Chain       .       6  to  9,000' 

(.          ,,        decumbens 

Do. 

B  and  Kirghese  Steppe 

2.          „        Kurroo    . 

Do. 

5C?Sary-djas      .         .       7  to  9,000' 

\.          ,,        Olivieri    . 

Do. 

A  Kopal  Chain  .         .               7.000' 

\.          „        frigida  var. 

Do. 

ABC  Kogoirak  Mtn.       8  to  9,000' 

).          ,,        Pneumonanthe 

Do. 

Isles  of  River  Obi  , 

>.          ,,       septemfida 

Do. 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mountains 

7.          „        macrophylla     . 

Do. 

Salair     . 

\.  Pleurogyne  carinthiaca   . 

? 

B  River  Almaty         .               7.000' 

).  Anagallidium  dichotomum 

? 

1     Gurjewsk 

).  Swertia  obtusa 

.  Marsh  Felwort 

;     Near  Riddersk        .              5-CXX)' 

i.        „        margmata 

? 

C  Sary-djas        .                        8,500' 

VOL.  II. 


A^ 


642 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 

Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Locality.             Time  of  bios-      1 
*                som  or  fruit. 

LL— POLEMONIACEAE  2  (i),  Polemonimn  Family. 

722. 

Phlox  sibirica 

F/ilox 

Gurjewsk 

723- 

Polemonium  caeruleum  . 

.  Jacob's  Ladder 

B  G  Turaigyr 

LIL— CONVOLVULACEAE  6  (3),   Convolvulus  Family. 

724. 

Convolvulus  Gortschakovii     . 

Bind  Weed 

Hi  Valley       . 

2,500  to 

725- 

,,            lineatus 

Do. 

A  C  Arassan  Sources  May,  ■?  to  1; 

726. 

,,           subsericeus 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

I 

727. 

„            Pseudo-Cantabrica 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

I 

728. 

,,            Semenovii  (w.j.) 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

I 

729. 

,,           arvensis  var. 

Do. 

C  Karkara  Plateau 

( 

LIII.-CUSCUT 

'EAE  2  (4),  Dodder  Family. 

730- 

Cuscuta  planiflora  . 

Dodder 

River  Kokpekty 

1 

731. 

„       lupuliformis,  var.  j3    . 

Do. 

River  Schulba 

i 

LIV.— BORAGIIS 

[EAE  35  (26),  Borage  Family. 

1 

732. 

Heliotropum  europaeum  var. 

Heliotrope 

A  and  Kirghese  Steppe 

733- 

Nonnea  picta 

? 

A  B  Kayssyk  Pass 

I  to. 

734- 

Anchusa  italica 

Alkanet 

Zarevna-Alexandrovsk    Ma) 

735 

„          myosotidiflora . 

Do. 

Zarevna-Alexandrovsk   May 

736. 

Onosma  echioides,  et  vars.      . 

? 

Kirghese  Steppe 

737- 

„         Gmelini    . 

? 

Bala  Kaldjir  . 

738. 

,.     simplicissinium    . 

? 

B  River  Merke  . 

739- 

Lithospermum  officinale 

Cromwell 

A   Karatal  Valley 

740. 

Pulmonaria  mollis  . 

Lungwort 

Marka-Kul     . 

1 

741. 

Amebia  cornuta     . 

? 

A  Hi  Valley       . 

742. 

,,       perennis     . 

? 

C  River  1  ekes  . 

743- 

Myosotis  palustris  .      Scorpion  Gr 

ass.  Forget-me-not 

Zaisan  district 

June 

744- 

„        caespitosa                  Do. 

Do. 

Quarries  of  Salair 

June 

745- 

„        silvatica                     Bo. 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

May,  Ju 

,,        ^  alpestris                  Do. 

Do. 

A   Kopal  Chain . 

\ 

746. 

,,        stricta       .                  Do. 

Do. 

B  Turaig}r  Pass 

\ 

747- 

Eritrichium  villosum,  et  vars. 

? 

ABC  River  Tekes 

748. 

„          sericeum 

? 

Gurje^^■sk 

749- 

„          rupestre 

? 

Zmeinogorsk 

750- 

„          pectinatum  . 

? 

B  Tabulgaty  Pass 

751 

pedunculare 

? 

The  Black  Irtish 

752 

Echinospermum  Redowskii,  et  vars. 

Prickly  Samphire 

Salair     . 

July,  Ai 

753- 

,,              microcarpum,  et  v 

ars.        Do. 

ABC  Turkistan 

754 

, ,              deflexum 

Do. 

C  and  Zaisan  Mounts 

ins 

755 

,,              om  )haloides 

Do. 

Quanies  of  Semenc 

)wsk 

756 

, ,              barbatum 

Do. 

Sergiojiol 

757 

,,              Lappula 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

July.  Ai 

758 

Heterocaryum  rigidum   . 

? 

A  Hi  Valley       . 

759 

Asperugo  procumbens    . 

Madwort 

A  and  Turkistan 

760 

Cynoglossum  officinale   . 

.  Hound's  Tonguc 

River  Kokpekty 

761 

,,            viridiflorum 

Do. 

B  River  Assy     . 

762 

Solenanthus  circinatus    . 

? 

A  River  Lepsa  . 

763 

nigricans,  et  vars. 

? 

BC  Karkara      . 

4  toi 

764 

Rindera  tetraspis    . 

? 

A  and  Kirghese  Step 

pe 

765 

echinata    . 

? 

Boroldai 

766 

Rochelia  leiocarpa 

? 

River  Koldjir 

APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


643 


,.                                 Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T  n,^=,lifv              Time  of  bios-      Eleva- 
L°c^''ty-              som  or  fruit.        tion. 

LV.— SOLANACEAE  6  (5),  Nightshade  Family. 

7 

Hyoscyamus  niger  . 

Henbane 

Chimkent 

S 

,,           pusillus 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

3 

Physoclaena  physaloides 

Do. 

\     Town  of  Ajagus 

D. 

, ,          Semenowii 

Do. 

\A   River  Bion    . 

I. 

Physalis  Alkekengi 

.    Winter  Cherry 

j     Turkistan 

2. 

Lycium  turcomanicum    . 

Lycium 

1     Iliisk      . 

LVL-  SCHROPHULA 

RIACEAE  50  (55),  Figivort  Family. 

)• 

^'erbascllm  phlomoides  . 

Mullein 

B  River  Almaty 

;• 

Blattaria 

Do. 

B  Vierny   . 

„          speciosum     . 

Do. 

River  Koseatau,  Turkistan 

i. 

,,         phoeniceum  , 

Do. 

River  Ulkun-Kaldjir 

7. 

Linaria  vulgaris 

Toadflax 

Jel-Tau  .         .         .  June,  July 

\ 

,,       macroura.  et  vars. 

Do. 

Town  of  Kokpekty 

,,       odora 

Do. 

Sergiopol 

, ,       ^  violacea  . 

Do. 

Hi  River  and  Valley 

D. 

Schrophularia  altaica 

Fis^uort 

River  Kulun  Ketken 

[. 

,,           Scopolii   . 

Do. 

/I   Sources  of  Arassan 

I. 

,,           aquatica  . 

Do. 

B  River  Turquen        .               3,ooo' 

y 

, ,           incisa,  et  vars. 

Do. 

ABO  Kara-Su  . 

3  to  7.500' 

\- 

, ,           variegata 

Do. 

River  Chayan 

V 

„           canescens 

Do. 

River  Tas-Sai 

3. 

Dodartia  oriental  is 

? 

A  and  Turkistan 

7. 

Gratiola  ofificinalis 

? 

River  Kalgutty 

^! 

Veronica  pinnata    .... 

Speedzvell 

Village  of  Sautshkj 

)• 

laeta 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

). 

,,        spuria      .... 

Do. 

River  Kokpekty 

,,         longifolia 

Do. 

S.  Altai 

Tune 

,,        spicata,  et  var. 

Do. 

B  S.  Altai 

y 

,,        incana     . 

Do. 

W.  Altai 

July 

\- 

,,         Anagallis 

Do. 

B  and  Turkistan 

,,         Beccabunga     . 

Do. 

B  Vierny  . 

1. 

,,        Teucrium,  et  vars.  . 

Do. 

S.  Altai . 

,,         ciliata 

Do. 

0  Kokjar-Bash  Mtn. 

9  to  10  000' 

,,        densiflora,  var. 

Do. 

Sartau    . 

7  to  8,500' 

,,         cardiocarpa,  et  vars. 

Do. 

C  Zaisan  Mountains 

„        biloba,  et  vars. 

Do. 

B  Turkistan 

I. 

,,         nudicaulis 

Do. 

Hi  River  and  Valley 

1. 

Leptorhabdos  brevidens 

? 

Karatchok  Valley 

)■ 

Odontites  rubra       .         .      Eye-bri 

ght,  Fainted  Cup 

Quarries  of  Salair  . 

[■ 

„        breviflora         .         .    Do 

Do. 

0  Issyk-Kul       . 

}• 

Euphrasia  officinalis 

Marsh  Eyebright 

B  Jenishke 

June 

3. 

Rhinanthus  Crus  Galli    . 

Yellow  Rattle 

Q  River  Karkara 

6000' 

7- 

Pedicularis  Ludwigi         .         .  Fed 

Rattle^  Lousewort 

Keyssyk  Pass 

i. 

,,         verticillata    . 

Do.           Do. 

B  Merke    . 

4000' 

). 

,         amoena,  et  var.     . 

Do.           Do. 

G  Kokjar  Mountain 

7  to  10  000' 

X 

,         Semenowi     . 

Do.           Do. 

/I   Bajan-Juruk  Mtn. 

7,000' 

I. 

,         rhinanthoidea 

Do.           Do. 

G  River  Zauku 

6  to  7.000' 

I. 

proboscidea  . 

Do.           Do. 

River  Obi       . 

3- 

,,         uncinata 

Do.           Do. 

Quarries  of  Salair 

July 

V- 

,         resupinata    . 

Do.           Do. 

Guijewsk       .         .  July 

V 

,         elata,  et  vars. 

Do.           Do. 

Barnaul .         ,         .  June 

>. 

,         laeta     .         .        .         j 

Do.            Do. 

Near  Riddersk 

644 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 

Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

I^rahtv               Time  of  bios-    Ele 
Locality.               g^^  ^j.  ^^j^       ^ 

817. 

Pedicularis  rubens 

Red  Rattle,  Lousewort 

Jil-Tau  . 

818. 

„         dolichorhiza 

Do.            Do. 

B  C  San-tash  Pass 

6  to  6.5 

8iq. 

, ,         comosa 

Do.             Do. 

Gurjewsk 

820. 

„         physocalyx. 

et  van        Do.            Do. 

A  B  Turaigyr 

3  to  4,0 

821. 

„         versicolor 

Do.            Do. 

B  C  Kurmenty  Pass 

.     9  to  lO.O 

822. 

Melampyrum  cristatum 

Cow -wheat 

Quarries  of  Salair 

LVII.— OROBANCHACEAE  4  (11),  Broom  Rape  Family. 

823.  Philipaea  salsa        ....  ?  A  River  Lepsa 

824.  Orobanche  amoena         ,         .         .     Broom  Rape 

825.  „         ammophila   .         .         .  Do. 


826. 


cernua 


Do. 


A   River  Hi 

Zaisan  district 
A  Kyssyk  Pass  . 


LVIII.— SELAGINACEAE  i   (o),   G lobular i a  Family. 
827.  Gymnandra  borealis  var.         .         .  ?  \  A  BO  Zauku  Pass 


I 


LIX.— LABIATAE  50  (57),  Labiate,  or  Mitit,  Family. 


828    Elsholtzia  cristata  . 

829.  Mentha  sylvestris   . 

830.  ,,        arvensis     . 

831.  Lycopus  exaltatus  . 

832.  Origanum  vulgare  . 

833.  Thymus  serpyllum,  et  vars. 

834.  Hyssopus  officinalis  var. 

835.  Salvia  Sclarea 

836.  ,,      sylvestris 

837.  Ziziphora  clinopodioides 

838.  ,,        tenuior    . 

839.  Nepeta  lavandulacea 

840.  „      densiflora    , 

841.  ,,      nuda  . 

842.  ,,      Glechoma   . 

843.  ,,      ucranica 

844.  Dracocephalum  stamineum 

845.  ,,  imberbe 

846.  „  altaiense 

847.  .,  integrifolium 

848.  ,,  nutans  . 

849.  „  alpina   . 

850.  .,  peregrinum 

851.  „  heterophyllum 

852.  „  Ruyschiana 

853.  „  y  alpinum 

854.  Lallemantia  Royleana    . 

855.  Prunella  vulgaris  var.     . 

856.  Scutellaria  alpina  var.     . 

857.  „         orientalis  var. 

858.  „         Severzovii      . 

859.  „         galericulata   . 

860.  Betonica  officinalis  var.  . 

861.  Stachys  sylvatica    . 

862.  „       palustris  var. 


? 

Mint 

Do. 

Gipsy  wort 

Marjoram 

Thyme 

Hyssop 

Sage 

Do. 

? 

? 

Cat  Mint 

Do. 

Do. 

Ground  Ivy 

? 

Dragon's  Head 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

? 

.SelfHeac 

Skull  Cap 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Betofty 

Woundwort 

Do. 


4  to  6.C 


I     Gurjewsk 

\     Vierny   . 

\B  Almaty  Valley 

I     Hi  Valley        . 

B  Chilik    . 

A  B  Mai-Bulak  . 

Ulba  Valley  in  Altai 

Boroldai  .         .  May 

A   River  Kokpekty    . 
ABO  Karkara  Plateau    July 

River  Chilik  . 

Gurjewsk 
B  Tabulgaty  Pass 
P  Issyk-Kul 
j     Takyr    . 

Salair     . 
0  Zauku  Valley 
A  B  Kopal  Chain 
A  0  Tekes  Valley 
\A  B  River  Talgar 

River  Takyr  . 
\A  B  and  Marka-Kul  .       6  to  {> 
A  B  Turguen  Pass      7.500  to  iS 

0  and  Kirghese  Steppe 

1  Zarevno-Nikolaievsk 

C  River  Karkara        .  6, 

!     Hi  Valley 
I     Chirchik 

Barnaul . 
A  0  River  Tub 

Chimkent 
I     Salair     . 

Chirchik 

Salair 

District  of  ZaLsan 


5  to  6. 
April 

7  to  S 

6  to  ^ 
2  to  2. 


May.  I  to  5 
.  May 

.  May,  Jul 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


645 


fo. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  blos- 
som or  fruit. 


Eleva- 
tion. 


63.  Galeopsis  Tetrahit 

.     He7Jip  Nettle 

Gurjewsk 

64.  Leonurus  glaucescens     . 

Mother  wort 

B  Salair     . 

.      3  to 

6,000' 

65.  Lamium  amplexicaule    . 

Dead  Nettle 

Chimkent 

66.         „        album 

Do. 

B  C  Almaty  Valley 

. 

67.  Lagochilus  diacanthophyllus  . 

R  Sara-bulak     . 

I  to  2, 500' 

68.          ,,           pungens 

Hi  Valley       . 

. 

69.  Phlomis  spectabilis 

River  Chirchik 

70.        „        tuberosa     . 

River  Kokpekty 

. 

71.        ..        alpina 

Riddersk 

4,500  to 

5.500' 

72.  Eremostachys  Tournefortii  var. 

Chimkent 

73.              „            sanguinea,  vars. 

B  and  Kirghese  Steppe    4  to  5,cxx>' 

74.              „             Sewerzovii 

Karatau 

75.             „            rotata       . 

Ayagus  . 

. 

76.             „            mollucelloides  . 

Zaisan  district 

77.  Ajuga  vesiculifera  . 

Bugle 

Boroldai 

• 

LX.— PLUMBAGINi' 

^CEAE  II  (7), 

Leadwort  Family. 

78.  Acantholimon  diapensioides   . 

? 

G  Zauku  Valley 

6,000' 

79.              ..             Hohenackeri  /3 

? 

B  G  Zauku  Valley 

. 

6,000' 

80.  Goniolimon  callicomum 

? 

Ala-Kul  district 

•Si.            ,,          speciosum  /3 

? 

G  Gurjewsk 

5.500  to 

.6,000' 

■82.             ,,          Sewerzovii 

? 

Turkistan 

.  July 

83.  Statice  Gmelini      .         .         .         . 

Sea  Lavender 

Ala-kul  district 

-84.       ,,      myriantha   .         .         .         . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

. 

S5.        „      caspia          .         .         .         . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

. 

86.       ,,      otolepis        .         .         .         . 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

, 

B7.       ,,      suffruticosa 

Do. 

Salt  Lake  near  Arkat 

58.       ,,      Semenovii  .         .        .        . 

Do. 

Katu  Hill,  Hi 

2,500' 

LXI.— PLANTAGIN 

ACEAE  6  (6), 

Plaritain  family. 

89.  Plantago  major,  et  var.  . 

Plantain 

A   Salair    . 

90.         ,,        maxima   . 

Do. 

River  Kolguty 

91.         ,,        media 

Do. 

Salair    . 

92.         ,,        lanceolata 

Do. 

B  Ala-Tau  Rivers 

2,500 

93.          ,,        arachnoidea     . 

Do. 

River  Karatau 

94.          ,,        maritima 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe 

LXIL— CHENOPODI 

ACEAE  34  (28) 

,   Goosefoot  Family. 

•95.  Chenopodium  acuminatum     . 

Goose-foot 

Kly  and  Irtish  Valley      June 

.96.                ,,           hybridum 

Do. 

B  G  Zauku 

i97.               ,,           Botrys     . 

Do. 

B  Chilik  . 

. 

•98.  Blitum  virgatum     . 

? 

G  Issyk-Kul  Plateau 

^99.        ,,       polymorphum     . 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

, 

)00,  Axyris  amarantoides 

? 

Hi  Valley      . 

)Oi.  Atriplex  laciniata  .         .         .         . 

Orache 

Hi  Valley      . 

. 

^02.        „        cana          .         .         .         . 

Do. 

Arkat 

^03.  Obione  verrucifera 

Do. 

Ala-Kul 

.  June 

>04.  Eurotia  ceratoides 

? 

B  G  Tekes  Valley 

)05.  Ceratocarpus  arenarius  . 

? 

B  Seyrek-tas     . 

.  May 

^06.  Camforosma  ruthenica  . 

? 

Salt  soil 

(07.  Agriophyllum  lateriflorum      . 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

1.500  to 

2,500' 

646 


I^USSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No.                           Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Tonlity.           Time  of  bios-    Ele 

908.  Corispenni  (incog.) 

k  Kara-Su 

909.  Kalidium  foliatum 

Arkat    .         .         .  June 

910.  Kalostachys  caspia 

Hi  Valley       . 

911.  Halocnemum  strobilaceum     . 

Ala-Kul 

912.  Schanginia  linifolia 

River  Kly      .         .  June 

913.  Suaeda  physophora 

Elite 

>4  River  Lepsa  . 

914.        ,,        altissima    . 

Do. 

River  Kly      .          .  June 

915.  Suaeda  salsa  .... 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

916.  Salsola  kali    .... 

Saltwort 

Salt  soils 

917.        ,,      affinis 

Do. 

^   Lepsa   . 

918.        ,,      lanata 

Do. 

>l   lU  Valley      . 

919.        ,,      brachiata    . 

Do. 

>4   Hi  Valley      . 

920.         ,,      rigida          .         . 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       . 

921.         ,,       Arbuscula  . 

Do. 

B  Seyrek-tas     .         .       3  to  4,0( 

922.  Haloxylon  Ammodendron      . 

Tert-Kol  Mountains 

923.  Ofaiston  monandrum 

Ala-Kul 

924.  Girgensohnia  oppositiflora 

f^  Hi  Valley      . 

925.  Anabasis  phyllophora    . 

A  B  Turaigyr  Pass     . 

926.  Nanophytum  erinaceum 

A  Bion      . 

927.  Petrosimonia  crassifolia 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

928.               ,.           brachiata 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

LXIIL— AMARANTACEAE  i  (i),  Amaranth  Family. 
929.  Amarantus  paniculatus  .         .         .  Amaranth  \  A   S.  of  Kopal 


LXIV.— POLYGONEAE  25  (29),  Buckioheat  Family. 


930.  Calligonum  leucocladum 

? 

Salt  Soils       .         .May,     i.a 

931.          ,,             flavidum 

? 

River  Bukon 

932.  Rheum  rhaponticum 

Rhubarb 

B  C  Zaisan  Mountains 

933.        ,,       leucorhizum 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains 

934.        ,,       Emodi 

Do. 

A  River  Karatau 

935-        55       spiciforme 

Do. 

0  Zauku  Pass   . 

9,0 

936.  Oxyria  reniformis  . 

Mountain  Sorrel 

ABC  Kokjar    . 

937.  Rumex  crispus 

Dock 

Kirghese  Steppe    . 

938.         ,,       aquaticus   . 

Do. 

C  Karkara 

5.0c 

939.  Atraphaxis  spinosa 

? 

Hi  Valley       . 

I,OC 

940.          „           canescens     . 

? 

Utch-Kara  Mountain 

941.          „           laetevirens   . 

? 

River  Changan 

942.          „           larce-)lata  var. 

p 

A  fi  Valleys       . 

I  to  3,00 

943.          ,.           pungens 

? 

A   Kopal   . 

944.  Polygonum  acerosum     . 

Snake  Weed 

B  Merke  . 

3>5c 

945.          ,,            cognatum    . 

Do. 

BC  Ak-kia 

4  to  7,5c 

946.          „             aviculare      . 

Knot  Grass 

Salair    . 

947.          ,,             amphibium,  et  var. 

Snake  Weed 

Hi  Valley       . 

1,00 

948.          ,,            nodosum 

Do. 

B  Salair    . 

2  to  2,50 

949.          ,,            lapathiflorum 

Do. 

Isles  of  River  Obi . 

950.           ,,             viviparum    . 

Do. 

Zauku  . 

6  to  8,(X 

951.           ,,             Bistorta 

Do. 

ABC  Kopal  Chain   . 

952.           ,,             var 

Do. 

Salair    . 

953.           „             convolvulus 

Do.            \ 

B  Jenishke 

954.          „            polymorphum 

Do. 

B  Sartau  Mountain    . 

4  to  7,00 

,,            var.  songoricuni  . 

Do.            ' 

C  Zauku  . 

5  to  7,5c 

APPENDIX  B. —FLORA. 


647 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-       Eleva- 
som  or  fruit.        tion. 


LXV.— SANTALACEAE  3  (2),  Sandalwood  Family. 


5.  Thesium  multicaule 
5.  ,,        refractum 

7.  ,,        alatavicum 


Flax-leaved  Toad  Flax B  Seyrek-tas     .         .  4,000' 

Do.  Do.         \p  Barnaul 

Do.  Do.         !5C  Kuimety    .         7,500108,500' 


LXVI. 

8.  Daphne  altaica 

9.  Stellera  stachyoides 

D.  Diarthron  vesiculosum 


-THYMELAEAE 


3  (2),  Mezereiitii  Family. 

Daphne 
Do. 
Do. 


Ulba  Valley  . 
Hi  Valley       . 
^  Arassan 


1,000' 
3  to  3,500' 


1.  Elaeagnus  hortensis 

2.  Hippophae  rhamnoide: 


LXVII.— ELAEAGNEAE  2  (i),   Oleaster  Family. 

Oleaster    \     Turkistan 
.     Sea  Buckthorn  G  Issyk-Kul  Plateau 


IjOOC 

3  to  4,000' 


LXVIIL— EUPHORBIACEAE  16  (17),  Spurgeivorts. 


Euphorbia  Chamaesyce. 

,,  blepharophylla 

,,  Rapulum 

,,  pilosa    . 

,,  songarica 

,,  alatavica 

,,  pachyrrhiza  . 

,,  macrorhiza    . 

,,  lutescens 

,,  subamplexicaulis  /3 

,,  subcordata     . 

, ,  undulata 

,,  Esula.  et  vars 

,,  latifolia 

,,  lucida    . 
Crozophora  sabulosa 


Spurgewort 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
? 


A  On  the  Steppe 

Jus-Agach 

Balkhash 

Quarries  of  Salair 
B  Zaisan  Mountains 
B  Seyrek-tas      . 
^  B  Merke 


C  Karkara  Plateau    . 

Karkara 

Ivanovsky  Snow  Mtn. 

Barnaul 
G  Issyk-Kul  Plateau 
A   Kopal  . 
A   River  Hi 


to 


3,000' 

800' 

2,000' 


5  to 


5,000' 
6,000' 
4,000' 
i,ooo' 


LXIX.— SALICINEAE  13  (37),   Will(yw  Family. 


Salix  fragilis 
alba 

purpurea,  et  vars. 
viminalis 

do.      Gmelini 
nigricans 
pyrolaefolia  . 
sibirica 
Populus  laurifolia  . 
,,        euphratica 
,,        pruinosa   . 
,,        nigra 
,,        suaveolens 


Willo^cv,  Osier 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Potlar 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


Hi  Valley      . 

Chinguildy     . 

B  Zaisan  Mountains 

Hi  Valley       . 

Chinguildy    . 

Tekes  Pass    . 

The  Black  Irtish 
G  Sary-jas 
A  Lepsa  Valley 
i4  Lepsa  Valley 

Hi  Valley       . 

Chinguildy    . 
A  B  Turguen     . 


May 


May, 

May 
July 
May, 


1,000' 


IjOOO' 

i,ooo' 
6,500 


i,ooo' 
1,000' 
1,000' 


4  to  5,000' 


LXX.— CANNABINEAE  i  (o),  Hemp  FamUy. 


Cannabis  sativa 


Hemp      \  ABG  Zaisan  July,  1,500  to  7,500' 


648 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No. 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  bios-      El 
som  or  fruit.        ti 


993- 
994- 


LXXL— URTICACEAE  2  (6),  Nettle  Family. 


Urtica  cannabina    , 
Parietaria  micrantha 


Stinging  NettMBC  Mai-bulak  .         3.500  to  5,( 
Pellitory       \0  Zauku  Pass   .  7,( 


LXXIL- 
995.  Betula  alba,  et  var 


-BETULACEAE  i   (9),  Birch  Family. 
Birch      I  0  River  Takyr 


LXXIII. 

996.  Ephedra  vulgaris    . 


-GNETACEAE  i   (o),  Jointed  Fir  Family. 
?  I  B  Turkistan     . 


3  to  5,c 


697.  Abies  Smithiana 

698.  Pinus  Ledebourii 
699-       , ,     sylvestris 


LXXIV.— ABIETINEAE       (i),  Fir  and  Pine  Family. 
Spruce  Fir    \BC  Marka-Kul 


Fir. 
Do. 


Marka-Kul 
Sandy  soils    . 


5  to  6,. 


LXXV.— CUPRESSINEAE  3 

1000.  Juniperus  Sabina 

looi.         ,,  Pseudo-sabina     . 

1002.  nana    .... 


(2),    Yew,  luniper.  Cypress  Fai7iily. 


Juniper 
Do, 
Do. 


B  Koldjir 

District  of  Zaisan 
District  of  Zaisan 


LXXVI. 

1003.  Typha  angustifolia 

1004.  „       stenophylla 

1005.  „        Laxmanni 


-TYPHACEAE  3  (6),   Cat-tail  Family. 

Reed  Mace,  Bull  Rush\     Kokpekty 
Do.  Do.        \b  Aral  Steppe 

Do.  Do.         \     Chirchik 


4  to  9,c 


J 


I  to  3,c 
July 


1006-7. 


LXXVIL- 

Eminium  Ledebouri  . 


-AROIDEAE 


[  (3),  Arum  Family. 
?  I    Boroldai 


.  May 


LXXVIIL— NAIADEAE  6  (3),  Pondweed  Favtily. 


1008.  Naias  major 

1009.  Ruppia  maritima 
loio.  Zannichellia  palustris  . 
ion.  Potamogeton  natans     . 

1012.  ,,  lucens 

10 1 3.  ,,  perfoliatus 


Tassel  Pond  Weed 

Horned  Pond  Weed 

Pond  Weed 

Do. 

Do. 


Aral  See 

Caspian  Steppe 

Syr-daria 

Kirghese  Steppe    .  August 

Syr-daria 

Kirghese  Steppe  Aug.,  i  to  1,5 


LXXIX.-JUNCAGINEAE 
1014.  Triglochin  maritimum 


(3),  Allied  to  Water- Plantain  Family. 
Arrazu  Grass  \    Mai  Chilik     .         .  May 


LXXX.— ALISMACEAE  4  (5),    Water- Plantain  Family. 


1015.  Alisma  plantago,  et  var. 

1016.  ,,       ranunculoides   . 

1017.  Sagittaria  sagittifolia    . 

1018.  Damasonium  umbellatus 


Water- Plantcun 
Do. 

Arro^vJiead 
Thrumwort 


Aral  Steppe 
BC  Plateaus 
Kokpekty 
Near  Bogda 


.  June 
July,  5  to  6,0 
.  June 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA, 


649 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 


Locality. 


Time  of  blos- 
som or  fruit. 


Eleva- 
tion. 


LXXXI.— BUTOMACEAE  i  (i),  Flowering  Rush  Family, 
9.  Butomus  umbellatus   .         .  Flowering  Rush  \     Kokpekty      .         .  June 


LXXXII.— ORCHIDEAE  6  (42),  Orchis  Family. 


0. 

Orchis  latifolia.  et  vars. 

Orchis 

B  C  South  Altai         2,500  to  5,000' 

I. 

,,       incamata  . 

Do. 

A   Kopal  .         .         .  July 

2. 

Gymnadenia  conopsea  . 

Fragrant  orchis 

River  Riddersk       .  July      1,000' 

3- 

Plantanthera  viridis,  et  vars. 

Frog  orchis 

B  C  Zauku         .      June,  6  to  8,000' 

4. 

Goodyera  repens  . 

Goodyera 

B  Jenishke        .         .               5,000' 

5- 

Cypripedium  macranthum    . 

Lady^s  slipper 

South  Altai   .         .  July 

LXXXIII.-IRIDEAE  11   (6),  Iris  Family. 

5. 

Iris  tenuifolia 

Flag,  Iris 

A   Kirghese  Steppe    .  April,  May 

7. 

„    ruthenica        .... 

Do. 

South  Altai    .         .  May 

S. 

,,    uniflora           .... 

Do. 

B  Turaigyr  Pass        .  June,    5,000' 

9- 

,,    humilis 

Do. 

Ters-Akkon  Valley  May,    3,000' 

D. 

„    biglumis          .... 

Do. 

Dolok-Kara  .         .  June 

I. 

„    Guldenstaedtiaria    . 

Do. 

C  Kirghese  Steppe    .       i  to  8,000' 

2. 

,,    songorica        .... 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  May 

3- 

,,    caucasica        .... 

Do. 

Turkistan 

\' 

,,    glaucescens    .... 

Do. 

A   Kyssyk 

5' 

,,    flavissima,  et  vars  . 

Do. 

Barnaul          .         .  June,  July 

5. 

Crocus  alatavicus 

Crocus 

A  Alpine  Meadows    .  May,     7,000' 

LXXXIV.— AMARYLLIDEAE  2  (5),  Amaryllis  Family. 

7. 

Ixiolirion  tataricum,  et  vars. 

Mountain  lily  B  Turkistan      .      May,  2  to  3,cxx)' 

S. 

Lycoris  Sewerzowi 

? 

Turkistan       .         .  July 

LXXXV.— SMILACEAE  i   (7),  Smilax  Family. 
).  Polygonatum  Sewerzowi      .         .      Solomon's  seal  \  Turkistan 


.  May 


LXXXVI.— LILIACEAE  58  (23),  Lily  Family. 
Erythronium  dens  canis,  et  vars. 
Tulipa  Gesneriana 

, ,        Borszczo  wl 

,,       altaica.  et  vars. 

,,       sylvestris,  et  vars. 
Orithyia  heterophylla 
Gagea  lutea 

„       filiformis  . 


,,       minima     . 

,,       Liottardi  . 

,,       chlorantha 

„       bulbifera  . 
Lloydia  serotina 
Fritillaria  minor 
,,        mthenica 
,,         verticillata  . 
,,        palladiflora,  et 
,,        Sewerzowi   . 


? 

Tulip 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

? 

Star  of  Bethlehem 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

? 

Fritillary 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


Ivanovsky  Snow  Mtn.  July,  6,000' 
Kirghese  Steppe    ,  April 
Kara-Kum  Steppe    May 
ABO  Talgar  May,  June,  i  to  6,oco' 
ABC  Kgh.  St.  May.  June,  i  to  5,000' 
BC  Tekes  Pass  July,  7, 500  to  ' 


Marka  Lake  .         .  May,  June 
Marka  Lake  .  .  May,  June 

Kirghese  Steppe    .  April,  May 
A  Aral      .         .         .  May,    6,ooo' 
A   In  the  Steppe         .  May,    2,000' 
A   Kirghese  Steppe   .  May,     3,000' 
A  C  Aral  .         .        May,  6 to  7,000' 

Kokpekty      .         .  April 
A   Kirghese  Steppe  April,  2  to  3  000' 

On  heath  lands     April 
ABC  Issyk-bash      May,  7  to  9,000' 
Kara-Tau       .         .  May 


650 


RUSSIA JSr  CENTRAL   ASIA, 


No.                           Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Tonlitv              Time  of  bios-    1 

1058.   Rhinopetalum  Karelini         .         .                ? 

Kirghese  Steppe    .  May,    1 

1059.  Lilium  martagon 

7urk  s  Cap  Lily 

Strauchem     .         .  June 

1060.  Allium  Schonoprasum  /3 

Garlic 

fl  C  Kokjar      June,  6,500  to  J 

1 06 1 .      , ,        atrosanguineum 

Do. 

B  C  Almaty       .      July,  5  to  7 

1062.      ,,        sabulosum 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  June 

1063.      ,,        CKruleum 

Do. 

B  In  the  Steppe        .  June,    2 

1064.      ,,        Pallasii    . 

Do. 

Chinguildy     .         .  May 

1065.       „        rubellum 

Do. 

Boroldai         .         .  May 

1066.       ,,        stenophyllum 

Do. 

Dolon-Kara  ,         .  May,     i 

1067.      „        moschatum 

Do. 

B  On  rocks        .         5,500  to  ( 

1068.       ,,         callidictyon 

Do. 

Syr-daria 

1069.      „        subtilissimum 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe    .  Aug.,    1 

1070.       ,,         obliquum 

Do. 

C  River  Karkara        .  June,    c 

107 1.      ,,        alataviense 

Do. 

B  C  Tekes  Pass  July,  5,500  to"; 

1072.      „         Semenovi 

Do. 

B  C  Santash  Pass 

1073.      >»        Steveni  var. 

Do. 

B  Kirghese  Steppe    .  Aug.,   ^ 

1074.      ,,        paniculatum 

Do. 

River  Ural     .         .  Aug. 

1075.       >>        strictum  . 

Do. 

B  Salair    .         .         .  Aug.,    < 

1076.       „        lineare     . 

Do. 

Kokpekty      .         .  June 

1077.       „         flavidum 

Do. 

Tarbagatai     .         .       6  to 

1078.      ,,        nutans     . 

Do. 

On  clay  soil  .         .  July 

1079.      ,,        angulosum 

Do. 

Kokpekty      .         .  June 

1080.       ,,        inderiense 

Do. 

Bugun  .         .         .  May 

108 1.      ,,        tataricum 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe  .         .  May 

1082.       ,,         Oreoprasum 

Do. 

B  On  rocks        .         .  Aug.,   4 

1083.      ,,        platyspathum 

Do. 

A   Kopal  Chain      Aug.,  7  to  h 

1084.       ,,         caspium  . 

Do. 

Syr-daria        .         .  May 

1085.      ,,         Iliense     . 

Do. 

Hi  Valley       .         .  May,     i 

1086.      ,,        tulipifolium,  et 

var. 

Do. 

A  Hi  Valley       .         .  May,     i 

1087.       ,,         Sewerzowi 

Do. 

Boroldai         .         .  May 

1088.       „        Akaka     . 

Do. 

Khokand  Mountains  May 

1089.      ,,        oreophilum 

Do. 

B  On  marl  soils      Aug. ,  6  to  7 

1090.   Eremurus  altaicus,  et  var. 

? 

BC  Almuty     June,  1,200  to  5 

1 09 1.   Henningia  Aucheriana 

7 

A   Kara-Tau      .         .  May,    7 

1092.           „          robusta 

? 

B  Talgar  .         .      June,  2  to 

1093.   Selonia  soogdiana 

■? 

Turkistan       .         .  May 

1094.   Hemerocallis  flava 

Hemerocallis 

Barnaul          .         .  May,  Ju 

1095.  Asparagus  trichophyllus,  et  vars. 

Asparagus 

A  Kirghese  Steppe    .  May,  Ai 

1096.          ,,          maritimus,  et  var. 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains  .  May 

1097.          ,,          verticillatus 

Do. 

Bogdo  . 

LXXXVII.— MELANTHACEAE  i  (o),  Colchiciim  Family. 
1098.  Veratrum  album   ....    White  hellebore  \  B  Tabulga  Lake 


LXXXVIII.-JUNCEAE  6  (32),  Rushes. 


1099.  Luzi 

ila  campestris 

Wood  rush 

1 100.      „ 

communis  . 

Do. 

IIOI.       ,, 

lamprocarpus     . 

Do. 

1 102.      „ 

bull)osus,  et  vars. 

Do. 

1 103.      „ 

Ijufonius     . 

Do. 

1 104.      ,, 

Tenageja   . 

Do. 

B  C  Mtn.  Passes      July,  8  to  9 
Karkara  Plateau  .  5»^ 

|5  In  marshy  places  3.500  to  4 
\C  Zaisan  Mtns.     June,  8  to  9 
C  Karkara  Plateau  .     July,  5 
Kirghese  Steppe  .  August 


APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


651 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

T  nmUtir               Time  of  bios-       Eleva- 
'    '^'">'-               som  or  fruit.        tion. 

LXXXIX.— CYPERACAE  30  (104),  Sedges. 

Cyperus  fuscus       ....          Galingale 

\B  In  sandy  soils       .  Aug.,   2,500' 

Eliocharis  acicularis 

Spike  rush 

\     Kirghese  Steppe  .  Aug. 

,,          palustris 

Do. 

B  Turaigyr       .         .  June,    4,000' 

,,          ar^rolepis    . 

Do. 

i     Syr-daria      .         .  July 

Scirpus  Tabernaemontani,  et 

var. 

Club  rush 

Syr-daria       .         .  August 

„        lacustris    . 

Do. 

Town  of  Kokpekty    June 

,,        maritimus  /3 

Do. 

Town  of  Kokpekty    June 

Isolepis  Holoschoenus  . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe,  Turkistan  May 

Eriophorum  Chamissonis 

Cotton  grass 

B  C  Tekes  Pass  July,  8,500  to  9,500' 

,,            angustifolium 

Do. 

Sartau  .         .         .  June 

Carex  stenophylla 

Sedge 

C  Kly      .         .         .  April,    8,000' 

physodes     . 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe           .  May 

,.       divisa  . 

Do. 

River  Ural    .          .  April 

,.       vulpina 

Do. 

Zaisan  Valleys       .  May,     4,000' 

paniculata 

Do. 

B  0  Karkara     July,  5.500  to  7,500' 

atrata  . 

Do. 

0  Zauku.         .        July,  6  to  8,500', 

nigra  . 

Do. 

A  0  Zauku        .         July,  7  to  8,500, 

frigida 

Do. 

/I  C  Zauku        .         July,  6to8,5oo 

tristis  . 

Do. 

G  Kyzyl-jars    .         .  June 

capillaris 

Do. 

G  In  marshy  soils     .  July,     8,000' 

Oederi 

Do. 

Baskan          .          .                1,000' 

praecox 

Do. 

G  Tasma           .         .  June,    4,500' 

supina 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains    August 

nitida 

Do. 

B  Ala-Tau       .         .  August,  6,000' 

punctata 

Do. 

B  Chilik .         .         .June,    2,500' 

caespitosa,  et  var 

s. 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains    May 

acuta,  et  vars. 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains    June 

nutans 

Do. 

G  Karkara  Pass        .  July,     5,500 

.,       songorica,  et  var. 

Do. 

G  Issyk-Kul     .         .  July,     4,000' 

vesicaria 

Do. 

Zaisan  Mountains .  June,      , , 

XC— GRAMINEAE  91  (123) 

,    Grasses. 

Psilurus  nardoides 

Sedge 

A  Kirghese  Steppe  .  Aug.,    2.500' 

Aegylops  squarrosa 

Do. 

B  In  the  Steppe        .  June,     2,500' 

Hordeum  bulbosum 

Barley 

Aksa    .          .          .        • 

, ,           murinum 

Do. 

Turkistan     . 

,,          pratense 

Do. 

G  Kirghese  St.     Aug., 4,500-6,000' 

Elymus  crinitus 

Lyme  grass 

Turkistan     . 

„        sibiricus    . 

Do. 

5C  Chilik        .    July,  5,500-6,000' 

,,        giganteus 

Do. 

G  Zaisan  Mountains  .  July.      6.000' 

,,       lanuginosus 

Do. 

B  Vierny           .          .  Aug. ,    2,000' 

,,        dasystachys  var 

Do. 

Caspian  Steppe    .  Sept. 

,,       junceus,  et  vars 

Do. 

B  Chilik  Valley        .  June,    2,500' 

,,        aralensis  . 

Do. 

Aral  Steppe          .  Oct. 

Secale  fragile 

Rye  grass 

Aral  Steppe          .  Nov. 

,,      cereale 

Do. 

? 

Triticum  prostratum 

Wheat  grass 

Aral  Steppe 

,,         orientale  j8 

Do. 

Hi  Valley     .         .  May,     i.ooo' 

,,         cristatum 

Do. 

fl  Zaisan  Mnts.    July.  2,500-4,000' 

,,         fibrosum  . 

Do. 

Kirghese  Steppe  .  Sept. 

,,         desertorum 

Do.             i 

Aral  Steppe          .  Oct. 

,,         repens 

Do.             \ 

B  South  Altai  .         .  June,     2,500' 

652 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


No.                                 Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Locality. 

Time  of  blos- 
som or  fruit 

II55- 

Festuca  ovina  /3     . 

Fescue  grass 

B  Jil-Tau 

1 1 56. 

,,       rubra 

Do. 

G  Kyzyl -jar 

.  June, 

1157- 

,,      elatior 

Do. 

South  Altai . 

. 

1158. 

, ,      arundinacea  /3  . 

Do. 

South  Altai 

1159- 

,,      altaica 

Do. 

B  C  Zauku 

.  7  to 

1 160. 

Brachypodium  pinnatum 

False  Brome  grass 

B  Kurmeny  Pass 

1161. 

,,            Schrenkianun 

1         .            Do. 

B  C  Kurmeny  Pass  .  Aug., 

1 162. 

Bromus  erectus 

Brome  grass 

B  C  Meadows  . 

ii63. 

„      tectorum  . 

Do. 

Caspian  Steppe    .  Sept. 

1 164. 

,,      squarrosus 

Do. 

C  Meadows      . 

.  Tune, 

1165. 

„            do.       ^  wolgens 

is      .           Do. 

River  Kokpekty  . 

1 166. 

,,      macrostachys,  et  /3 

Do. 

Turkistan     . 

1 167. 

,,      Danthoniae 

Do. 

Turkistan     . 

. 

1168. 

Nephelochloa  songorica 

? 

Jel-Tau 

. 

1 169. 

Dactylis  glomerata 

Cocks  Foot  grass 

0  South  Altai  . 

July,  3  to 

1 1 70. 

Aeluropus  littoralis 

? 

A  In  salt  soils  . 

.  Aug., 

1171. 

,,          intertnedius . 

? 

Zaisan  Mountains 

1 172. 

Poa  alpina     . 

.     Meadow  grass 

B  C  Kokjar 

July,    7,500 

II73- 

„    bulbosa/3       . 

Do. 

A  Turkistan     . 

May,  4  to 

1 1 74. 

,,    altaica    . 

Do. 

C  Issyk-Kul     . 

July,    4  to 

II75- 

,,    serotina  . 

Do. 

South  Altai 

.  June 

1 1 76. 

,,    nemoralis 

Do. 

B  Zaisan  Mountains   Aug., 

1 177. 

,,    annua     . 

Do. 

District  of  Zaisan 

1 178. 

,,    pratensis 

Do. 

South  Altai . 

1 1 79. 

,,    trivialis  . 

Do. 

Kly      .         . 

.  June 

1 180. 

Eragrostis  poaeoides,  et  vars 

? 

Almaty  Picket      .  Aug. 

1181. 

,,         pilosa    . 

? 

Aral  Steppe 

.  Aug. 

1 182. 

Atropis  convoluta 

? 

B  Vierny  . 

•  Aug., 

1 183. 

Glyceria  fluitans 

Ilote  Grass 

B  Vierny . 

.  Aug., 

1 184. 

,,         aquatica 

Do. 

South  Altai 

.  June 

1 185. 

Arundo  Phragmites 

Reed 

C  Issyk-Kul 

.      July,  I  to 

1 186. 

Melica  ciliata 

Melic 

B  Almaty 

.     June,  3  to 

1 187. 

,,      altissima  . 

Do. 

Kokpekty 

.  June 

1188. 

,,      nutans 

Do. 

South  Altai 

.  June 

1189. 

Koeleria  cristata,  et  vars. 

Crested  Hair  Grass 

B  C  Sary-jas 

.         .  July, 

1 190. 

Schismus  minutus 

? 

Hi  Valley 

.  Aug.. 

J 191. 

Hierochloe  borealis 

Holy  Grass 

South  Altai 

.  May. 

1 192. 

Anthoxanthum  odoratum     . 

Sweet  Vernal  Grass 

Sartau  . 

.  June 

II93- 

Arrhenatherum  elatius 

Oat  Grass 

South  Altai 

.  June 

1 194. 

Avena  pubescens,  et  j3 

Do. 

C  South  Altai 

.  June 

II95- 

,,      pratensis  . 

Do. 

B  C  Kok-jar 

.      6  to 

1196. 

,,      flavescens,  et  /3 

Do. 

B  South  Altai  . 

. 

1 197. 

Deschampsia  koelerioides     . 

? 

C  Kok-jar 

1198. 

„             caespitosa 

? 

fiChilik  . 

July. 

1 199. 

„             aralensis  . 

? 

Syr-daria 

.May 

1200. 

Calamagrostis  dubia     . 

.       Small  Reed 

B  Chilik  . 

.  Aug.. 

1 201. 

,,            epigejos 

Do. 

B  Aral  Steppe 

.  Oct., 

1202. 

Agrostis  alba 

Beiit  Grass 

B  In  meadows 

.  June 

1203. 

Milium  effusum    . 

.       Millet  Grass 

B  Almatinka    . 

June,  3  to 

1204. 

„      holciforme,  et  vars.  . 

Do. 

B  C  Zaisan  Moi 

mtains     May 

1205. 

Lasiagrostis  splendens  . 

? 

/IfiCTekesPh 

xt.  July.  I  to 

1206. 

Polypogon  maritimus   . 

? 

Ural  Steppe 

•  Aug. 

1207. 

Stipa  capillata      . 

Feather  Grass 

Hi  Valley     . 

Aug.,  I  to 

1208. 

,,    pennata 

Do. 

Kebin  Valle> 

r      Aug.,    I  to 

1209, 

„    Szovitsiana 

Do. 

Syr-daria 

.  May 

1 2 10. 

Ptilagrostis  mongholica 

? 

C  Kok-jar 

July,  7,600- 

APPENDIX  B.— FLORA. 


653 


Name  in  Latin  and  English. 

Locality.           Timeofblos- 
^            som  or  fruit. 

Eleva- 
tion. 

Aristida  pungens 

? 

Kirghese  Steppe 

Aug. 

Cynodon  dactylon  j3     . 

Dog's  Tooth  Grass 

Caspian  Sea 

,  Digraphis  arundinacea 

? 

Zaisan  Mountains 

Aug. 

Phleum  asperum  . 

Cat's   Tail  Grass 

B  Vierny  . 

.  Aug., 

2,000' 

,,      Boehmeri 

Do. 

C  South  Altai  . 

July. 

5.500' 

„      alpinum  . 

Do. 

B  0  Sartau 

5tc 

8,000' 

.  Alopecurus  ruthenicus 

.    Fox  Tail  Grass 

B  Turaigyr 

.  June, 

4,000' 

,,          geniculatus 

Do. 

Chinguildy    . 

.May 

.  Crypsis  Borszczowi 

? 

? 

„       alopecuroides 

? 

Aral  Steppe 

Sept. 

,,      schoenoides 

? 

Hi  Valley      . 

•  Aug,, 

1,000' 

,,      aculeata     . 

? 

Caspian  Steppe 

Aug., 

1,000' 

.  Setaria  viridis 

Rousrh  Panick  Grass 

Zaisan  Mountains 

Aug., 

3,800' 

„      italica 

Do. 

B  Kokpekty     . 

.  Aug., 

2,000' 

.  Andropogon  Ischaemum 

? 

B  Vierny  .         .     Aug.,  2  tc 

)  4,000' 

XCL— BALANOPHOREAE  i  (0),  Allied  to  the  Grasses. 

Cynomorium  coccineum 

?             1 

Hi  Valley     . 

.    June 

,  1,000' 

XCII.— CRYPTOGAMAE  (8—80),  Flowerless  Plants. 


Equisetum  elongatum  . 
Lycopodium  Selago 
Polypodium  vulgare     . 
Woodsia  glabella,  et  j3 
Asplenium  septentrionale 
Chara  foetida  var. 
Fontinalis  antipyretica 
Marchantia  polymorpha 


Horsetail 

Club  Moss 

Polypody 

Woodsia 

Forked  Spleenwort 

Chara 

Greater  Water  Moss 

Liverwort 


Ural  Rivers  . 
Riddersk 
Arkat  Mountains 
Zaisan  Mountains 
Kirghese  Steppe 
Town  Ayagus 
River  Bukon 
Marka  Lake 


Aug.,  Sept. 

7,ooo' 

May,  1,200' 

June,  8,000' 

May,  1,200' 

1,300' 

June 


APPENDIX    C. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY   OF   RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 

A  SHORT  description  of  the  method  in  which  the 
following  lists  of  books  have  been  compiled  will  be 
interesting,  I  trust,  to  general  readers,  and  perhaps  useful 
also  to  any  who  may  attempt  the  like  hereafter.  Remember- 
ing that  "  as  extensive  a  knowledge  as  can  possibly  be 
obtained  of  all  literature  bearing  upon  his  subject  is  nowadays 
the  first  requisite  for  an  author  attempting  a  standard  work," 
I  made  my  way  to  the  British  Museum,  asking  for  books 
upon  Russian  Central  Asia.  By  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  Bond 
and  Mr.  Garnett,  I  was  taken  to  the  modern  books  of 
geography  and  travel  in  Asia,  in  the  general  library,  and 
found  myself  before  12  presses,  some  30  feet  high,  each 
containing  about  18  shelves  a  yard  long,  or  as  many 
volumes,  say,  as  would  fill  a  shelf  600  feet  in  length. 
These  I  examined,  my  amanuensis  meanwhile  copying  the 
particulars  of  all  such  books  as  treated  of  the  aforesaid 
region  ;  after  which  departmental  libraries  of  the  Museum 
were  looked  through.  A  similar  process  was  repeated 
subsequently  on  various  occasions  at  80  shelves  of  the 
library  of  the  Royal  Society,  30  at  the  India  Office,  and 
so  on,  until   I   had  visited   four-and-twenty   libraries.* 

As   a    next    step,  I  proceeded   to    search    various   library 

*  British  Museum  :  Natural  History  Museum  : 

General  Library.  '            Mineralogical  Department. 

Department  of  Oriental  MSS.  Geological  do. 

Department  of  Coins.  Botanical  do. 

Zoological  Department.  Cambridge  University  Library. 

Ethnological  do.  i    India  Office  Library 


APPENDIX   C— PREFACE  TO  BIBLIOGRAPHY.     6ss 


catalogues  *  and  bibliographical  works, "j*  taking  as  a  help 
certain  catch-words,j  under  which  it  was  expected  might  be 
found  the  information  required,  and  in  this  way  I  prosecuted 
the  search,  finally,  to  the  indexes  of  periodical  publications 
and  the  transactions  of  learned  societies.  § 

The  result  these  researches  brought  to  my  net  was  nearly 
700  titles,  which  were  copied,  so  as  to  give  as  far  as  possible 
the  author's   name  ;    title  of  book   or  article  ,    date  of  the 


United  Service  Institution  Library. 

The  Royal  Society  Library. 

Royal  Asiatic  do.    do. 

Royal  Astronomical  do.    do. 

Royal  Geographical  do.   do. 

Anthropological  do.   do. 

Geological  do.    do. 

*  The  London  Library  Catalogue. 

Royal  Geographical  Society  do.    do. 

London  Institution  do.    do. 

East  India  Company's  do.   do. 

Manchester  Free  do.   do. 

t  Watt's  "  Bibliotheca  Britannica." 

The  English  Catalogue. 

Leypoldt's  American  Catalogue. 

Porter's   "Hand-list  of  Bibliographies 
in  the  British  Museum." 

Publications    of    Caucasus    branch    of 
Russian    Geographical    Society. 

Zuchold's   '•  Bibliotheca    historico-geo- 
graphica." 

Ternaux      Compans,      "  Biblioth^qu 
Asiatique." 

Denis  and  Pincon's  "  Manuel  de  Bib- 
liographic. " 

Jackson's    "Liste     de     bibliographies 


Linnean  Society's  Library. 
Meteorological  do.   do. 
Zoological  do.    do. 
Society  of  Antiquaries  do. 
Kew  Gardens  Library. 
The  London  do. 

Boston  Bates  Hall  Library  Catalogue. 

Mr.  Wylie's  do.    do. 

Boston  Athenaeum  do.   do. 

Boston  Public  do.   do. 

New  York  State  (Subject  Index)  do.  do. 

Lorenz,     Catalogue     de     la      librairie 

fran9aise. 
Mejow's  "  Recueil  du  Turkestan." 
Catalogue  des  Russica. 
Record    of    Translations    relating     to 

Central  Asia. 
List  of  Russian  books  at  the  Fisheries 

Exhibition, 
List  of  books  in  : — 

Howorth's    "  History  of    the    Mon- 
gols. " 
Hutton's  "Aryan  to  Cossack." 
Marvin's  "  Merv." 
Yule's  "  Marco  Polo." 


geographiques."  ' 

X  Such  as  :  Asia  (Central),  Bokhara,  Kalmuks,  Ferghana,  Hi,  Jaxartes.  Kirghese, 
Khiva.  Khokand,  Kopal,  Kuldja,  Omsk,  Oxus,  Samarkand,  Semipolatinsk, 
Siberia  (West),  Steppes,  Syr-daria,  Tajiks,  Tashkend,  Turkomans,  Turkistan, 
Uzbegs,  Vierny,  Zarafshan. 

§  Index  to  Publications  of  the  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg. 
, ,  loiimal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society. 

,,  Petermann's  Geographische  Mittheilungen. 

,,  Behm's  Geographisches  Jahrbuch. 

,,  V  Annie  giographicpie . 

, ,  The  Zoological  Record. 

,,  Oriental  Church  Magazine. 


656  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

information  or  travel  ;  name  of  editor  or  translator  ;  name 
of  series  or  periodical  ;  place  and  date  of  publication.  Tht 
titles  were  then  classified  under  the  9  heads  of  i,  Central  Asic 
in  general  ;  2,  Bokhara  ;  3,  Khiva  ;  4,  Khokand  ;  5,  Kuldja 
6,  Siberia  (Western)  ;  7,  Turkistan  ;  8,  Turkmenia  ;  and  9 
Maps, — the  only  Map-room  searched,  however,  being  that  o 
the  Geographical  Society.  After  this  the  titles  under  eacl 
heading  were  arranged  chronologically,  not  necessarily  accord 
ing  to  the  year  of  publication,  but  with  regard  to  the  dat 
when  the  information  was  obtained.  Each  title  was  then  num 
bered  from  the  commencement,  and  cross-references  inserted 

In  this  manner  has  been  compiled  what  is,  I  hope,  \ 
tolerably  complete  bibliography  of  English  books  or 
Russian  Central  Asia,  with  the  addition  of  a  still  large 
number  in  French  and  German,  and  a  few  in  Russian— 
these  last  being  for  the  most  part  those  in  my  own  posses 
sion,  or  in  the  London  libraries.  Further  information  con 
cerning  Russian  books  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  excellen 
bibliography  of  Mejow,  which  gives  1,397  titles,  not  only  o 
books,  but  of  pamphlets,  papers,  and  even  newspaper  article 
upon  Central  Asia  in  general,  and  Turkistan  in  particular. 

It  would  be  ungracious  on  my  part  to  omit  the  expressioi 
here  of  my  thanks  for  the  unbounded  courtesy,  kindness 
and  attention  shown  to  me  by  the  London  librarians  am 
their  assistants  ;  and  this  applies  not  only  to  libraries  when 
I  had  the  right  of  entrance,  but  to  librarians  upon  whom 
had  no  claim  whatever. 

I  was  gratified  to  learn  from  a  Russian  acquaintance  ii 
Petersburg,  who  had  officially  visited  the  principal  librarie 
of  Europe,  that  he  considered  ours  in  the  British  Museun 
the  best,  and  I  have  met  with  the  writings  of  a  French  biblio 
grapher,  who  speaks  highly  of  London  librarians.  Englanc 
indeed,  has  reason  to  be  proud  of  its  libraries  and  librarianf 
but,  by  way  of  "  practical  conclusion,"  I  wish  to  point  out  tha 
we  are  in  one  respect  pitiably — I  had  almost  said  unpardon 
ably — poor,  for,  rich  as  our  literature  is,  we  have  not  a  snhjei. 
catalogue  thereto.  If  one  asks  a  librarian,  "  Have  you  a  boo 
by  such  an  aiithor?"  "Yes"  or  "No"  is  speedily  forthcoming 


APPENDIX  C— PREFACE  TO  BIBLIOGRAPHY.     657 

but  if  one  asks,  "  Have  you  a  book  on  such  a  subject  f"  the 
Hbrarian  is  either  dependent  on  his  own  resources,  or  on 
reference  to  a  number  of  incomplete  bibHographical  works. 

The  inquirer,  therefore,  if  he  be  a  careful  writer,  must 
make  a  bibliography  for  himself,  and  what  that  means,  the 
reader  may  judge  from  what  has  preceded.  To  collect  the 
700  titles  in  the  following  list  cost  me  about  30  journeys  to 
London,  visits  (sometimes  several)  to  24  libraries,  examining 
the  books  on  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  shelves,  a  search 
through  10  library  catalogues,  19  bibliographical  works,  and 
8  indexes  to  publications  some  of  which  extended  over  half  a 
century  !  Now  if  this  were  requisite  for  a  comparatively  small 
topic  like  "  Russian  Central  Asia,"  let  the  reader  judge  what 
amount  of  labour  would  be  needful  for  an  ordinary  subject. 

What  a  boon,  then,  might  be  bestowed  upon  literary  men, 
and  through  them,  be  it  remembered,  on  their  readers,  and 
what  glory  added  to  our  literature,  if  some  generous  patron 
of  letters,  assisted  by  enthusiastic  volunteers,  would  compile, 
at  first,  perhaps,  a  subject  catalogue  of  English  books. 
There  is  now  in  course  of  preparation  an  English  dictionary 
that,  when  completed,  will  be  the  most  thorough,  by  far, 
in  any  language,  in  the  prosecution  of  which  the  editorial 
staff  is  assisted  by  hundreds  of  volunteers.  Could  not  a 
like  effort  be  set  on  foot  in  the  interest  of  bibliography  .? 
Could  not  some  benefactors  be  found  to  bear  the  expense 
of  the  editorial  staff .?  Many  a  fortune  has  been  bequeathed 
or  given  for  a  less  worthy  object,  the  title  of  the  work 
might  perpetuate  the  name  of  the  donor,  and  abundance  of 
voluntary  help  could  be  enlisted.  Financially,  such  a  work 
might  not  probably  pay,  because  of  the  limited  number  of 
copies  that  would  be  sold,  but  its  accomplishment  would  be 
a  crown  to  our  literature  to  the  end  of  all  time. 

Not  that  such  a  bibliography,  however,  would  leave 
nothing  more  to  be  desired.  There  would  yet  remain  the 
much-needed  universal  index  to  English  literature.  The 
Times  newspaper  has,  if  I  mistake  not,  promulgated  an 
autocratic  law,  with  which  for  one  I  heartily  sympathize, 
that  it  will  review  no  book  that  has   not   on   the  title-page 

VOL.  TI.  42 


658  RUSSIAJSr  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

honestly  printed  the  date  of  publication.  One  could 
almost  wish  that  the  Times,  and  every  other  publication, 
would  decline  to  review  any  book  (within  certain  limits)  that 
has  not  an  index  ;  for  no  author,  speaking  generally,  who 
writes  a  thousand  pages  of  closely  printed  and  perhaps  valu- 
able matter,  is  justified  in  not  providing  his  reader  with 
contents  of  chapters  that  he  may  see  where  he  is  going, 
or  with  an  index  to  show  whence  he  has  come. 

Things  are  improving,  however,  in  this  respect,  and 
authors  may  be  relieved  of  much  tedious  labour  by  placing 
their  works  in  the  hands  of  professional  index-makers. 
There  has  been  formed  also  a  society,  called  the  hidex 
Society,  the  object  of  which  is  to  make  and  publish  indexes 
to  valuable  books  now  without  them.  The  society  has 
already  issued  one  or  two  valuable  works,  notably,  "  A  Guide 
to  the  Literature  of  Botany,"  and  "An  Index  to  Titles  of 
Honour,"  but  for  lack  of  funds  it  can  do  but  little. 

I  gladly  mention  this  in  case  any  who  read  these  lines 
should  be  disposed  to  send  the  society  help  in  money,  or 
the  offer  of  honorary  assistance  in  making  indexes,  or  doin^^ 
anything  towards  the  suggested  bibliography  of  English 
literature.  Communications  will  be  thankfully  received  by 
the  Secretary,  Mr.  W.  T.  Riseley,  Offices  of  the  Index  Societ} 
8,  John  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C. 

Meanwhile  I  append  my  bibliograph}-,  arranged  chrono- 
logically. 

ABBREVIATIONS. 

J.R.G.S.,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society. 
P.R.G.S.,  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society. 
P.G.M.,  Petermann's  Geographische  Mittheilungen. 

ilzvestia  (i  Zapiski)  Kavkazskago  otdiela  Imperatorskag* 
Russkago   Geographicheskago   Obstchestva   (Notes 
[also  Memoirs]  of  the  Caucasian  section  of  the  Imperia 
Russian  Geographical  Society). 
Tr.        .         .         .     Translated.  Par.   .         .         .     Paris. 

£d.       .         .         .     Edited.  Ber.    .        .        .     Beriin. 

V.  .         .         .     Volumes.  Ret.     .         .         .     Petersburg. 

Zond.    .         .         .     London  £din.  .         .     Edinburg. 

signifies  repetition  of  preceding  author's  name. 

[        ]  Square  brackets  enclose  the  known  or  supposed  dates  of  travel 
or  when  the  information  was  acquired.  m 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  659 

ASIA    (CENTRAL)    IN    GENERAL. 

'FROM  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  1700. 

1.  Hiouen    Thsang.       Memoires    sur    les    contrees    occidentales    traduits    du 

Sanscrit  en  Chinois  en  I'an  [648] ;  et  du  Chinois  en  P>an9ois  par  M. 
Stanislaus  Julien.  1858 

2.  Assemani.     Bibliotheca  Orientalis.     \o\.  iii.,  part  ii.  (for  an  account  of  the 

Nestorian  Church). 

3.  Yule,  Henry.     Notes   on    Hwen  Thsang's   account  of  the  Principalities   of 

Tokharistan.     Maps. 

4.  Mir  Ali  Shir  (poetically  called  Nevai'i).     Khamsah  Nevai'i  (the  five  Poems 

of  Nevai'i).     Oriental  MSS.,  British  Museum. 

5.  Nevai'i,  Glossary  to  the  Poems  of     Oriental  MSS.  in  British  Museum. 

6.  Dughlat,  Mirza  Haidar.    Tarikh  Rashidi  (with  MS.  translation).     Oriental 

MSS.,  British  Museum. 

7.  Fazl  Ullah  Khan.     Turki  Vocabulary  explained  in  Persian. 

8.  Mirza  Mohammed  Mehdi  Khan.      Tarikhi  Nadir  Shah  [1260].    Teheran,  \?>^ 

9.  Sheikh  Kemaleddin  Ahdurrezak.     Matlaa  es  Saadein  [1423- 1482].  Oriental 

MSS.,  British  Museum. 

10.  Tudela  Benjamin  Rabbi.      Travels  through  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  [i  160- 

II 73].     Pinkerton's  Voyages,  vol.  vii. 

11.  Purchas'  Pilgrimes,  vol.  ii.  1625-6 

12.  Harris,  vol.  i. 

13.  Bergeron,  Pierre.     Voyages  faits  principalement  en  Asie  dans  les  xii.,  xiii., 

xiv.,  et  XV.  siecles,  par  Benjamin  de  Tudele,  Jean  du  Plan-Carpin, 
N.  Ascelin,  G.  de  Rubruquis,  Marc  Paul,  Haiton,  J.  de  Mandeville,  et 
Ambroise  Contarini.  A. la  Haye,  1735 

14.  White's  Translations  of  the  Institutes  of  Timour. 

15.  Stewart,  C.     Timour's  Memoirs.     Tr. 

16.  Polo,    Marco.     The  Travels    of  a   Venetian   [in    the    13th   century]  ...  a 

description  of  remarkable  places  in  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  world.  -Tr., 
W.  Marsden.  London,  Longmans,  1818 

17.  The  Travels  of.     Edited  by  Hugh  Murray.  1844 

18.  Tr.,  Henry  Yule.  London,  1875 

19.  Le  livre  de.     Redige  en  Fran9ais  par  Rustician  de  Pise.  1865 

20.  Rubruquis,  William  de.     The  Journal  of  Friar  .  .  .  unto  the  East  part  of 

the  worlde  [1253].     Hakluyt's  Voyages.  Lofidon,  lS$g 

21.  Clavijo,  Ruy  Gonzalez  de.     Narrative  of  his  Embassy  to  the  Court  of  Timour 

[1403-6].    Tr. ,  C.  Markham.    Hakluyt  Society's  Publications.      Lond.  iS$g 

22.  Schiltberger.  Johannes.     Reisen  des  K.  F.  Neumann.  Miinich.  1859 

23.  •     The  Bondage  and  Travels  of.  .  .  .  Tr.  by  J.  B.  Telfer,  for  the  Hakluyt 

Society.  London,  1879 

24.  Baber,  Memoirs  of  [1558].     In  Turki.  text  edited  by  N.  Ilminski.  of  Kazan. 

25.  Tr.  by  Erskine,  with  Introduction.  London,  1826 

26.  Nameh  Djagataica.     Ed.,  N.  Ilminsky.  Caznni,  1857 

27.  - — —        ,,  ,,  Edinburgh  Review,  1827 

28.  Courteille,  Pavet  de  la.     Tr.  of  Babernameh. 

29.  Dictionnaire  Turk-Orientale.    (To  facilitate   reading  works   of  Baber, 

Abul  Ghazi,  et  Mir-Ali-Shir-Nevai'i.)  Paiis,  1870 

30.  Evliya  Effendi.    Travels  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  [in  17th  cent.].     1834-50 

31.  Feynes,  Sieur  de.    Voyage  fait  par  terre  depuis  Paris  jusqu'a  la  Chine.      1630 

32.  Dmitrovskiy,  N.  V.     Bibliographicheski  Ukazatel  sochineniy  o  srednei  Asii 

( Bibliographical  Index  to  Publications  relating  to  Central  Asia,  printed  in 
Russia  in  the  Russian  Language)  [from  1692].  Turkistan  Annual,  No.  3, 
pp.  181-250.  1874 


66o  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

1700-1800. 

33.  Sherefeddin  AliZezdi.     Zafer  nameh  (Book  of  Victories).    Tr.  into  French  by 

Petis  de  la  Croix.  Paris,  1722 

34.  Abul  Ghazi.     History  of  the  Turks,  Moguls,  and  Tatars.  1730 

35.  Mir  Abdoul  Kerim  Boukhary.     Texte  Persan.  Pai-h    1875. 

36.  Histoire  de  1'  Asie  Centrale,  depuis  les  dernieres  annees  du  regne  de  Nadir 

Chah  [1740-1818].     Tr.,  Charles  Schefer.  Paris,  Leroux,  1876 

37.  The  Genealogical  History  of  the  Tatars. 

38.  Shedjre-i-Turki  (Turkish  Genealogy).    Pub.  by  Romanzoff.    Kazan,  i2)2^ 

39.  Bahadur   chani    sistoria   Mongolorum   et    Tatarorum    (History   of  the 

Djagatai  Language  of  the  i8th  century),  de  C.  Frahn.  Cazani 

40.  Defremery.     Histoire  des  Samanides.  Paris,  1845 

41.  Strahlenberg.     Description  of  North  and  East  of  Europe.  London.  1738 

42.  General  History  of  the  Turks  (History  of  the  Tatars)  and  the  Empires  founded 

by  them  in  Tatary  and  Lower  Asia.     Book  I.  London,  1759 

43.  Pallas,  P.  S.     Voyages  en  differentes  provinces  de  I'empire  de  Russie.     Tr., 

Peyroine.     5  Tomes.  Paris,  1785-93 

44.  Landres,  Prey  de.     Histoire  des  decouvertes  de  Pallas,  Gmelin,  etc.       1781-7 

45.  Mosheim,  L.     Historia  Tartarorum  Ecclesiastica.  Helinstadi,  1791 

46.  Campbell,  Donald.     Journey  overland  to  India.  1 795 

47.  Abu-Taleb-Khan.     Travels  in  Asia,  etc.  [1799-1813].     Tr.  Stewart.  1814 

1800-1850. 

48.  All-Bey.     Voyage  en  Afrique  et  en  Asie  [1803-7].  '^H 

49.  Ephremov,  F.  S.     Stranstvovanie  Philippa  Ephremova  v  Kirghizskoi  stepi. 

Bukhariy,  Khivii,  etc.     (Travels  of  P.  Ephremoff  in  the  Kirghese  steppe, 
Bokhara,  Khiva,  etc.)  Kazan.  181 1 

50.  Price,  D.     Chronological  retrospect  or  memoirs  of  the  principal  events  of 

Muhammadan  history.  1821 

51.  Mir  Izzut  TJllah.     Voyage  dans  I'Asie  Centrale  [1812].     Klaproth's  Mag. 

Asiat.  1S26 

52.  Travels    in   Central   Asia   in   the   years   [1812-13].      Tr.   by   Captain 

Henderson.  Calcutta,  1872 

53.  Murray,  H.  Historical  account  of  Discoveries  and  Travels  in  Asia.  Edin.,  1S20 

54.  Bitter,  Karl.     Allegemeine  vergleichende  Geographic.  Berlin,  1822-59 

55.  Marsden,  William.     Numismata  Orientalia  Illustrata.    The  Oriental  Coins, 

ancient  and  modern,  of  his  collection  described,  etc.  London,  1823 

56.  Morier.     The  Adventures  of  Haji  Baba.  1824 

57.  Senkovski,   M.   Joseph.      Supplement  a  Ihistoire  generale  des  Huns,  des 

Turcs,  et  des  Mongols,  etc.  St.  Petersburg,  1824 

58.  Klaproth,  Julius.     Memoires  relatifs  a  I'Asie.  Paris,  1824 

59.  Magasin   Asiatique,  ou    Revue   Geographique  et  historique  de   I'Asie 

Centrale  et  Septentrionale.  Paris,  1825 

60.  Notices  sur  les  troubles  survenus  recemment  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.    Nouv. 

Joum.  Asiatique,  i.,  pp.  147,  319  ;  Joum.  Asiatique,  x.,  p.  310.  1827 

61.  Bemusat,  J.  P.  A.     Melanges  Asiatiques.  Paris,  1825 

62.  Fraehnii,    Ch.       Recensio   numorum    Muhammedorum.       Academiae   Imp. 

.Scient.  Petropolitanae.     Inter  prima  academiae  Imp.  soecularia  edita. 

Petropoli,  1 826 

63.  Ledebour,  C.  F.  von.      Reise  durch  die  Soongarische  Kirgisen-steppe  (and 

Atlas  to  his  travels).  Berlin,  1829 

64.  Flora  Rossica,  sive  enumeratio  plantarum  in  totius  Imperii  Rossici. 

Stuttgarticc,  1842 

65.  Davis.  Sir  F.  Notices  of  West  em  Tartary.  Transac.  R.  Asiat.  Soc.  London. \?^2() 

66.  Miles,  The.  Shajout  ul  Atrak  ;  or.  Genealogical  Tree  of  the  Turks  and  Tart. its. 

London,  1S30 

67.  Bosenmiiller.     Biblical  Geography  of  Central  Asia,  2  vols.  London,  I'^l^ 

68.  Levshine,  A.  J.     Opissanie  Kirgiz-Kazachikh  ord  i  stepei.      (Description  of 

the  hordes  and  steppes  of  the  Kirghese  Kazaks.)  St.  Petersburg,  1832 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  66i 

69.  Levshine,  A.  J.  Description  des  hordes  et  des  steppes  des  Kirghiz-Kazaks. 

Tr.  par  Fevry  de  Pigny,  revue  par  E.  Charriere.  Pans,  1840 

70.    Descrizione  delle  Orde  dei  Kirghizi-Kazaki.  Milan,  1840 

71.  Heeren,    A.    H.   L.     Historische  Werke.     Historical   Researches    into  the 

Politics,  etc.,  of  the  Asiatic  nations  of  antiquity.  Oxford,  1832-40 

72.  Helmersen,  G.  von.     Reise  nach  der  Kirgisen  Steppe  [1835].  1S41 

73.  Coquilles  marines  trouvees   dans  les    sables    de  Karakum  (German), 

23-25- 

74.  Baer.  K.  E.,  and  Helmersen,  Cr.  R.     Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  Russischen 

Reiches  und  der  angranzenden  Lander  Asiens.  .5"/.  Petersburg,  1841 

75.  Perovski,  General.     Narrative  of  the  Russian  Militaiy  Expedition  to  Khiva 

under  General  Perovski  [1839].     Tr.  J.  Michell.  Calcutta,  1867 

76.  Prichard,  James  Cowles.     On  the  Ethnography  of  High  Asia.  London,  1839 

77.  Hagemeister,  Jules  de.     Essai  sur  les  resources  territoriales  et  commerciales 

de  I'Asie  Occidentale,  le  caractere  des  habitans,  leur  Industrie,  et  leur 
organisation.    Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  d.  Russ.  Reiches.    St.  Petersburg,  1839 

78.  Neve,  Felix.     Expose  des  guerres  de  Tamerlan  et  de  Schahrokh  dans  I'Asie 

Occidentale.  Bruxelles,  1 840 

79.  "Wilson,  H.  H.     Ariana  Antiqua:  Antiquities  and  Coins  of  Afghanistan.  1841 

80.  Urquhart.     Diplomatic  Transactions  in  Central  Asia.  1841 

81.  Baer,  K.  E.  von.     Klima  der  Kirgisen  steppe.  1840 

82.  Zimmermann.  Geographische  Analyse  der  Karte  von  Inner  Asien.  Berlin,  1841 

83.  Memoir  of  the  countries  about  the  Caspian  and  Aral  Seas.     Tr.  by 

Capt.  Morier.  London,  1840 

84.  Leonhard,  Gustav.     Handworterbuch  der  topographischen  Mineralogie. 

Heidelbei-g,  1843 

85.  Finn,  James.     The  Orphan  Colony  of  Jews  in  China. 

London,  Wertheim.  1843  '■>  Nisbet,  1872 

86.  Brandt,  J.  F.     Observations  sur  le  Cervus  pygargus  de  Pallas  [Lu  le  14  Juin, 

1844].     Bull.  Phys.  Math.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  Tom  iii.,  pp.  280-1. 

87.  Basiner,  T.  F.    J.     Naturwissenschaftliche  Reise  durch  die  Kirgisensteppe 

und  Khiva.  St.  Petersburg,  1848 

88.  Buchanan,    Claudius.     Christian   researches  in   Asia.   With  notices  of  the 

translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  the  Oriental  languages.  London,  1849 

89.  Ehanikoif,  N.,  and  Tolstoi,  P,     List  of  positions  in  South-western  parts  of 

Central  Asia  determined  astronomically  (in  Russ).  1850 

90.  Spisok  mest  v  Severo-zapadnoi  chasti  Srednei  Asii.      (List  of 

positions  in  north-western  parts  of  Central  Asia.)  St.  Petersbiirg,  1855 

91.  Bichurin,  J.     Sobranie  Sviedienii  o  narodakh,  obitavshikh  v  Srednei  Asii  v 

drevniia  vremeni.  (Collection  of  information  concerning  the  peoples 
dwelling  in  Central  Asia  in  ancient  times.)  St.  Petersburg,  185 1 

1850-1860. 

92.  Lelewel,  Joachim.     Geographic  du  moyen  age.  Bruxelles,  1852 

93.  Bunge.     Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Flora  Russlands  und  der  Steppen  Central 

Asiens.     Alexandri  Lehmann,  Reliquiae  botanicse.  1852 

94.  Nebolsin,  P.     Ocherki  byta  Kalmykov  Khoshoutovskago  ulusa.     (Sketches 

of  the  life  of  the  Kalmuks  of  the  Khoshout  tribe.)  St.  Petersburg,  1852 

95.  Abriss    des   Russischen  Handels   mit  dem   mittleren  Asien.    P.G.M., 

215.  1857 

96.  Golovin,  Ivan.     Russia  and  Turkey,  and  their  destiny.  London,  1854 

97.  Gould,  J.     Birds  of  Asia.     Published  by  Author.  1855 

98.  Geographische  Notizen.     Zur  Botanischen  Geographic  und  Orographie  von 

Central  Asien.     P.G.M.,  163.  1855 

99.  Noschel,  A.     Bemerkungen  iiber  die  naturhistorischen,  insbesondere  die  geo- 

gnostisch-hydrographischen  Verhaltnisse  der  Steppe  zwischen  den  Fliissen 
Or  und  Turgai,  Kumak  und  Syr-daria,  Mit  einem  Vorwort  und  Bemer- 
kungen von  G.  von  Helmersen — Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  d.  Russ.  Reiches. 

1856 


662  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

loo.  Taylor,  Bayard.     Cyclopaedia  of  Travel.      New  York  and  Cincinnati,  x^^"] 
loi.  Central  Asia.     Amer.  Geo.  Soc,  p.  59.  1863-4 

102.  Central  Asia.  Nexu  York,  1874 

103.  Abich,  H.     Beitrage  zur  Palaontologie  des  Asiatischen  Russlands.     (From 

the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  St.  Petersburg.)    St.  Pet.,  1858 

104.  St.  Martin.  V.  de.     Memoire  Analytique  sur  la  carte  de  I'Asie  Centrale.  1858 

1860-1870. 

105.  Lyde,  Samuel.    Asian  Mystery  in  the  history  of  the  Ansaireeh.  London,  i860 

106.  Trade  Routes  of  Central   Asia.     Tr.  from  the  Russian  Nautical  Magazine, 

July.  1862 

107.  Morley,   W.  H.,  and  Lees,  "W.  Nassau  (Editors).     The  Tarikhi  Baihaki. 

Published  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica.  Calcutta,  1862 

108.  Radloff,  W.     Kurzer  Bericht  iiber  eine  Reise  in  den  Altai  [1861].     Bull,  de 

I'Acad.  de  St.  Petersburg,  p.  534.  1863 

109.  Kurzer   Bericht   iiber  eine   in   [1862]   unternommene    Reise   in   der 

ostlichen  Kirgisen-steppe.     Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  St.  P.,  p.  415.  1863 

no.  Bericht  iiber  eine  in  [1863]  unternommene  Reise   in   den   oestlichen 

Altai.      Bull,  de  I'Acad.  imper.  de  St.  Petersburg,  p.  26  1864 

111.   Die    Hausthiere   der   Kirgisen.      Zeitschrift  fiir    Ethnologic.    Band 

3,  4.  Berlin,  187 1-2 

112.  Kirghise.     Journal  Asiatique,  Oct.,  p.  309.  1865 

113.  Ehanikoff,  N.  de.     Memoire  sur  la  partie  meridionale  de  I'Asie  Centrale. 

Paris,  1 86 1,  and  P.G.M.,  p.  38,  1863 

114.  Kitto,  J.     Cycl.  of  Bib.  Lit.,  vol.  i.,  p.  756.     Article  on  "  Eldad  Ben  Malchi  " 

(with  reference  to  Jews  in  Cush).  Edinburgh,  1862 

115.  Berg,  Ernst  von.    Repertorium  der  Literatur  iiber  die  Mineralogie,  Geologic, 

Palifiontologie,  Berg-und  Hiittenkunde  Russlands  bis  zum  Schlusse  desxviii. 
Jahrhunderts.  St.  Petersbicrg,  1862 

116.  Gerstfeldt.     Der  Verkehr   Russlands   mit  Westasien   [Geschrieben,   1862.] 

Beitrage  zur  Kentniss  d.  Russ.  Reichs. 

117.  Benjamin,  J.  B.     Eight  Years  in  Asia.  1863 

118.  Vambery,  Arminius.     Travels  in  Central  Asia  [1863].  London,  1^6 \ 

119.  Voyage  dans  I'Asie  Centrale  [1863].     Tour  du  Monde,  p.  33.  1865 

120.  Voyage  d  'un  faux  Derviche  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.  Tr.  par  E.  D.  Forgnes. 

121.  Do.         do.      Edition  abregee  par  J.  Belin  de  Launay.     Paris,  1877 

122. Geschichte  Bocharas  oder  Trans-Oxaniens.  Stuttgart,  1872 

123.  Sketches  of  Central  Asia.  London,  1868 

124.  Skizzen  aus  Mittelasien.  Leipzig,  1868 

125.  Reise  in  Mittelasien  [1863].  Leipzig,  1873 

126. Central  Asia  and   the   Anglo-Russian  Frontier  question  :   a  series  of 

political  papers.     Tr.  by  F.  E.  Bunnett.  London,  1874 

127.  "  Russia  and  her  Dependencies."     Eraser's  Mag.,  April.  1864 

128.  Davies.     A   copy   of  Mr.   Davies's  report  of  the   Trade  of  Central  Asia. 

Ordered  by  the  House  of  Commons  to  be  printed,  17  Feb.  1864 

129.  Zaleski,  B.   La  vie  des  steppes  Kirghises— descriptions  et  contes.   Paris,  i?>6$ 

130.  Veniukof,  M.,  and  Captain  ValilAanof.    The  Russians  in  Central  Asia,  their 

occupation  of  the  Kirghise  Steppe,  and  the  line  of  the  Syr-Daria,  their 
political  relations  with  Khiva,  Bokhara,  and  Kokan:  also  descriptions  of 
Chinese  Turkestan  and  Dzungaria.    Tr.  by  J.  and  E.  Michell.   London,  1865 

131.  The   Pamir  and  the  Sources  of  the  Amu-Daria.     Tr.  by  J.  Michell. 

J.R.G.S.,  p.  248.  1866 

132.  Les  plus  recentes  explorations  russes  en  Asia.  L  M.  Rheinthal  a  Kash 

gar;  IL  M.  Nikitin  a  Khokand.  Russische  Revue.  St.  Petersburg,  1876 

133, Notes  on  Lake  Issyk-Kul  and  the   River  Koshkar.     Tr.  by  J.  Mit- 
chell.    J.R.G.S.,  p.  560.  1862 

134.    Die  Russische-asiatischen  Grenzlande.     Tr.  by  Von  Krahmer. 

Lpzig,  1874 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  663 

135.  A  British  Subject.     Russia,  Central  Asia,  and  British  India.     London,  1865 

136.  Articles  on  Central  Asia  : — ^Journal  de  St.  Petersburg,  16  July,  3  Dec,  1865; 

28  Feb.,  1867;  14  Oct.,  *i  and  21  Nov.,  1869  ;  8  Jan.,   16  May,  7  July, 
18  Oct.,  1871  ;  21  Nov.,  19  Dec,  1872  ;  23  Jan.,  7  Feb.,  1873. 

137.  Marthe.   F.     Aus   dem    Kirgisenlande.     Aus    dem    Russ.     Zeitschrift    der 

Gesellsch.  der  Erdkunde.  Berlin,  1866 

138.  Jardot,  Al.  A.    Revolutions  et  migrations  des  peuples  de  la  haute  Asie.    1866 

139.  Khanikoff.    Note  sur  le  voyage  dans  I'Asie  Centrale  d'un  officier  Allemand  au 

service  de  la  compagnie  des   Indes  orientales.     Bull,  de  Soc  G^og.    1869 

140.  On  the  subject  of  Sir  H.  Rawlinson's  criticisms  of  "  MS.  Travels  of  the 

Anonymous  German  Traveller  in  Central  Asia."     P.R.G.S.,  No.  6. 

141.  Yule,  Henry.     Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither.  London,  1866 

142.  Gobineau,  Comte  de.     Les  religions  et  les  philosophies  dans  I'Asie  Centrale. 

Paris,  1866 

143.  Central  Asian  Question  from  an  Eastern  standpoint  [1866].        London,  1869 

144.  T.  L.  (Eobert  Michell).      Letters  on  Things  as  they  are  in  Central  Asia. 

Tizzies  of  India.  1866-72 

145.  Vereschagine,  Basile.     Voyage  dans  I'Asie  Centale   [1867-8].      lozir  du 

Monde,  p.  193.  1 873 

146.  Von  Chodschend  nach  Samarkand.  Giodus,'No.  S.  1868 

147.  Des  travaux  geographiques  des  Russes  dans  le  Turkestan  et  dans  la  haute 

Asie  [1867-8].     Annales  des  Voyages,  No.  7.  1869 

148.  Schlagintweit,  R.     Die  Bewohner  Turkistan's.     Internationale  Revue,  1868 

149.  Die  neuesten  Russischen  Forschungen  in  Central  Asien.     P.G.M.,  p.  161. 

1869 

150.  Thonnelier,  M.  Jules.     Dictionnaire  geographique  de  I'Asie  Centrale,  offrant 

par   ordre   alphabetique   les   transcriptions   en   caracteres    Mandchoux   et 
Chinois  des  noms  geographiques.  Paris,  1869 

151.  Smythe,  P.  E.  F.  W.     Articles  and  Notes  upon  Central  Asia  and  Russia.    In 

his  selection,  v.  2.  1 869 

152.  Bebm,  E.  andWagner,  H.   Die  Bevolkerung  der  Erde.     Areal  undBevolker- 

ung,  Gebietsveranderungen.  Zahlungen  und    Schatzungen   aus  den  Jahren 
[1869,  1870,  und  1871].     P.G.M.,  Erganzbd.,  vii.,  1871-2.  Got/ia,  1872 

153.  Wagner,  H.     Die  Bevolkerung  der  Erde.     Allgemeine  Betrachtungen  und 

historische   RUckblicke.     Erlauterungen  zur  Uebersichtstabelle.     P.G.M., 
1873-4.  Go^ka,  1874 

154.  Bell.  Evans.     The  Oxus  and  the  Indus.         London,  Triibner,  1869  and  1874 

155.  Trench,  Captain  F.     The  Russo-Indian  Question.  London,  1869 

156.  Crealock,  H.   H.     The  Eastern   Question  and  the  foreign  policy  of  Great 

Britain.     A  series  of  papers  [1870-8].  London,  Chapman  and  Hall. 

157.  Romanovski,  M.     Notes  on  the  Central  Asiatic  Question.        Tr.,  R.  Michell. 

Calcutta,   1870 

158.  Pumpelly.  R.     Across  America  and  Asia.  1870 

159.  Behm,  E.     Geographisches  Jahrbuch  [1870-2].  Gotha,\%']\ 

1870-1880. 

160.  Sarauw.     Russlands  kommerzielle  Mission  in  Mittelasien.  Leipzig,  187 

161.  Bretschneider,  E.     On  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  ancient  Chinese  ot 

the  Arabs,  and  the  Arabian  Colonies  and  other  Western  countries  mentioned 
in  Chinese  books.  London,  187 1 

162.  Notices  of  Mediaeval  Geography  and  History  of  Central  and  Western 

Asia  from  Chinese  and  Mongol  writings.  1876 

163.  Chinese  Mediaeval  Travellers  to  the  West.  London,  1875 

164.  Forsyth,  D.     Memorandum  on  Trade  with  Central  Asia,  13th  March,  1871. 

Printed  by  India  Office.  1 871 

165.  Schepelew,  A.     Recognoscirung  des  Musart  Passes.     P.G.M.,  p.  400.     1872 

166.  Russia  and  the  Central  Asian  Khanates.  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  No.  325.    1872 
7.  Palgrave,  William  G.     Essays  on  Eastern  Questions.  London^  1872 


664  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

1 68.  Maieff,  N.  A.,  and  V.  H.  Trotsky,  Edited  by.      Russkii  Turkestan.    Sbomik 

izdannyipo  po  povodu  Politekhnicheskoi  vystavki.  (Russian  Turkistan, 
vol.  i.,  Geographical  statistics  and  miscellany,  published  in  connection  with 
the  Polytechnic  exhibition  ;  vols  ii.,  iii..  Articles  on  Ethnography,  Arts, 
Rural  economy,  Natural  History,  and  Turkistan  military  affairs.) 

Moscow,  1872 

169.  Wood,  John.    Journey  to  the  source  of  the  River  Oxus.     With  essay   on 

Geography  of  the  Valley  of  the  Oxus  by  Henry  Yule.  London,  1872 

170.  Schuyler,  Eugene,     Turkistan.     Notes  of  a  Journey  in  Russian  Turkistan, 

Khokand,  Bukhara,  and  Kuldja.  London,  1877 

171.  Elwes,  H.  J.    Geographical  distribution  of  Asiatic  Birds.     Pro.  of  Zoolog. 

Soc,  p.  615.  1873 

172.  Neue  Werke  liber  Centralasien.     Die  "  Grenzboten.'''  1873 

173.  The  Central  Asian  Question.     Eraser's  Magazine,  Nos.  45  and  47.  1873 

174.  Kessler,  K.  F.     On  a  remarkable  Fish  of  the  family  of  Sturgeons  (Scaphi- 

rhynchus).     Annals  and  Mag.  of  Nat.  Hist.,  October,  p.  269.  1873 

175.  Ichthyology  of  Central  Asia.     Pisces  3.  Zoological  Record,  1879 

176.  Nouvelles    recherches   concemant   ITchthyologie  de   I'Asie    Centrale, 

282 — 310  (in  German),  Bull.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  xxv. 

177.  Travaux  de  I'expedition  Aralo-Caspienne.  Les  poissons  vivant  et  se  trou- 

vant  dans  lebassin  ichthyologique  Aralo-Caspio-Pontique.  I.K.I.R.G.O., 
Bull.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  vol.  xv.  Tiflis,  1877-8 

178.  Giinther,  Albert.      Notes  on  the  Scaphirhynchus.      Annals  and  Mag.  of 

Nat.  Hist.,  No.  70,  October.  1873 

179.  Petrovsky,    N.    Th.      Materialy   dlia    torgovoi    statistiki     Turkestanskago 

Kraia.     (Materials  for  Trade  Statistics  of  Turkistan.)  Tashkend,  1873 

180.  Goldsmid,  Sir  F.  J.     Central  Asia  and  its  question.  Lo7idon,  1873 

181.  Lerche,  P.,  Fried.  vonHellwald.  Die  Russen  in  Centralasien.  Augsburg,  1873 

182.  Hellwald,  F.  von.     The  Russians  in  Central  Asia.     A  critical  examination 

down  to  the  present  time  of  the  Geography  and  History  of  Central  Asia. 
Tr,  by  Theodore  Wirgman.  London,  1874 

183. Central   Asien.     Landschaften   und   Volker    in    Kashgar,    Turkestan, 

Kashch,  und  Tibet.  Leipzig,  1875 

184.  Nashi  sosiedi  v  srednei  Asii.     Khivi  i  Turkmeniyi.  St.  Petersburg,  1873 

185.  Just,  Leopold.     Botanischer  Jahresbericht.  Berlin,  i'6'jt, 

186.  Terentief.     Statistiscal  sketch  of  Central  Asia  (Russ.).  1874 

187.  Russia  and  England  in  Central  Asia  (Russ).  St.  Pet.,  1875 

188.  do.     Tr.  by  F.  C.  Daukes.  Calcutta,  1876 

189.  Clarke,  F.  C.  H.     Steppe  Campaigns.     Tr.  from  the  Russian.    London,  1874 

190.  Rialle,  Girard  de.   Memoire  sur  I'Asie  centrale,  son  histoire,  etc.    Pari^,  \%1^ 

191.  Instructions  anthropologiques  pour  I'Asie  Centrale.     Bull,  de  la  Soc. 

d'Anthropol.,  April,  June.  1874 

192.  Vincent.  C.  E,     Russia's  Advance  Eastward.  London.  1874 

193.  [Long,  Rev.  James.]     Russia  and  England  in  Central  Asia.    Nrcv  York,  1874 

194.  St.  Martin,  V.  de.   Explorations  Russes.  L'Annee  Geographique.    Pans,\%']^ 

195.  Aberigh-Mackay,  G.  E.     Notes  on  Western  Turkestan.  Calcutta,  1875 

196.  Spencer,  Herbert.     Descriptive  Sociology.     Asiatic  Races,  No.  V.     Edited 

by  Duncan.  London,  1875-8 

197.  Brooke,  Sir  V.    On  Asiatic  Sheep.    Pro.  of  Zoolog.  Soc,  pp.  509-526.    1875 

198.  Recent  Russian  Explorations  in  West  Mongolia.  Markham  s  Geog.  Mag.  1875 

199.  Debelak.  Julius.     Die  Central-Asiatische  Frage.  Wien,  1875 

200.  Bogdanowitch.  E.     Expose  de  la  question  relative  au  Chemin  de  fer  de  la 

Siberie  et  de  I'Asie  Centrale.  Pa7-is,  1875 

201.  Stuart,  A.     Le  chemin  de  fer  Central- Asiatique  projete  par  MM.  Ferd.  de 

T.esseps  et  Cotard.     L Explorateur,  October,  November.  1875 

202.  Regel.  E.  Botanischer  JahresbeiHcht,  p.  734.  Berlin,  1874-5 
203. Descriptiones   plantarum   novarum  et   minus  cognitarum.     Tom   iii., 

fasciculus  iii.,  iv.,  v.,  vi.,  vii.  (and  supplement),  viii.  (and  supplement),  ix. 
(Description  of  new  Plants  in  the  Turkestan  region).  Petropolis,  1875-8 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  665 

204.  Kegel,  E.     Alliorum  adhuc  cognitorum  monographia.  Fetropolis,  1875 

205.  Towle,  G.  M.     The  Russians  in  the  East.     The  Atlantic  IMonthly,  July,  1875 

206.  Hutton.  James.     Central  Asia  from  the  Aryan  to  the  Cossack.  London,  1875 

207.  Brodowsky,  M.  Cotton  of  Central  Asia.  Journ.  Amer.  Geog.  Soc.,p.  395.    1875 

208.  Poole.    Stanley  Lane.      The   Coins  of  the  Eastern  Khaleefehs.      Ed.   by 

Eeginald  S.  Poole.  London,  1875 

209.  • and  E.   S.     The  Coins  of  the  Mohammedan  Dynasties  in  the  British 

Museum.  London,  1876 

210. Coins  of  Mongols  in  British  Museum.  London,  1881 

211.  Paquier.  J.  B.     Le  Pamir,  Etude  de  Geographic  Physique  et  Historique  sur 

I'Asie  Centrale.  Paris,  1876 

212. L'Asie  Centrale  a  vol  d'oiseau,  Paris,  1881 

213.  Les  exportations  russes  et  anglaises  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.     Bull.  Soc.  de 

Geog.  de  Paris.  1876 

214.  Maieff,  N.     Hissar  and  Kulab.     Markham's  Geog.  Mag.  1876 

215.  Mejow,  V.  J.    Recueil  du  Turkestan,  comprenant  des  livres  et  des  articles  sur 

I'Asie  Centrale,  etc.    2  Tomes  i — 150,  151 — 300.        St.  Petersburg,  1878-84 

216.  Ujfalvy,  Charles  de.      Voyage  du  Capitaine  Kouropatkine  en    Kashgarie. 

Nouvelles  du  Colonel  Prjevalsky.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog..  pp.  651-661.       1877 

217.  Le5on  d'ouverture  d'un  cours  de  Geographic  Historique  et  Politique 

de  I'Asie  Centrale  [1878].  Paris 

218.  Les  Bachkirs,  les  Vepses,  et  les  antiquites  Finno-ougriennes  et  Altaiques, 

etc.  Paris,  1880 

219. Atlas  des  etoffes,  bijoux,  aiguieres,  etc.,  de  I'Asie  Centrale.   Paris,  1880 

220.  Ujfalvy,    Madame   de.     D'Orenbourg   a    Samarcand   [1876-8].      Tour   dii 

Monde.  1 879 

221.  De    Paris    a    Samarcand,    le    Ferganah,    le   Kouldja,    et   la   Siberie 

occidentale.  Paris,  1880 

222.  Kostenko.     The  Russian  Expedition  to  the  Alai  and  Pamir  [1876].       Tr.  by 

R.   Michell  from  the  Russian  Invalide.     P.R.G.S.,  p.   122.     1876-7,  and 
J.R.G.S.,    p.  17.  1877 

223.  Baker,  Valentine.   Clouds  in  the  East.   Travels  and  Adventures  on  the  Perso- 

Turkoman  frontier.  London,  1876 

224.  Howorth,  Henry  H.     History  of  the  Mongols.  London,  1876 

225.  Eegel.  A.     Reisen  in  Central  Asien  [1876-9],  with  Map.      P.G.M.         1879 
226. Reiseberichte  vom  Kaschthal  im  Thian  Shan.  Gartenflora.               1881 

227.  Mouchketoff,  I.     Les  volcans  de  I'Asie  Centrale.     Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  St. 

Petersburg.  1877 

228.  Solfataras  of  Turkestan.     Neues  Jahrbuch  fiir  Mineralogie,  Geologic, 

und  Palccontologie.     Jahrgang,  1876,  p.  516.  Stuttgart,  1876 

229.  Les  richesses  minerales  du  Turkestan  Russe.  Paris,  1878 

230.  Cahun,  Leon.     La  banniere  bleue.    Aventures  d'un  musulman,  d'un  chretien, 

et  d'un  paien  a  I'epoque  des  croisades  et  de  la  conquete  mongole.    Ouvrage 
illustre  de  73  gravures.  Paris,  1877 

231.  Wild,  H.    Annalen  des  Physikalischen  Central-Observatoriums    (Herausgege- 

ben  von).     Jahrgang  1877  und  1881.  St.  Petersburg,  1878  and  1882 

232.  Tomaschek.  Wilhelm.     Centralasiatische  Studien,  L,  Sogdiana.     I4^ien,  1S7 7 

233.  Recueil  d'  itineraires  et  de  voyages  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.   Paris,  Leroux,  1878 

234.  Villeroi.  Bernard  de.     A  Trip  through  Central  Asia.  Calcutta,  1878. 

235.  Fawcett,  R.  H.     Routes  in  Asia.     Section  iii.    Being  .  .  .  routes  in  Khiva, 

Bokhara,  Khokand,  Yarkand,  and  Russian  Turkestan.  Calcutta,  1878 

236.  Latham,  R.  G.     Russian  and  Turk  from  a  geographical,  ethnological,  and 

historical  point  of  view.  London,  1878 

237.  Parliamentary     Reports      [1878-80].       (Correspondence    with     Russia    re- 

specting Central  Asia.) 

238.  Martens,  M.  F.    La  Russie  et  I'Angleterre  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.    Gaud,  1879 

239. Russia  and  England  in  Central  Asia.  Ridg\\ay,  1879 

240.   England  and  Russia  in  Central  Asia.     (A  review).     Oriental  Church  Maga- 
zine for  December.  N'czv  York,  1879 


666  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

241.  Das  Quellengebiet  des  Oxus.     With  Map.     P.G.M.,  p.  9.  1875 

242.  Verne,  Jules.     The  Exploration  of  the  World.  London,  1879 

1880-1884. 

243.  Reerel,  Edward.     Gartenflora.  SUdtgart,  i88c 

244.  Vsepoddanneishiy  otchet  voennago  ministerstva    [1880].     St.  Petersburg,  i^2>2 

245.  Vseobstshii  Kalendar  za  1882.    (Russian  calendar  for  1882.)       St.  Petcrsbtirg. 

246.  Vambery,  A.  On  the  Uzbeg  epos.   J.R.  Asiat.  Soc,  New  Ser.,  xii.,p.  365.  1880 

247.  Boulger,  D.  C.     Central  Asian  Portraits.  1880 

248.  Pochtovy  dorojnik  Rossiiskoi  Imperii.      (Post-road   book   of    the   Russian 

Empire).  St.  Petersburg,  1880 

249.  Russian  Slaves  in  the  Khanates  of  Central  Asia.     Oriental  Church  Mag.  for 

Sept.  Ncxv  York,  i88c 

250.  Street,  Rev.  Owen.     The  changes  in  the  Physical  Geography  of  the  ancient 

home  of  man  in  Central  and  Western  Asia.     J.  Amer.  Geog.  Soc,  p.  193, 

1880 

251.  Lentz,  P.  E.     Zapiski   Imperatorskago   Russkago   Geographicheskago  Ob- 

shestva.  (Notes  of  the  Imperial  Geographical  Society).  St.  Petersburg,  1881 

252.  Staudinger,   0.     Beitrag   zur    Lepidopteren    Fauna    Central    Asiens.    En- 

tomologische  Zeitung,  October,  p.  393.  Stettin,  1881 

253.  Wild,  H.  Die  TemperaturVerhaltnissedes  Russischen  Reiches.  St.  Pet.,  i%2)\ 

254.  Reclus,  Elisee.     Nouvelle  geog.  universelle.     vi.  L'Asie  Russe.    Paris,  1881 

255.  Middendorf,  A.  de.     Einblicke  in  das  Ferghana  Thai.    Mem.  de  I'Acad.  de 

St.  Pet.,  VII  Serie,  tome  xxix.  ^t.  Petersburg,  1881 

256.  Imbault-Huart.  Camille.  Recueil  des  documents  sur  I'Asie  Centrale.  /V?;-.  1881 

257.  Frost,  Thomas.     Modern  Explorers.  London,  1882 

258.  Capus,  G.,  and  G.  Bonvalot.     Reise  in  Central  Asien.     P.G.M.  1882 

259.  I>es  narcotiques  dans   I'Asie   Centrale.      Revue  Scientifique,   No.  24 

[16  Juin,  1883].  Paris,  Germer,  Balliere,  et  Cie.,  1883 

260.  La  Musique  chez  les  Kirghese  et  les  Sartes  de  I'Asie  Centrale.     Revue 

d' Ethnographic.  Paris,  1884 

261.  Sur  les  plantes  cultivees  qu'on  trouve  a  I'etat  sauvage  ou  subspontane 

dans  le  Thian-schan  occidental. 

262.  Bonvalot,  Gabriel.    En  Asie  Centrale.    De  Moscou  en  Bactriane.   /an j,  1884 

263.  Nolde,  Baron  Ed.  Th.    Piteinoe  dielo  i  aktsiznaya  sistema.   (The  Drink  ques- 

tion and  Excise  system.)  St.  Petersburg,  1882 

264.  Keane,  Augustus  H.     Asia.    Edited  by  Sir  Richard  Temple.     With  Ethno- 

logical Appendix.  London,  1882 

265.  Daubree.    Presentation   d'un  memoire   de   Tchihatchef  sur   les   deserts  de 

I'Asie  et  I'Afrique.     Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geog.  de  France.  Paris,  1882-3 

266.  Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  Imp.  des  Naturalistes  de  Moscou  [1882].   Mosc..  1882 

267.  The  Russians  in  Central  Asia.     The  Athenceum,  No.  2,204. 

268.  Entfernung  der  Nachtlager  unserer  Karawane  auf  dem  Wege  von  Orenburg 

nach  Chiwa,  mit  zwei  Hodometern  gemessen.  Beitrage  zur  Kentniss  des 
Russ.  Reiches.     Band  15. 

269.  Verzeichniss  der  auf  dem  Wege  von  Orenburg  nach   Chiwa  gesammelten 

Pflanzen.     Beitrage  zur  Kentniss  des  Russ.  Reiches.     Band  15. 

270.  Berezin,  P.     Sheibaniada.     (Text  with  Russian  translation.) 

271.  Opissanie  Turetsko-Tatarskikh  rukopissei.     Stati  ii.,  iii.,  iv.  (v.  Jurnal 

Ministerstva  Narodnago  prosveshchenia,  ch.  1.,  liv.,  and  lix.  Djagataiskiia 
rukopissi).  (Description  of  Turco-Tatar  MSS.,  ii.,  iii.,  and  iv..  Journal  of 
Ministry  of  Public  Instruction,  vol.  1.,  liv.,  lix.,  Djagatai  MSS.) 

272.  Dom,  B.      Rapport  sur  des  monnaies  et  manuscrits  orientaux  envoyes  aux 

Musee  Asiatique  par  M.  Khanikoff,  513-536.     Bull.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  I. 

273.  Manuscrits  Orientaux  offerts  en  don  au    Musee  Asiatique    par  M.  1" 

General  Kaufmann.  262-276.    (German).    Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  St.  Pet.,  x- 

274.  Edwards,  H.  Sutherland.     The  Central  Asian  Question. 

275.  "England.'*   The  Central  Asian  Question.  A  series  of  letters  reprinted  from 

Xht  Friend  of  Lndia.  London 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY,  667 

276.  Geographisches  aus  Mittelasien.  No.  23  Beilage  zur  Allgemeinen  Zeitung,  1870 

277.  Hammer,  Joseph  von.     Geschichte  der  Goldenen  Horde. 

278.  Geschichte  der  Ilkhanen. 

279.  Karazine.     Traduit  du  Russe  par  Tatiana  Lvoff  et  Augustin  Teste.    Scenes 

de  la  Vie  Terrible  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.  Paris 

280.  Le  pays  oij  Ton  se  battra.  Voyage  d'un  Russe  dans  I'Asie  Centrale.    Par. 

281.  lejean,  Guillaume.     La  Russie  et  I'Angleterre  dans  I'Asie  Centrale. 

282.  Ala-eddin  Ata  Malik  Djuveini,     Tarikhi  Djihankusha.     Imperial  Library 

at  Vienna. 

283.  Ebu  Bekir   Mohammed   bin  Djafar    un    Narshakhi.      Kitab-i-Narshakhi 

(book  of  Narshakhi)  under  the  title  of  Kitab-i-Akhbar-i-Bokhara  (book  of 
news  of  Bokhara). 

284.  Said  Rakim.      Tarikhi   Seid    Rakim.      MS.    in    possession    of    Professor 

Vambery. 

285.  Munshi  Sadik  Mirza.     Dakhme-i-Shahan.     MS.  in  possession  of  Professor 

Vambery. 

286.  Mehemmed  Yusuf.     Tarikhi  Mekim  Khani.     Asiatic  Society. 

BOKHARA. 

1517-1850. 

287.  Jenkinson,  A.     [1517-84.]    Voyages  and  Travels,  vol.  vii.  1810 

288.  [1517-84.]     Hakluyt,  vol.  i. 

289.   Purchas,  vol.  iii.  1 625-6 

290.  Travels  in  Bucharia.     Pinkerton's  Collection  of  Travels.  1808-14 

291.  Meyendorff,    Baron   G.      Journey   to    Orenburg    [1820].      Tr.   by    E,    F. 

Chapman.  Calcutta,  1870 

292.  (revu  par  M.  le  Chevalier  Amedee  Jaubert).  Voyage  d'Orenbourg  a 

Boukhara.  Paris,  1826 

293.  Journey  of  the  Russian  Mission  from  Orenbourg  to  Bokhara.     Tr. 

Madras,  1 840 

294.  Eversman.  Edouard.     Reise  von  Orenburg  nach    Buchara.     With    Preface 

by  Dr.  H.  Lichtenstein.  Berlin,  1823 

295.  Tychsen,  T.  C.     De  numis  Graecis  et  barbaris  in  Bochara  nuper  repertis. 

Goettingen,  1823-7 

296.  Wolff,  Joseph.     Journal  of  Missionary  labours  [1827-38].  1839 

297.  Travels  and  Adventures.  London,  i860 

298.  Narrative  of  a  Mission  to  Bokhara  [1843-5].  London,  1845 

299.  Burnes.  A.,  Travels.     Edinburgh  Review,  Jan.,  1835. 

300. Travels  into  Bokhara,  3  vols.  London,  1839 

301.  Helmersen,  Gregoire.     Nachrichten  liber  Chiwa,    Buchara,   Chokand,  und 

den  ijordwestlichen  Theil  des  chinesischen   Staates.     Beitr.,  T.   ii.,  Pub. 
Acad.  St.  Pet.  1839 

302.  Khanikoff,  N.    Description  of  the  Khanate  of  Bukhara  (Russ.),  Si-.  Pet..  1843 

303.  Bokhara  :  its  Amir  and  People.     Tr.  by  De  Bode.  Lond.  184$ 

304.  Samarcand.     Tr.  par  P.  Voelkel.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog.,  xvii.,  p.  295.   1869 

305.  Cartes  du  Turkestan  russe.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog.  1877 

306.  Grover.     Appeal  to  the  British  Nation.  1843 

307.  Bokhara  Victims.  London,  1845 

1850-1870. 

308.  De  Tassy,   Garcin.     Notice  sur  une  carte  routiere  de  Mesched   a  Bokhara 

par  M.  Sedillot.     Extrait  du  Bull.  Soc.  Geog.  Paris,  1852 

309.  Feisalin,  Mustava.     Nachrichten  liber  Buchara.  Kokand,  u.  s.  w..  von  dem 

Kaukasischen    Tartaren  .  .   .  ,  der    diese     Gegenden    mehrfach    besucht. 
P.G.M.,  p.  214.  1857 

310.  Veliaminof-Zernof,  Wladimir.     Notice  sur   un  poignard  Boukhare.     Bull. 

hist.  phil.Acad.  St.  Pet.,  T.  xvi.,  pp.  184-9,  and  Melanges  asiatiques,  T.  iii., 
pp.  576-83.  1859 


668  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

311.  Veliaminof-Zernof,  Wladimir.    L'Emir  Haidar  de  Boukhara  et  ses  trois  fil 

Bull.  hist.  phil.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  T.  xvi.,  pp.  275-83,  and  Melanges  asiatique: 
T.  iii.,  p.  361.  185 

312.  Description  de  quelques  monnaies  de  I'oulous  de  Djaghatai,  de  Khiv 

et  de  Khokand,  pp.  207-18.     Bull,  de  I'Acad.   Imp.  St.  Pet.,  II.     Lu  [1 
Avril,  i860].     Melanges  asiatiques,  iv.,  pp.  137-52. 

313.  Kokan,  Bokhara,  and  Afghanistan,  Articles  on.     Punjab  Report  for  1860-6 

314.  Vambery,  A.     Eine  Anekdote  aus  der  Geschichte  Bocharas.     Westermafw 

Illustrirtt  Monatsschrift,  No.  i.  187 

315.  History  of  Bokhara.  London,  187 

316.   On  Maieff's  Journey  from   Samarkand  to  Shahr-i-sabz  and  Bokhar; 

Tr.,  Markham's  Geog.  Mag.,  April.  187 

317.  Beschreibung  von  Samarkand.     P.G.M.,  p.  224.  186 

318.  Gavazzi,  M.    Alcune  Notizie  raccolte  in  un  viaggio  a  Bucara.    Milajio,  \%i 

319.  Tatarinov,  A.     Semimassiachniy  plen  v  Bukharii.  St.  Petersburg,  186 

320.  Gloukhovskoy,   M.     Captivite  en  Boukharie.     Tr.   par  P.  Voelkel.     Bui 

Soc.  Geog.,  p.  9.  i8( 

1870-1884. 

321.  Kostenko,  L.    Puteschestvie  v  Bukharu  Russkoi  missii  [1870].  Petersb.,  18J 

322.  Description  of  the  Journey  of  a  Russian  Mission  to  Bokhara  [1870 

Tr.  by  R.  Michell. 

323.  Abramof,  General.     The  Principality  of  Karategin.     Tr.,  J.R.G.S.  18; 

324.  Lenz,  R.     Unsere  Kenntnisse    iiber    den    friiheren    Lauf   des  Amu-Dari; 

Mem.  Acad.  St.  Pet.,  f  serie,  T.  xvi.,  No.  3,  p.  158,  P.G.M.  187 

325.  Yavorsky,  J.  L.     Puteshestvie  Russkago  Possolstva  po  Affganistanu  i  Bi 

kharskomu  Khanstvu  v  [1878-9].     (Journey  of  the  Russian  Embassy  throug 
Afghanistan  and  Khanate  of  Bokhara.)  St.  Petersburg,  188 

326.  Russian  Mission  to  Cabul  [1878].     Tr.  by  R.  Michell. 

327.  Oshanin.  Erforschung  von  Karategin  [1878],  with  Map.   P.G.M.,  p.  210.    18^ 

328.  Travels  in  Karategin  and  Darwaz.     Tr.  from  Pro.  of  Russ.  Geog.  So 

for  1881,  xvii.,  I.     By  Major  Walter  E.  Gowan. 

329.  Marshall,  L.     Routes  compiled  by  Col.  Maieff,  in  his  second  Journey  in  Sout 

Bokhara  in  [1878].     Tr.  from  Jour,  of  Imp.   Russ.  Geog.  Soc,  part  v.,  < 
1878.  Londo 

330.  Bonvalot,  G.,  et  Capus,  G.     De  Bochara  a  Krasnovodsk.     Societe  de  Gc' 

graphie.     3  Fev.,  No.  3,  et  3  Nov.,  p.  449.  i'^ 

331.  The  Mennonites.      The  Friend,  pp.  32,  81,  163,  211,  253  (1882),  180  (i.^ 

London,  i^ 

332.  Poole,   Stanley  L.,  and  Reginald  S.     Catalogue  of  Oriental  Coins  in  tl 

British  Museum.     The  Coinage  of  Bukhara  (Transoxiana).      London,  18!: 

333.  Eyries.     Bukharie,  J.R.G.S.,  vol.  xiv. 

334.  Sur  les  affaires  de  Boukharie.     Jour,  de  St.  Pet.,  pp.  114  et  1 15. 

335.  Captivite  en  Boucharie.     Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geog.,  Paris,  1861,  vol.  ii. ;  186; 

I.,  p.  438  ;  1868,  Sep.,  p.  265. 

336.  Ivanoff.  The  Russian  Pamir  Expedition  [1883].  Tr.,  P.R.G.S.    Lond.,  187 

KHIVA. 

1717-1850. 

337.  Cherkaski,  A.  Bekovitch.     The  Russian  Military  Expedition  to  Khiva  [17 17 

Tr.  by  R.  Michell,  London  R.G.S.  187 

338.  Mehenuned  Salih  of  Kharezm.     Sheibaninameh.     Imperial  Library,  \'ienii; 

339.  Riza,  Qouly  Khan.    L'Ambassade  au  Kharezm.   Tr,  C.  Schefer.    Paris,  187 

340.  Khanikov,    N.    A.       Poyeasdka   iz    Orska   v   Khivu    i   obratno    [1740-41 

(Journey  from  Orsk  to  Khiva  and  back.)  St.  Petersburg,  185 

341.  Lockhart,   W.    S.      Muravieff's  Journey  to  Khiva   through  the   Turcoma 

country  [1819-20].  Calcutta,  187 

Meyendorff.    See  291-3. 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  669 

342.  Mouraviev,  M.  N.    Voyage  en  Turcomanie  et  a  Khiva  [1819].       Paris,  1823 

343.  Route  de  commerce  d'Astrakan  a  Khiva.     Journal  Asiatique,  vol.  iv.       1824 

344.  Shakespear,  Richmond.     Journey  to  Khiva.     Blackwood's  Mag.,  June. 

Edin.,  1842 

345.  Conolly,  Arthur.     Journey  to  the  North  of  India  overland  from  England 

through  Russia,  Persia,  and  Afghanistan.  1834 

346. Travels.     Edinburgh  Review,  July,  1 844. 

Helmersen.     See  72,  74,  301. 

347.  Ivanov,N.  P.     Khivinskaya  Ekspeditsiya  [1839-40].  St.  Petersburg,  1%']^ 

348.  Vigne,  G.  T.    A  personal  narrative  .  .  .  with  notices  of  .  .  .  Khiva,  etc.    1840 

349.  Rukavkin,  A.     Puteshestvie  iz  Orenburga  v  Khivu.     (Travels  from  Oren- 

burg to  Khiva. )  St.  Petersburg,  1840 

Basiner,  T.  F.  J.     See  87. 

350.  ButakoiF,  A.     Survey  of  the  Sea  of  Aral  [1848-9].    J.R.G.S.,  p.  93.  1853 
351. The  Delta  and  Mouths  of  the  Amu-daria  or  Oxus.    Tr.  by  R.  Michell. 

P.R.G.S.,  p.  113,  and  J.R.G.S.  1866-7 

352.  Abbott,  James.  Journey  from  Heraut  to  Khiva  [1840].  Loud.,  1856  and  1884 

1850-1870. 

353.  Beschreibung  des  Chanats  Chiwa.     P.G.M.,  p.  213.  1857 

354.  Kiihlewein,  G.     Relation  d'un  voyage  a  Khiva.    Journ.  de  St.  Pet..  8,  9. 

and  10  Aug.,  1861.     P.G.M.,  p.  366.  1861 

Vambery.     See  118-21,  123-5,  246,  654. 

355.  The  Sea  of  Aral  and  the  Russians  in  Central  Asia.      Colburn's  New  Monthly 

Magazine,  No.  1,122.  1868 

1870    1880. 

356.  Rawlinson,   Sir  H.  C.     On  Trade  Routes  between   Turkestan  and  India. 

P.R.G.S.,  xiii.,  p.  10. 

357.  England  and  Russia  in  the  East.     A  series  of  papers  on  the  Political 

and  Geographical  Condition  of  Central  Asia.  London,  1875 

358.  Notes  on  Khiva.     P.R.G.S.,  p.  162.  1872-3 

359.  Ignatieff,  General  (probably  written  by).     Advantages  to  Russia  of  posses- 

sion of  Khiva.     Russkii  Mir  ( The  Russian  World),  June.  1873 

360.  Reclus,  E.     Note  relative  a  I'histoire  de  la  mer  d'Aral.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog., 

Aout.  Paris,  1873 

361.  Kostenko,  L.  F.     Die  Stadt  Chiwa  im  Jahre  [1873].     P.G.M.,  p.  121.     1874 

362.   Khiva  en  [1873].     Tr.  du  russe  par  M.  Guyard.     Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de 

Geog.,  Nov.,  pp.  469-492.  1874 

363.  De  Khiva  au  fort  de  Kasala.  Le  Globe  de  Genhje,  1875 

364.  Von  Chiwa  nach  Fort  Kasala  am  Syr-Daria.  P.G.M.,  1874 

365.  Lerche,  P.     Khiwa  oder  Kharezm.     Seine  historischen  und  geographischen 

Verhaltnisse.     Mit  einer  Karte  von  Khiwa.  St.  Petersburg,  1873 

366.  Schmidt,  Emil.     Lerche,  P.     Die  Expedition  gegen  Chiwa  im  Jahre  [1873]. 

Russ.  Revue,  Band  vi.  St.  Petersburg,  1874 

367.  Die  Russischen  Expeditionen  [1874]  i"  die  Niederungdes  Amu- Darya. 

Russische  Revue,  pp.  225-247.  St.  Petersburg,  1875 

368.  Zerbs,  Anton.     Die  Russische  Expedition  gegen  Chiwa  [1873].     Wien,  1875 

369.  Soliman,  Hauptmann.     Positionsbestimmungen  in  Chiwa  und  am  Aral-See, 

[1873].     P.G.M.,  p.35.  1875 

370.  Niemann,    Hauptm.    A.    von.      Die    Russische   Expedition   nach     Chiwa. 

P.G.M.,  p.  161.  1873 

371.  Le  Khiva  en  Mars  [1873].  Paris  et  London,  Quaritch,  1873 

372.  Blaramberg,   Gen.  von.     Der  Feldzug  nach  Chiwa  [1873].     P.G.M.    1874 

373.  Stumm,  Hugo.    Mit  der  Russischen  Armee  gegen  Chiwa  [1873].     P.(r.M., 

p.  281.  1873 

374-  Aus  Chiwa.  Berlin,  1873 

375-  Der  Russische  Feldzug  nach  Chiwa.  Berlin.  1875 

376.  Russia's  Advance  Eastwards.  London,  1874 


670  RUSSIAN  CE AURAL  ASIA. 

377.  Kolokoltzof,  Col.     Expedition  de  Khiva  [1B73].     Le  Globe,  Journ.  Geo 

de  la  Soc.  de  Geneve,  xiii. ,  pp.  24-40.  18' 

378.  Veniukof,  Col.     Khiva  [1873].     ^u^'-  •'^oc.  Geog.,  April  and  June. 

379.  Suavi-Effendi.     Le  Khiva  en  [1873].  Paris,  i8' 

380.  Saint-Martin,  V.  de.     Geographie  du  Khanat  de  Khiva.     13,  L'Annee  Ge 

graphique.  Paris.  18 

381.  Khanikoff,  JNicholas  de.     Les  documents  sur  le  Khanat   de  Khiva.     Bu 

Soc.  Geog.,  March,  pp.  282-94.  18 

382.  Roesler.  Robert.     Die  Aralseefrage.  J  Vim,  18 

383.  Traub,  Paul.     Khiva  et  le  Prince  Beloudek.     Heros  de  la  Perse.  i8' 

384.  Spalding,  H.     Khiva  and  Turkestan.      Tr.  from  Russ.  /.on<ion,  18; 

385.  Ker.  David.     On  the  Road  to  Khiva.  London,  18' 

386.  The  Mineral  Wealth  of  Central  Asia  as  bearing  on  Russian  progre^ 

Geog.  Mag.,  January,  p.  4.  18; 

387.  MacGaban,  J.  A.     Journey  to  Khiva.     Bull.  Amer.  Geog.  Soc.  18; 

388. Campaigning  on  the  Oxus,  and  the  Fall  of  Khiva.  London,  18; 

3S9.  Kiepert,  H,    Uas  Tiefland  von  Chiwa,  mit  dem  Delta  des  Amu-Darya.  Xa* 

russischen  und  von  Lieut.  H.  Stumm  gesammelten  Materialen.     Bcrl.  18; 

390.  Paget,  John  C.     Khiva  and  the  Eastern  Question.     St.  James's  Mag.,  18; 

391.  Tillo,    Al.    A.   von.     Notice   sommaire  sur   le  nivellement    Aralo-Caspie 

Orenburg,  i%', 

392.  Wood,  Herbert.     Notice  sur  une  cause  probable  du  changement  .   .  .  dai 

cours  de  I'Amou  Daria.  Geuife,  18' 

393.  The  Aralo-Caspian  Depression.     Geog.  Mag.,  May.  London,  18' 

394.   West  Turkestan  and  adjoining  countries.     (The  shores  of  Lake  An 

in  9  maps.)  1 8; 

395. Geological    Exploration    in    the  Amu-Daria    District.  Ger>g.    Mag 

January.  London,  18; 

396.  Burnaby,  Frederick.     A  Ride  to  Khiva.  London,  iS; 

397.  Howorth,  Heary  H.     The   Basins  of  the  Caspian  and  the  Aral.      Con 

spondence,  Geog.  Mag.,  April,  p.  106.  London,  1S7 

398.  Das    Nivellement    z\Nischen    dem    Aralsee    und    dem    Kaspischen    Meer 

P.G.M.,  p.  310.  18: 

399.  Burnand,  F.  C.     The  Ride  to  Khiva.  Punc/i.  18; 

400.  Morgan,  E.  D.     Old  Channels  of  the  Lower  Oxus.  J.R.G.S.,  18; 

401.  Koenen,  A.  von.     Ueber  die  unter-oligocaene  Tertiaerfauna  vom  Aralse 
Veliaminof  Zernof      6*^:^312. 

1880-1884. 

402.  Amu  Daria,  Hydrometric  Measurement  of  the.      Orient.  Chiirrh  Mat;..  Oc 

Ac7C'  York,  18J 

403.  Bogdanoff,  M.  N.     Account  of  the  Fauna  and  Flora  of  the  Khivan  Oasi 

and  the  Kizil  Kum  Desert  (Russ.).  Tashkent,  i*^^ 

404.  C[larke],  F.  C.  H.     Khiva.     Art.  in  Encycl.  Britannica.  La. 

405.  Meteorologische  Beobachtungen,  angestellt  wahrend  der  Raise  von  Oreni 

bis  Taschhaus.     Beitrage  zur  Kenntnis^  des  Russ.  Reiches,  Band,  15. 

406.  Zimmermann.     Khiva.     Tr.  by  Morier.  London,  J.  Madde 

KHOKHAND. 

1813-1870. 
407    Singh,  Sodi  Hukum.     History  of  Khokand.     Ed.  Charles  Ellison  Bate; 

Lahore,  1S7 

408.  Nazaroff,  Expedition  to  Khokand  [1813  and  1814].  St.  Pc, 

409.  Klaproth,  J.      Voyage    a    Khokhand   [1813   et    1814],    par    Ph.    Nasaiov 

Mag.  Asiat.,  I.  \'^' 

410.  Notices  geographiques  et  historiques  sur  Khokand,  et  autres  pays.     K 

roth's  Mag.  Asiatique,  vol.  i.,  p.  81.  1 


APPEXDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  671 

Helmersen.     Sec  72-4,  99,  301. 
VeliaminofF-Zemof .     See  312. 
Punjab  report.     See  313. 

411.  Report  of  a  Journey  to  Kokan.     Selections  from  Records  of  Government  of 

India.      No.  x.xxix.  Calaitta,  1863 

412.  Osten-Sacken,  P.  R.     Les  paysages  inconnus  de  I'Asie  Centrale.     Annales 

des   voyages,   No.  3.  1870 

413.  Expedition   to'  the  Trans-Naryn    Country  in  [1867].     Tr.  by  E.   D. 

Morgan,  P.  R.G.S.,  p.  221,  1869;  JR-G.S.,  p.  250.  1870 

414. and  Ruprecht,  F.  J.     Sertum  Tianschanicum.     Botanische  Ergebnisse 

einer  Reise  im  mittleren  Thian-schan.     Mem.  de  I'Acad.  Imp.  de  St.  Pet. 

1869 

415.  Michell.  Robert.   The  Jaxartes,  from  Russian  sources.  T.R.G.S.,  p.  429  1868 

1870-1884. 

416.  Fedchenko,  A.     Reise   in    Kokan   und  zuni    Noidende   des  Pamir,   [1871]. 

P.G.M.,  p.  161.  1872 

417.  Reise  wahrend  [1871]  im   siidlichen    Greenzgebirg  von  Kokan.     Tr. 

F.  Marthe.     Zeitschr  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdk..  Bd.  vii. 

418.  Travels  in  Khokand,  and  to  the  Upper  Waters  of  the  Jaxartes.    P.G.M. 

1874 

419.  Travels  in  Khokand,  Aug.     Geog.  Mag.  London,  1873 

420.  Kuhn.  Alexander  von.   Province  of  Ferghana.  Tr.  by  F.  Henvey.  S2fnla,i2>']6 

421.  Vambery  A.    Russian  Campaign  in  Khokand.    Markham's  Geog.  Mag.,  1876 
VeniukoiF.     See  130-134. 

422.  Michell.  R.     Ferghana.     Markham's  Geog.  Mag.  1876 

423.  Weil.       La  campagne  des    Russes   dans  le  Khanat  de  Khokand  [1875-6]. 

Journal  des  Sciences  Militaires.  Paris,  1876 

424.  SevertsofF,    N.     Journey  in  Ferghana   and   the  Pamir   [1877-8].     From   a 

trans,  by  Alexis  Lomonossof.      P.R.G.S.,  p.  499.  1880 

425.  New  species  of  Turkestan  Birds  (Russ).     Notes  of  Turkestan  section 

of  Soc.  of  Friends  of  Natural  History,  etc.,  vol.  i.  Tashkend.  1879 

426.  Birds  of  the  Pamir.     Ilns,  5th  series,  i.,  p.  48.  1883 

427.  Ujfalvy,  C.  de.     Excursion  scientifique  dans  le  Ferghana.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog., 

August,  pp.  190-193.  1877 

428.  Notes  sur  le  Ferghana.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog.,  October,  pp.  425-9.         1877 

429.  Le  Kohistan,  le  Ferganah,  et  Kouldja,  Paris,  1878 

430.  Atlas  Anthropologique  des  Peuples  du  Ferghanah.  Paris,  1879 

431.  Capus,  Gr.    Les  sables  du  Ferganah.    Archives  des  Missions  scientifiques  et 

litteraires.     3e  serie,  tome  viii.  Paris,  1882 

KULDJA. 

1712-1850. 

432.  Gaubil.      Journal   de   la  Mission    Chinoise  chez  les    Tourgouth   Tartares. 

[1712].     Soc.  Observ.  Math.,  etc.,  I.,  pp.  148-175. 

433.  Amiot.     Monument    de  la  transmigration  des   Tourgouttes   [1712].     Mem. 

Cone.  I.,  pp.  401-418. 

434.  Unkowsky.  J,     Neueste  Historic  der  ostlichen  Kalmiickei.    Muller's  Samml. 

Russ.  Gesch.,  1.,  p.  123.  1732 

435.  ,  De  Guigne's  Histoire  generale  des  Huns,  iv.,  p.  102.       Paris,  1756-58 

436.  Pesterev,  Jegor.    Remarques  sur  les  peuples  qui  habitent  la  frontiere  chinoise, 

sur  les  Tatars  tributaires  de  la  Russie,  et  sur  les  Soiotes  et  Mongols  soumis 
a  la  Chine  [177 1 -81].     Klaproth's  Magasin  Asiat.,  vol.  i.,  p.  123.  1*825 

437.  Bergmann.    Noniadische  vStreifereyen  unter  den  Kalmuken.   4  v.   Riga,  1804 

438.   Voyages  chez  les  Kalmucks.    Traduit  de  I'Allemand.       Chatillon,  1875 

439.  Timkowski,  George.     Travels  of  the  Russian  Mission  through  Mongolia  to 

China  [1820-21].  London,  1827 


672  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

440.  Poutimstev,  M.     Voyages  de  Bukhtarminsk  a  Gouldja  ou  Hi  [181 1].     Klap- 

roth's  Mag.  Asiat..  vol.  i.,  p.  173.  1826 

441.  Trautvetter.     Enumeratio   plantanim   sungoricarum   a   Dr.   Schrenk   annis 

[1840-43]  collectarum.    Bull.  Nat.  Moscou,  i.,  ii.,  i860:  ii.,  iv.,  p. 937.  1866 

442.  Karelin  et  Kirilow.     Enumeratio  plantarum  in  desertis  Sungorise  orientalis 

et  in  jugo  summarum  alpium  Alatau  anno  [1841]  collectarum.     Bull  Nat. 
Moscou,  i.,  ii..  iii.  p.  933.  1842. 

1850-1870. 

443.  Zwick,  H.  A.     Grammatikder  West-Mongolischen,  d.  L,  Oirat  od.  Kalmu- 

kischen  Sprache.  Danauesch.^  1852 

444.  Atkinson,  T.  W.     A  Journey  through  some  of  the  highest  Passes  in  the  Ala 

Tau  and  Ak  Tau  Mountains.     P.R.G.S.,  p.  127.  1858-9 

445.  Mrs.     Recollections  of  Tartar  Steppes.  London^  1863 

446.  Semenoff,  P.  P.     First  Ascent  of  the  Thian  Shan  in  [1857].     With  Map.     Tr. 

by  John  Michell.    J.R.G.S.,  p.  356.  1861 

447.    Djungaria  and  the  Celestial  Mountains.  Tr.  by  J.  Michell.  J.R.G.S., 

p.  213.  1865 

448.  Forschungsreisen   in   den  Transilischen  Alatau    und    zum   Issyk-kul. 

Zeitschrift  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdkunde.  Berlin,  1869 

449.  Narrative   of  an  Exploring  Expedition  from   Fort   Vemoye    to    the 

Western  Shore  of  Issik-Kul.  Tr.  by  E.  D.  Morgan.  J.R.G.S.,  p.  311.    1869 

450.  Regal,  E.  et  Herder,  F.     Enumeratio  plantarum  in  regionibus  cis-et  trans- 

iliensibus  a  Semenovio,  anno  [1857]  collectarum  auctoribus.     Acta  Horti 
Petropolitani.  Mosqiice,  1864 

451.  Der   Fluss    Hi    als    kiinftige   Wasserstrasse   nach   dam   westlichen    Chma. 

P.G.M.,  p.  407.  ^  1858 

452.  Sabir,  C.  de.     Le  pays  des.sept  rivieres  et  la  contree  trans-ilienne.    Memoir. 

Societe  de  Geog.  Paris,  \^\ 

453.  Molloy,  Captain.     Narrative  of  the  Tungani  Insurrection  in  Eastern  Tur- 

kestan in  [1863]. 

454.  Michell,  Robert.     Eastern  Turkestan  and  Dzungaria,  and  the  Rebellion  of 

the  Tungans  and  Taranchis.  1862-6 

455.  Temperatur-Beobachtungen  in  Kuldscha.     P.G.M.,  p.  III.  1865 

456.  Die  Seenzone  des  Balchasch-ala-kul,  und  das    Sieben-Stromland   mit  dem 

Ilibecken.     P.G.M.,  pp.  73>  '63,  393.  1S68 

457.  Motchoulski,  V.  de.     Coleopteres  rapportes  de  la  Sungarie  par  M.  Semenof 

pp.  301-14.     Mem.  de  I'Acad.  de  St.  Petersbourg. 

458.  Coleopteres  rapportes  en  1859  par  M.Severtsof  des  steppes  meridionales 

des  Kirghises.     Bull,  de  I'Acad.  Imp.  St.  Pet.,  ii.,  pp.  513-44. 

1870-1884. 

459.  Cordier,  Henri.     Catalogue  of  the  Library  of  the  North  China  branch  of  the 

Royal  Asiatic  Society  (including  the  Library  of  A.  Wylie).  Shanghai,  1872 

460.  Bibliotheca  Sinica.     Dictionnaire  bibliographique  des  ouvrages  relatifs  a 

I'Empire  Chinois.     Publications  de  I'ecole  des  langues  x.  Paris,  1878 

461.  Dilke,  Ashton.   On  the  Valley  of  the  Hi.    P.R.G.S.,  vol.  xviii.,  p.  246.    1874 

462.  Mdllendorff,  P.  G.,  and  0.  F.  von.    Manual  of  Chinese  Bibliography,  being  a 

list  of  Works  relating  to  China.    Shanghai,  Kelly  &  Walsh.    London,  1876 

463.  Prjevalsky,    N.   M.      Reise  von    Kuldscha   iiber  den  Thian-Schan  an  den 

Lob-Nor  und  Altyn-Tag  [1876  und  1877].  Gotha,  1878 

464. ?'rom  Kulja  across  the  Tian  Shan  to  Lob-Nor.    Tr.  by  E.  D.  Morgan. 

Including  Notices  of  the  Lakes  of  Central  Asia.  London,  1879 

465.  Expedition  fromKuldja    to    Lob-Nor.      Orient.    Ch.    Mag..    March. 

New  York,  1879 

466.  Regel.  A.  Meine  Expedition  nach  Turfan  [1879].  P.G.M.,  p.  27,  Band  x.  1881 

467.  PantussofF,  N.    SviedieniaoKuldjinskom  Raioneza[i87i-7].    Information  on 

Kuldja.  Kasan,  188 1 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  673 

468.  Statisticheskia  sviedienia  po  Semiriechenskoi  oblasti  i  Kuldjinskomu  raionu 

za  1878  (Statistics  of  Semirechia  and  Kuldja).    In  Manuscript ;  unpublished. 
Ujfalvy.     Sec  429. 

469.  Clarke,  F.  C.  H.     Kuldja.     P.R.G.S..  p.  489.  1880 

470.  Morgan,  E.  D.  A  Journey  through  Semiretchia  to  Kuldja  [1880].  P.R.G.S.  1881 

471.  Alpheraky,   Serge.     Lepidopteres   du   district   de  Kouldja,    Part  i.     Horse 

vSocietatis  Entomologicte  Rossicoe,  Tom.  xvi.,  1881  ;  xvii.         St.  Pet..  1882 

472.  Kuropatkin,  A.  N.    Itinerary  of  the  route  followed  by  the  Russian  Embassy 

to  Kashgaria  [1876].     By  W.  E.  Gowan.  Shyila,  1880 

473.  ^  Kashgaria.     Tr.  by  W.  E.  Gowan  (Zc?«i/^«,  E.  Thacker).  Calcutta,  iSSt 

SIBERIA— WESTERN. 

FROM  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  1850. 

474.  De  la  Croix.  Petis.     Life  of  Gengis  Can. 

475.  Purchas.     Relation  of  two  Russe  Cossacks  Travails  out  of  Siberia  to  Catay. 

Vol.  iii.  1619 

476.  Ides,  E.  Ysbrand.      Driejaarige  Reize  naar  China.  Amsterdam,  ly  10 

477.   Journal  of  an  Embassy  to  China.  1698 

478. Three  years'  Travels  from  Moscow  overland  to  China.       London,  1706 

De  Guignes.     See  435. 

479.  Coxe,  William.     Account   of  the   Russian   Discoveries   between  Asia   and 

America,  to  which  are  added  the  Conquest  of  Siberia.  1780 

480.  Meiners,   C.     De  antiquis  monumentis  in  Siberia  australi  existentibus.     In 

Gotttingener  Ges.  d.  VViss.  Comm.  1795-8 

481.  Humboldt,  A.  von.     Personal  Narratives  of  Travels  to  .  .  .  Asiatic  Russia 

[1799- 1 804].     Tr.  by  W.  McGillivray.  1832  and  1853 

482. Fragmens  de  geologie  et  de  climatologie  Asiatiques. 

483.  Asie  Centrale.     Recherches,  etc.  1843 

484.  ,  and  Graf  G.  von  Cancrin.     Im  Ural  und  Altai.  Leipzig,  1869 

485.  Yazykov,  D.  J.     Sobranie  puteshestvii  k  Tataram.     (Collection  of  Travels 

among  the  Tatars.)  St.  Petersburg,  1825 

486.  Bose,    Gustav.     Mineralogisch-geognostische   Reise   nach   dem    Ural,  dem 

Altai,  und  dem  Kaspischen  Meer.  Berlin,  1837 

487.  Fedorow.  W.     Vorlaufige  Berichte  iiber  die  von  ihm  ...  in  West  Siberien 

ausgeiithrten  astronomisch-geographischen  Arbeiten.  1838 

488.  Jones,  Sir  W.     Works.     Vol.  i.,  4to  edition,     Discourses  on  the  Tatars. 

489.  Notices  des  manuscrits  de  la  Bibliotheque  du  Roi.  Vol.  xiii.,  p.  291.  Paris,  1838 

490.  Bonyard,  E,  H. ,  und  C.  A.  Meyer,     Verzeichniss  der  am  Saissan-nor  und 

am  Irtysh  gesammelten  Pflanzen.  Besonderer  Abdruck.  Memoires  de  I'Acad. 
Imp.  St.  Pet.,  tom  iv.  1841 

491.  Fischer,  F.  E.  L.,  et  C.  A.  Meyer.     Enumeratio    plantarum  novarum  a  cl. 

Schrenk  lectarum.  Petropoli,  1841 

492.  History  of  Siberia.     German. 

493.  Middendorff,  A.  T.  von.   Voyage  scientifique  dans  la  Siberie  occidentale.  1844 

1850-1884. 

494.  Atkinson^  Thomas  W.     Oriental  and  Western  Siberia.  London,  1858 

495.  Abramof,   N.     Semipalatinsk.     With  Table  of  Meteorological  Observations, 

J.R.G.S..  p.  555.  1862 

496.  Nor    Tsai-san    and     its    Neighbourhood.      P.R.G.S.,     1864-5,     ^md 

J.R.G.S.,  p.  58.  1865 

497.  Cherkassoff,  A.    Zapiski  Okhotnika  Vostochnoi  Sibiri,  1856-63.  6"/. /V/.,  1867 

498.  Ujfalvy,   C.     Excursions  en  Dzoungarie.     Bull.  Soc.   Geog.,  Dec,  p.  638. 

1877 

499-  Le  Syr-Daria,  le  Zerafchane,  le  pays  des  sept-rivieres,  etc.    Pans,  1879 

500.  Atlas  archeologique  des  antiquites  Finno-Ougriennes  et  Altaiques  de  la 

Russie,  de  la  Siberie.  et  du  Turkestan.  Paris,  1880 

VOL.  II.  43 


674  JiUSS/AA^  CENTRAL  ASIA- 

501.  Obzor  Akmolinskoi  oblasti  za  [1S80].     (Review  of  the  Akmolirij^k  01)last) 

Omsk  (not  published),  1881 

502.  Obzor  Semipalatinskoi ;  oblasti.  (Supplements  to  the  Reports  of  the  Governo 

of  the  Semipolatinsk  Oblast  for  [1879-80,  and  1881].     Not  published. 

503.  Finsch,   Otto.      Reise  nach  West  Sibirien  im  Jahre  [1876].     Zool.   Botan 

Soc.  of  Vienna.  VVien,  i87( 

504.  Pamiatnaia    knijka  Zapadnoi    Sibiri    (Calendars  for  Western   Siberia)  fo 

[1880  and  1 881].  Omsk.  1881  8 

505.  Yadrintseif,  N.  M.     Sibir  kak  kolonia.   (Siberia  as  a  Colony.)  St.  Pct.^\%%: 

506.  Laharpe.     Siberie.     Voyages  de  Gmelin.  vol.  viii. 

507.  Lansdell,  Henry.     Through  Siberia  [1879].     2  vols.  London.,  188: 

508.   do.     I  vol.  London,  188 

TURKISTAN. 

1650-1850. 

509.  Abulfeda.     Chorasmias   et   mawralnahr^e,  hoc   est,  regionum   extra  fluviuii 

Oxum  descriptio.     From  the  original  Arab,  and  Lat.  London,  165' 

510.  Astley,  T.    Vol.  IV.    Collection  of  Voyages.  Descrip.  of  Turkestan.      1745- 

511.  Milman,  H.  H.     Samor,  Lord  of  the  Bright  City  :  an  heroic  Poem.         i8ii 

512.  Old  Bed  of  the  Oxus.     Nouveau  journal  Asiatique.     December,  183 
Perovski.     See  75. 

513.  Yagmin,  A.     Kirghiz  Kaisatzkiya  Step  i  ikh  jiteli.     (The  Kirghese  Kazal 

Steppes  and  their  Inhabitants.)  St.  Petersburg,  184 

514.  Burslem.  Rollo.     A  Peep  into  Toorkistan.  London,  184 

515.  Lai,  Mohan.   Journal  of  a  Tour  through  Panjab  .  .  .  Turkestan  (in  compan 

with  Lieut.  Eurnes).  Calcutta.  1834  ;  London,  184 

516.  Travels  in  .  .   .  Turkestan.  London,  1841 

1850-1870. 

517.  Ferrier,  J.  P.     Caravan  Journeys  in  .  .  .  Turkestan.  185 

518.  Maksheev.     Opisanie  nizoviev  Sir-Daryi.     (Description  of  the  Lower  Syi 

daria.)  .5"/.  Petersburg.  185 

519.  Maksheeif,  Kapitan.      Beschreibung  des  Aral-Sees.    P.G.M.,  p.  213.     185 
Veliaminof-Zemof,  Wladimir.     See  312. 

520.  Golubef,  A.     Brief  Sketch  of  the  Results  of  the  Issyk-Kul  Expedition.     T: 

by  John  Michell.    J.R.G.S  ,  p.  366.  186 

521.  Ostroumoff^   N.     Istoricheskii  ocherk  narodnago  obrazovaniia.     (Historic^ 

account  of  the  National  Education  in  the  Towns  and  Forts  of  the  fornit 
Syr-daria  line  and  Turkestan  Oblast  [1860-67].)  Tashkend.  188 

522.  Characteristics   of  the    Mussulmans   in   Central    Asia.       Moskovsko 

Pravoslavnoe  Obozrenie  (Orthodox  Rev.).   August.  188' 

523.  Kitaiskie  Emigranty.     (Chinese  Emigrants  in  the  Semirechia  oblast  » 

the  Turkistan   region   and   the   spread   among   them   of  orthodox  Chri^ 
tianity.)  Kasan,  187 

524.  Marthe,  F.     Russische  wissenschaftliche  Expeditionen  im  Jahre   [1864  un 

1865]  in  Turkistan.     Zeitschrift  fiir  Allgemeine  Erdkunde.         Berlin,  186 

525.  Lobysevitch,  Theodore.  Laligne  militairedu  Syr-Daria.  St.  Petersbttr^,  186 
1^26.  Paschino,  P.  J.     Turkestanskii  Krai  [1866].  St.  Petersburg,  \> 

527.  Das  Land  Turkestan  [1866].    P.G.M.,  p.  117.  1 

528.  Poltaratsky.     The  Country  between   the  Tchou  and   Syr  Rivers    (Ri; 

Zapisky  Imp.  Russ.  Geog.  Soc,  1.  i' 

529.  The  Country  between  the  Tchou  and  Syr  Rivers.     Tr.  into  Frencli 

P.  Voelkel.     Bull.  Soc.  Geog.,  December,  p.  433.  Paris,  180 

530.  Voyage  du  general  .  .  .  et  du  baron  Osten-Sacken,  dans  le  Turkestn 

Russe.     Annales  des  voyages,  No.  ii.  i'"^ 

531.  Kazantseff.  Elia.     Opisanie  Kirgiz-Kasakof.      (Description  of  the  KirL, 

Kazaks.)  St.  Petersburg,  I6> 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  675 

Osten-Sacken,     See  412-414. 

Michell,  R.     See  144,  222,  351,  415,  454,  533^  538,  562. 

532.  Die  Turkestanische  Industrieausstellung  in  St.  Petersburg.     Globus.        1869 

533.  Michell,  R.   Notes  on  the  ruins  in  Samarkand.  Tr.  from  Fedchenko's  descrip- 

tion of  the  Valley  of  the  Zerafshan  [1869].     P.R.G.S.,  p.  393.  1870-71 

534.  Fedchenko,  A.  P.,  Edited  by.      Puteshestviye  v  Turkestan  (Travels  in  Tur- 

kistan).  Vols  xi.,  parts  1-7;  xix.,  8-10;  xxi.,  11-13  ;  xxvi.,  14-16; 
xxxiv.,  17-18;  also  vol.  iii.,  part  2  (Instructions  for  the  Expedition); 
and  ix.,  part  I  ;  x.,  I  and  2  ;  and  xiv.,  for  various  works  on  fauna, 
flora,  etc.,  of  Turkistan,  as  : — Mammals,  Birds,  Reptiles,  and  Fishes,  by 
Severtsoff;  Fishes,  by  Kessler  ;  MoUusca,  by  Martens  ;  Crustacea, 
by  Ulianin  ;  Araneae,  by  Kroneberg ;  Coleoptera,  by  Solsky  ;  Mellifera, 
by  Morawitz  ;  Sphegidae,  Mutillidae,  and  Chrysidiformes,  by  Radozkovsky ; 
Scoliidae  and  Orthoptera,  by  Saussure  ;  Formicidae,  byMayr  ;  Lepidoptera 
by  Erschoff ;  Neuroptera,  by  MacLachlan  ;  Odonata,  by  Brauer  ;  and 
Vermes,  by  Krabbe  ;  in  Isvestia  Imperatorskago  Obshchestva  Lubitelei 
Estestvoznaniia.  (Transactions  of  the  Imperial  Society  of  Friends  of  Natural 
History,  Anthropology,  and  Ethnography.)    Tomes  i.-xxxviii.  Moscow 

535.  Sketch  of  the  Zarafshan  Valley.  J.R.G.S.,  1870 

536. Reisen  in  Turkestan.     P.G.M.,  p.  201.  1870-71 

537. Topographical  Sketch  of  the  Zarafshan  Valley.     Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  xL. 

1870 

538.  Notes  on  Map  ofMaghian.  By  R.   Michell.     J.R.G.S.,  p.  263.    1873 

539. Das   Gebiet   des   Oberen  Amu  und  die  Orographic   Central  Asiens. 

With  Map.     P.G.M.  1874 

540.  Adamoli,  Jules.     Das  Thai  von    Samarkand   und  der   dortige  Seidenbau. 

Nach  brieflichen  Mittheilungen.  Deutsch  bearbeitet  von  W.  Koner,  Zeit- 
schrift  der  Gesellsch.  fiir  Erdkunde.  1870 

541.  Turkestan  Gazette,  January,  1871,  Statistics  of  the  Province  of  Central  Asia  ; 

August  13th.  1870,  Central  Asian  Khanates  ;  October  21st,  1870,  Kashgar 
and  Western  China  :  Jan.  29th.  1871,  Yakub  Beg  and  Dunganis. 

1870-1880. 

542.  Lercbe,  P.     Das  russische  Turkestan.     Russ.  Revue.  1872 

543.  Petzholdt,  Alex.,  and  Lerche,  P.     Turkestan  auf  Grundlage  einer  im  Jahre 

[1871]  unternommenen  Bereisung  des  Landes  geschildert.         Leipzig,  1874 

544.  —  Umschau  im  Russischen  Turkestan,  nebst  einer  allgemeinen  Schilder- 

ung  des  "  Turkestanschen  Beckens."  Leipzig,  1877 

545.  Maieff,  N.  A.     Material  dlia   statistiki   Turkestanskago  Kraia.     (Turkestan 

Annual),  vol.  i.  St.  Petersburg,  1872 

546.  do.  do.  Vol.  ii.  ,,    ,,    1873 

547.  do.  do.  Vol.  iii.  ,,    „    1874 

548.  do.  do.  Vol.  iv.  „    ,,    1876 

549.  do.  do.  Vol.  V.  ,,    „    1879 

550.  The  Saturday   Review.     Articles   on   Central   Asia,   January    i8th,    1873  5 

February  ist,  1873  ;  April  5th,  1873  ;  April  26th.  1873;  May  loth,  17th, 
and  31st,  1873  ;  June  28th,  1873  ;  August  2nd  and  9th,  1873. 

551.  The  Pall  Mall  Budget.     Articles  on  Central  Asia,  January  2nd,   loth,  and 

17th.  1873;  February  14th  and  21st,  1873;  April  2nd  and  25th,  1873; 
November  7th,  1873;  December  5th,  1873;  May  8th,  15th,  and  29th, 
1874;  June  I2th,  1874;  July  loth,  1874. 

552.  Notiz   iiber   das   im    Jahre   [1873]   in   Turkestan   beobachtete  Temperatur 

Maximum.     Russ.  Revue. 

553.  Alphabetical  Index  to  the  contents  of  the  Turkestan  Annual  for  the  years 

1872,  1873,  1874,  1876,  1879  (Nos.  I,  2,  3,  4,  5),  and  of  the  Turkestan 
Kalendar  for  1880.  Simla,  1883 

554.  Regel,   E.     Descriptiones  plantarum  novarum    in  regionibus  Turkestanicis 

a  cl.  viris  Fedjenko,  Korolkow,  Kuschakewicz  et  Krause  coUectarum. 
Fasciculi  I.— VIII.  Petropoli,  1873 


676  RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

555.  Begel,  E.    Descriptiones  plantarum  novarum  et  minus  cognitarum  in  legio- 

nibus  Turkestanicis  crescentium,  II.  and  III.  Transactions  of  Botanical 
Gardens  of  St.  Petersburg,  p.  289.  1874 

556.    A.  P.G.M..  p.  155.  1874 

557.  Das  russische  Turkestan.     Die  "  Grenzboten,'^  No.  25.  1873 

558.  Vambery,  A.     The  Steppes  to  the  North  of  Bokhara.  Geog.  Mag.,  1873 

559.  Nachrichten  liber  das  Klima  von  Turkestan.     P.G.M.,  p.  434.  1873 

560.  Severtsoff,  N.  A.     Puteshestviya  po  Turkestanskomu  Kraiu.      St.  Pet.,  1873 
561. Erforscliung  des  Thian-schan   Gebirgssystems  [1867]  nebst   kartogra- 

phischer  Darstellung  desselben  Gebietes  und  der  Seenzone  des  Balkash- 
Alakul  und  Sieben-Stromlandes.  Nach  den  Originalen  und  offiziellen 
russischen  Aufnahmen  von  A.  Petermaim  Gotha.  1875 

562.  - —   Journey  to  the  west  portion  of  the  Thian   Shan.  [1867].    Tr.    by  E. 

Michell.    J.R.G.S.  1870 

563.  Vertical  and  Horizontal  Distribution  of  Turkestan  Animals  [1873].     Tr. 

in  Annals  and  Magazine  of  Natural  History.  Oct.  /  ond.,  1876 

564.  Vertical  and  Horizonal  Distribution  of  Birds.     Tr.  into  German,  pp. 

321-89,  Oct..  1873;  403-47,  1874;  58-104,  168-200,  1875.  Gabanis, 
Journal  fiir  Ornithologie.  Leipzig 

565.   Letter  with  corrections  of  article  on  Birds   in  Cabanis'  journal,   pp. 

420-31,  vol.  iii.,  1875.     ''' St j-ay  Feathers.'''  Loudon 

566.  Dresser,  H.  E.      Notes  on  Severtsoff's  Fauna  of  Turkistan  (Turkestanskia 

Jivotnyia).  pp.  77,  171.  319,  410.     '•  The  Ibis.'' 

567.  De  Mamy,  N.  P.  B.     Geological  Explorations  in  the  Region  of  the  Amu 

Daria.     Markham's  Geog.  Mag.,   December,  p.  362.  London.  1857 

568.  Daly.     Russian  Expedition  to  Turkestan.     Bull.  Amer.  Geog.  Soc.      1874-6 

569.  Index  to  the  contents  of  the  Turkestan  Gazette  from  1874.  Simla,  1883 

570.  Lubomirski.    Un  nomade  Safar-Kadgi.    Les  Russes  aSamarcand.    /V?;-.,  1874 
Spalding.     See  384. 

Aberigh  Mackay.     See  195. 

571.  Hochstetter,  Ferd.  v.     Asien,  seine  Zukunftsbahnen,   seine   Kohlenschatze 

Eine  geog.  Studie.  Wicn,  1876 

572.  Iwanow,  D.     Die  Russen  in  Turkestan.     Nach  Skizzen  Deutsch  von  A.  v. 

Drygalski.  Sttittgart,  1876 

573.  Khoroshkhin,  A.  P.     Sbornik  statei  kasaiushchikhsia  Turkestanskago  krain 

(Collection  of  papers  relating  to  the  Turkestan  region).  ^/.  Pet.,  1876 

574.  Kiepert,  H.     Turan  oder  Turkistan,  zu  C.   Ritter's  Erdkunde,  zum  dritten 

Mai  neu  bearbeitet.  Bei-lin,  \%^t 

575.  Die  Sande  Kara-Kum,  in  ihren  Beziehungen  zur  Eisenbahn.     P.G.M.     187S 
Ujfalvy.     See  427-30,  498-500. 

576.  Piankoflf,  B.     Turkestanskii  Kalendar  za  [1880J.  Tashkent,  \'i']^ 

577.  Oshanin,  B.     Materials  for  the  Hemipterological  Fauna  of  Turkistan.  Notes 

of  Turkistan  section  of  the  Society  of  PMends  of  Natural  History,  etc 
(Russ).  Tashkend,  187c 

578.  Zapiski  Turkestanskago  otdiela  I.  O.  (Notes  of  the  Turkestan  Section  of  tht 

Society  of  Friends  of  Natural  History,  etc.),  vol.  i.  Tashkend,  1879 

1880-1884. 

579.  Kostenko,  L.    Turkestanskii  Krai,  3  vols.    (Turkestan  region.)  6"/.  Pet.  188c 

580.  Capus,  G.      Das  Jagnau-Thal  und  .seine  Bewohner.     P.G.M.  i8Sj 

581.   Sables  mouvants  et  colonnes  de  breche  du  Turkestan.     La  A^atun 

p.  343,  April  26th,  1884.  Parii 

582.  Indications      sur     le      climat     et     la     vegetation     du      Turkestan 

Annales  des  sciences  naturelles,  Botanie,  vi.  serie,  tome  xv..  xvi.,  xvii., 
xviii.,  Nos   4-6.  Paris,  1883-4 

583.  Dragendort     Ueber  den  jetzigen  Zustand  der  Volksmedecin  in  Turkestnn. 

584.  Beschreibung  des  Landes  Turkestan.     Allgemeine  Historic,  etc.,  vol.  vii. 

585.  Nachrichten  aus  Turkestan.     St.  Pet.  Zeitung,  214.     Rigasche  Zeitung.  64. 


APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  677 

586.  Motivirovannaya  Zapiska  o  Amu-Daryinskom  Otdielie  sostavlennaya  po  pro- 

grame  prikaza  po  General-Gubernatorstvu,  No.  36  (Notes  concerning  the 
Amu-Daria  District  for  the  General  Governor).     In  MS.,  unpublished. 

587.  La  defense  de  Samarkande.      'journal de  St.  Pet.,  No.  181. 

588.  La  prise  de  Samai-kande.      journal  de  St.  Pet.,  No.  116. 

589.  Bulletin  militaire.      Nouvelles  du  gouvernement  general  du  Turkestan  du 

15  Avril.     Jmirnal  de  St.  Pet.,  No.  117. 

590.  Sobolef.     Geography  and  Statistics  of  the  Zarafshan  District  (Russ.) 

TURKMENIA. 

FROM  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  1870. 

Clavijo,  R.  G.  de.     See  zi. 
Muravieff.     See  342. 

591.  Bode,  Baron  de.     Otcherk  Turkmenskoi  zemlii  i  yugo-vostochnago  prebrajia 

Kaspiiskago  moria  (A  Sketch  of  the  Turcoman  Land  and  South-East  Littoral 
of  the  Caspian  Sea  in  [1837  and  1848]).  Otechestvennyia  Zapiski  (Annals 
of  the  Fatherland;,  July,  August,  September.  St.  Petersburg,  1856 

592.  Michell,  R.      Memorandum  on  the  Country  of  the  Turcomans,  giving  an 

account  of  the  Russian  Occupation  of  the  East  Coast  of  the  Caspian. 

593.  Quelques  aper^us  sur  les  Turcomans  a  I'orient  de  la  mer  Caspienne.  Nouvelles 

Annales  des  Voyages  et  des  Sciences  geographiques.  Paris,  1852 

594.  Karelin,  Gr.     Enumeratio  plantarum  quas  in  Turcomania  et  Persia  boreali 

collegit.     Bull.  Natur.  Hist.,  p.  141.  Moscow,  1839 

Zimmermann.     See  83,  598,  662. 

595.  De  Hell,  Xavier  H.     Les  Steppes  de  la  Mer  Caspienne,  etc.         Paris^  1843 

596.  Travels  in  the  Steppes  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  London.  1847 

597.  Pushchin.      Kaspieskoe   more    Hidrografitcheskoe   opisanie   i    rukovodstvo 

dlia  plavania  (The  Caspian  Sea  :  a  Hydrographical  Description  and  Hand- 
book for  Navigation").     Russian  Hydrographical  Department.  1854-77 

598.  Humboldt,  H.  A.,  und  Carl    Zimmermann.     Denkschrift  liber  den  untem 

Lauf  des  Oxus  zum  Karabugas  Haff  des  Caspischen  Meeres.      Berlin,  1845 

599.  Borszczow.  El.     Compte  rendu  general  sur  les  resultats  botaniques,  obtenus 

pendant  un  voyage    dans   les   regions   Aralo-Caspiennes  [1857    et   1858]. 

Bull.  phys.  math.,  pp.  471-479.    Acad,  de  St.  Pet.,  T.  xvii.  Lu  le  7  Jan.  1859 

600. Die  pharmaceutisch-wichtigen  Ferulaceen  der  Aralo- Caspischen  Wiiste. 

i860 
601. Die  Aralo-Caspischen  Calligoneen.  i860 

602.  Abich,  H.     Ueber  eine  im  Caspischen  Meere  erschienene  Insel  nebst  Bei- 

tragen  zur  Kenntniss  der  Schlammvulkane  der  caspischen  Region.  Mem. 
TAcad.  Imp.,  7.  serie,  tome  vi..  No.  5.  St.  Petersburg,  1863 

Vambery.     6"^,?  118- 121,  123-5,  654-5. 

603.  Route  de  Merv.  ...  a  Samarcand.  Journ.  Asiat.,  p.  263,  and  p.  92.   1865-72 

604.  De  Blocqueville,  Henri  de.     Quatorze  mois  de  captivite   chez  les  Turco- 

mans.     Tour  dtc  Monde,  p.  225.  Paris,  1866 

605.  Mielgunow.     Turkmenien  und  die  Insel  Aschurade.     Archiv  fiir  Wissensch. 

Kunde  von  Russland.  1866 

606.  Unter  den  Turkomanen.      Globus.  1867 

607.  Koschkul,    M.    F.    de.      Compte   rendu   des  travaux   geologiques   executes 

[1869-70]  dans  les  environs  de  la  baie  de  Krasnovodsk.      Tiflis,  1875,  1881 

1870-1883. 

608.  Koschkul,  M.  F.  de.      Tableaux  statistiques  sur   la  production   de  petrole 

dans  la  presqu'ile  d'Apcheron,  vol.  vi.,  p.  5.  Tiflis,  1875  ^"^^  1881 

609.  Markozoff,  Col.     Reconnaissances  avec  le  detachment  de  Krasnovodsk  .  .   . 

[1871].     I.K.I.R.G.O.,  vol.  i.,  p.  85.  Tiflis,  1873 

610.  Stebnitzky,  M.  J.     Report  on  his  Journey  [1872]  in  Central  and  Southern 

Turkomania.     Tr.  by  E.  D.  Morgan.     J.R.G.S,,  p.  217.  1874 


678  RUSSIA A^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

6n.  Stebnitzky  M.J.  Les  steppes  des  Turcomans.  Bull.  Soc.  Geog.,  p.  457.  1871 
612. Nouvelles  reconnaissances  dans  les  steppes  Turcomanes.     Notice  pre- 

liminaire  sur  I'expedition  scientifique  executee  [1872].     I.K.I.R.G.O.,  vol  i. 

Ti/lis,  1873 
613. Observations  sur  les  pays  des  Turcomans.     Memoires  Z.K.I.R.G.O., 

vol.  viii.  Ti/lis,  1 873 

614.  Data  of  Turcoman  Steppe  [1875].     Tr.  by  Eobert  Michell. 

615.  Sievers.  G.     Die  Russische  militarische  Expedition  nach  dem  alten  Oxus- 

Bette.  dem  Kjurjandagh  Gebirge  und  dem  Atrek  [1872].     P.G.M.     1873 

616.  Les  Turcomans  Yomouds.     Extrait  de  la  Revue  Militaire  russe,  Jan.  [1872]. 

Bull.  Soc.  Geog.,  July.  p.  i58  ;  Sept.,  p.  319.  _  1871 

617.  Stuinin.     Grabstatten    der  Turkmenen.    Nach   Skizzen    von    Lieut.    Tafel. 

P.G.M.,  p.  18.  1873 

618.  Du  plateau  de  I'Oust-Ourt  et  de  I'ancien  cours  de  I'Oxus.  I.K.I.R.G.O., 

vol.  iii. 

619.  Kawlinson,  G.     Ethnic  affinities  of  the  nations  of  West  Asia.     In  Herodotus 

Hist.,  V.  I.  1858 

620.  The  Sixth  Great  Oriental  Monarchy,   or  the  Geography,  History,  and 

Antiquities  of  Parthia.  London,  1873 

621.  Grodekoff,  N.J.     Deux  petites  listes  de  plantes  recueillis  en  [1873]  pendant 

la    marche    du    detachement    du    Manghychlak  de    Kinderli    a    Khiva. 

I.K.I. R.G.O.,  vol.  iii.  Tiflis 

622.  Voina  v  Turkmenii.     (War    in    Turkmenia.  Skobeleffs    Campaign, 

1880-81.)     4  vols.  St.  Petersburg,  i^^ 

623.  Lomakin.     Reconnaissance  of  the  Uzboi  (Russ.).      I.K.I.R.G.O.,  vol.  iv., 

No.  I.  1875 

624.  Nouvelles  sur  la  population  Turcomane  entre  I'ancien  lit  de  I'Amou  Daria  et 

les  limites  septentrionales  de  la  Perse.     I.K.I.R.G.O.,  vol.  vi.,  pp.  51-57 

Tifljs,  1879-81 

625.  The  Oxus  Expedition.     Geog.  Mag.,  pp.  313-4.  1874 

626.  Blaramberg,  Gen.  Lieut,  v.     Die  Untersuchung  des  alten  Bettes  des  Amu- 

Darja  (Oxus).     P.G.M.,  p.  23.  1874 

627.  Die  Ruinen  der  Stadt  Mestorjan.     P.G.M.,  p.  16.  1876 

628.  Petrusevitch,  Nicholas.     The  Turcomans.     Tr.  by  R.  Michell. 

629.  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Investigation  of  the  Darialyk  (Uzboi)  and 

the  country  between  the  Amu-daria  and  Sar}'-Kamish  (Russ).  I.K.I.R.G.O., 
vol.  v.,  p.  241.  Tijlis,  1877-S 

630.  Turcoman  Steppe  in  [1875].     Tr.  from  Jour,  de  St.  Pet.,  No.  55,  28  Feb. 

—II  Mar.  1876 

631.  De  Goeje,  J.     Das  alte  Bett  des  Oxus  Amu-darja.  Leiden,  1875 

632.  The  Amu-Daiya  Expedition.     Markham's  Geog.  Mag.,  pp.  262,  264.      1875 

633.  Die  Russische  Amu-Darja  Expedition.     P.G.M. ,  p.  361.  1875 

634.  Precis  des  travaux  publics  au  Caucase  sur  la  geographic  de  ce  pays.    Ti/lis,  1875 

635.  Do.     do.     depuis  1875.  ^l^^'  '^^^ 
Wood.     See  392-5. 

636.  Murray,  J.  Wolfe.    A  List  (translated  into  English)  of  the  Publications  of  the 

Caucasian  section  of  the  Russian  Imperial  Geographical  Society.     MS.  in 
possession  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society.  London 

637.  Memoires  de  la  section  Caucasienne  de  la  Societe  Imp.  de  Geographic.    Tiflu 
Bonvalot.     See  258,  262,  330. 

Capus.     See  258.  330. 

638.  Tietze,  Dr.  Emil.     Ueber  einen  kurzen  Ausflug  nach  Krasnovvodsk  im  west- 

lichen  Turkestan.   Jahrbuch  der  K.K.  Reichsanstalt,  Bd.  27,  p.  i.         1877 

639.  Organization  du  pays  Transcaspien.    I.K.I.  R.G.O.,  vol.  v.,  pp.  302-17.  7V/f/j 

640.  Do.  do.         Trans,  in  Russische  Revue,  p.  447  (German).        187c 

641.  Kuropatkin,    Captain.      Turcomania    and    the    Turcomans.      (From    the 

Russian  Military  Journal,  Nos.  9  and  lo  of  1879.)    Tr.byR.  Michell.     iS"' 

642.  O'Donovan,  E.     The  Merv  Oa.sis  [1879-81].  London,  x"^ 

643.  Merv  :  a  Story  of  Adventure  and  Captivity.  Lojidon,  iN 


London, 

i88i 

London, 

1883 

London, 

1881 

London, 

1880 

London, 

1883 

London, 

1884 

APPENDIX  C— BIBLIOGRAPHY.  679 

644.  O'Donovan,  E.     Merv  and  its  Sun-oundings.     P.R.G.S.,  May,  June.       1882 

645.  Die  Turkmenen.     P.G.M.,  p.  325.  1880 

1880-1884. 

646.  Marvin,  C.     The  Eye-witnesses'  account  of  the  disastrous  Russian  Campaign 
against  the  Akhal  Tekke  Turcomans.  London,  1880 

647.  Merv,  the  Queen  of  the  World. 

648.  The  Russians  at  Merv  and  Herat. 

649.  The  Russian  Advance  towards  India. 

650. Grodekofif 's  Ride  from  Samarcand  to  Herat. 

651.  The  Russian  Railway  to  Herat  and  India. 

652.  The  Russian  Annexation  of  Merv. 

653. Reconnoitring  Central  Asia.  London,  1884 

654.  Vambery,  A.    The  Turcomans  :  their  Past  and  Future.   Journal  of  the  Royal 
United  Service  Institution,  No.  cv.  London,  1880 

655.  Die  Turkomanen  und  ihre  Stellung  gegeniiber  Russland. 

656.  The  Akhal  Tekke  Oasis  and  Ways  of  Communication  with  India.     Orient. 
Ch.  Mag.,  Oct.  Nnu  York,  1881 

657.  Helmersen,  G.  v.     Zur  Geologic  der  Aralo-Kaspischen  Niederung.     Bull,  de 
TAcad.  de  St.  Petersbourg,  tome  xxviii.,  May.  1883 

658. et  Jakowlew.     Sur    la   geologic    de   la   depression  Aralo-Caspienne. 

Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  St.  Pet.,  tome  xxviii.,  No.  3,  pp.  364-79. 

659.  Notice   sur    Ak-tau   et    Kara-tau   montagnes    dans    la   presqu'ile   de 

Mangyschlak.     Bull,  de  I'Acad.  Imp.  de  St.  Pet.,  xiv.,  pp.  529-35. 

660.  Remarques    sur   la  geologic   et   la  geographic  physique   de  la  vallee 

Aralo-Caspienne    (German).    Bull,   de  I'Acad.   Imp.  des   sciences   de  St. 
Petersbourg,  xxv.,  pp.  513-49. 

661.  Maloma,  M.     Description  de  la  route  de  Krasnovodsk  aux  puits  Dektcha. 
Annexe: — Catalogue  de  plantes,  etc.    I.K.I.R.G.O.,  vol.  viii.     Tiflis,i2>']'^ 

662.  Zimmermann,  C.     Denkschrift  uber  den  untern  Lauf  des  Oxus  zum  Kara- 
bugas  Hafen. 

663.  St.  Martin,   Vivien  de.     L'Oxus  (Amu-daria).     Etudes   et   investigations. 
L'ancien  lit,  etc..  etc.,  sur  L'Asie  Centrale. 

664.  Loupandine.     Description   de  la   partie   de   I'Ouzboi  entre  Bala-Ichem   et 
Sary-Kamyche.     I.K.I.R.S.O.,  vol.  iv.  Tijiis,  1875-7 

665.  Bakoulin.     Piesni  u  Turkmenakh  i  poet  Makhdum-Kuli.     (The  Songs  of 
the  Turkomans  and  their  poet  Makhdum  Kuli.)     I.K. I.R.G.O. 

666.  Kurze  Zusammenstellung  der  Uniersuchungen  in  der  Turkmenen- Steppe  in 
der  Richtung  von  Krasnowodsk  nach  Chiwa. 

667.  Honinski.     Sur  la  langue  des  Turkmenes.     I.  Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  St.  Pet., 
PP-  563-71. 


MAPS  ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

(^Chiefly  in  the  Library  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  London.) 
FROM  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  1870. 

668.  Spruner,  Dr.  Karl  von.     Historico-Geographical  Hand  Atlas.  London,  1861 

669.  Yule,   H.     Asia  in  the  first  half  of  the  [fourteenth   century]   to   elucidate 

Cathay  and  the  way  thither. 

670.  Maas,  A.     Nova  tabula  maris  Caspii  et  Regionis  Usbeck.  1735 

671.  Gilssefeld,    F.    L.     Carte   de  1 'empire  de  Russie  et  de  la  grande  Tartarie 

dressee  avec  soin.     Les  Herit.  de  Homann,  I'an  1786 

672.  Balbi,  Adrien.     Atlas  Ethnographique  du  Globe.  Paris,  1826 

673.  Plan  von  Samarkand  und  Umgebung  [1841].  Gotha,  Perthes,  1865 

674.  Johnston,  A.  K.     The  Physical  Atlas.  Edinburgh,  1848  and  1854 

675.  Boutakoff,  Capt.     Karta  Aralskago  Moria.     (Map  of  the  Aral  Sea.)         1850 


68o  JRUSSIAJV  CENTRAL  ASIA. 

676.  Pochtovaya    karta    Aziiatskoi    Rossii.       (Post-Map     of    Asiatic     Russia.) 

St.  Petersburg^  A.  Ilyin,  1851 

677.  Telegraphnaya  karta    Rossiiskoi  imperii.     (Telegraph  Map  of  the  Russian 

Empire.)  St.  Petersburg,  1870 

678.  Karta  Aziiatskoi  Rossii.     (Map  of  Asiatic  Russia)  [i860]. 

679.  Severzoff  N.  A.  und  Osten-Sacken.     Karte  der  neuesten  Russischen  For- 

schungen  im  Thian-Schan  System,  besonders  der  Reise  zwischen  Issyk-Kul 
und  Kaschgar.     P.G.M.,  p.  200.  1867 

1870-1884. 

680.  Severtsof,  N.  A.     Karta  vysot  i  rastitehiosti  Turkestanskago  Kraya.     (Maj) 

showing  Altitudes  and  Vegetation  of  Turkistan.)  1872 

681.  Petermann,  A.     Plan  von  Chiwa  nach  russischen  Quellen.        P.G.M.,  1873 

682.  Kegel,    Dr.    A.     Karte  von  Reisen  in  Central  Asien  [1876-79],    sowie  der 

Routen  von  Kuropatkin,  [1876-77],  und  Prjevalsky,  [1877].      P.G.M.,  187^ 

683.  Fedchenko,  A.     Reise  nach  dem  Pamir  Plateau  [1871].  P.G.M.,  1874 

684.  Das  Gebiet    des    Oberen  Amu  und  die   Orographic   Central  Asiens. 

With  Map.     P.G.M.,  p.  157.  1874 

685.  Lusillin.     Karta  Zakaspiiskago  Ki-aia  Khivy.  i  prileiasheikh  stran.    (Map  of 

the  Trans-Caspian  region  and  adjoining  regions  of  Khiva.)  1873 

686. Map  of  Turkestan,  showing  Russian  Boundaries.  1875 

Oschanin.     See  327. 
Kegel.     See  225,  466,  556. 

687.  Faunthorpe,  J.  P.     An  Elementaiy  Physical  Atlas.  London,  1878 

688.  Spruner-Menke.       Hand -atlas  fiir  die  Geschichte  des  Mittelalters  und  der 

neueren  Zeit.  Got  ha,  Perthes,  1880 

689.  Chavanne,  J.     Ethnographische  Karte  von  Mittelasien.    Deutsche  Rundschau 

fiir  Geographic  und  Statistik,  p.  196.  1880 

690.  Walker.     Map  of  the  Kuldja  District  and  the  Russo-Chinese  P'rontier  in 

Turkestan.     P.R.G.S.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  529.  1880 

691.  Turkestan    and    the    countries     between    the    British    and     Russian 

dominions  in   Asia.      Mapped  on    the   basis   of  the  surveys   made   up  to 
[1881].     Scale,  I  inch  =  32  miles.  Dchra  Dun,  September,  188 1 

692.  Turkestan  and  parts  of  Adjacent  Countries.     (In  Syriac,  Greek,  and  Latin.) 

693.  Kaspiiskoe  More.     (Russian  Chart,  with  surroundings  of  the  Caspian.) 

694.  Swalenburg.     J.  B.   Greenhough.     Nova  descriptio  geographica  Tartarica 

Tartary  (Russian  Empire  in  Asia)  with  ethnological  matter. 

695.  Weller,  E.    Botanical  Map  showing  the  distribution  and  limits  of  Cultivation 

of  some  of  the  principal  Plants  most  useful  to  man. 

396.  Zoological  Map 'showing  the    distribution   and  range  of  some  of  the 

pnncipal  members  of  the  Animal  Kingdom. 

697.  Ethnographicheskaya    karta    Aziiatskoi    Rossii.     (Ethnographical   Map    of 

Asiatic  Russia.) 

698.  Ethnographical  Map  of  the  World,  showing  the  Geographical  distribution  of 

the  varieties  of  man.    With  diagrams  showing  the  occupation  of  all  nations, 
and  distribution  of  man  according  to  religious  belief 

699.  Arrowsmith,  J.     The  Country  between  the  Aral  and  Caspian. 

700.  The  Caspian  Sea,  Khiva,  and  the  surrounding  country. 

701.  Karta   Turkestanskago   voiennago    okruga,   sostavlena   pri    Turkestanskom 

voenno-topographicheskom  otdiela  v  [1877]  goduei  po  noveishim  sviedie- 
niiam.     Scale,  i  English  inch  =  40  versts.  .S^.  Petersburg^  18S2 

702.  Blackie,  W.  G.     Comprehensive  Atlas  and  Geography.  London,  1883 


LIST    OF    AUTHORS, 

WITH  REFERENCE  NUMBERS  TO  THEIR  WORKS  IN  THE 
FOREGOING  BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Abbott,  J.,  352 
Aberigh-Mackay,  195 
Abich,  H.,  103,  602 
Abratnof,  General,  323 
Abramof,  N.,  495,  496 
Abu  Taleb  Khan,  47 
Abul  Ghazi,  34 
Abulfeda,  509 
Adamoli,  J.,  540 
Ala-eddin  Ata  Melik  Dju- 

veini,  282 
Ali  Bey,  48 
Alpheraky,  S..  471 
Amiot,  433 

Arrovvsmith,  J.,  699,  700 
Ascelin,  N.,  13 
Assemani,  2 
Astley,  T.,  510 
Atkinson,  T.  W.,  444.  494 
Atkinson,  Mrs.,  445 

Baber,  24-27 
Baer.  K.  E.,  74-81 
Baker,  V.,  223 
Bakoulin,  665 
Balbi,  A..  672 
Basiner  T.  F.  J.,  87 
Bates,  C.  E.,  407 
Behm,  E.,  152,  159 
Bell,  E.,  154 
Benjamin,  J.  B.,  117 
Berezin,  P.,  270,  271 
Berg,  E.,  115 
Bergeron,  P.,  13 
Bergmann,  437,  438 
Bichurin,  J.,  91 
Blackie,  W.  G.,  702 
Blaremberg,  Gen.  von,  372. 
626,  627 


BogdanofF,  M.  N.,  403 
Bogdanowitch,  E.,  200 
Bonvalot,  G.,  258,  262,  330 
Bonyard,  E.  H.,490 
Borszczow,  El,  599-601 
Boulger,  D.  C.,  247 
Brandt,  J.  F.,  86 
Brauer,  534 

Bretschneider,  E,,  161-63 
Brodowsky,  M,,  207 
Brooke,  Sir  V.,  197 
Buchanan,  Claudius,  88 
Hunge,  93 

Bunnett,  F.  E.,  126 
Burnaby.  F.,  396 
Burnand,  F.  C,  399 
Burnes,  A.,  299,  3CXD 
Burslem,  Rollo,  514 
Butakoff,  A.,  350,  351,675 

Cahun,  Leon,  230 
Campbell,  D.,  46 
Cancrin,  G.  von,  484 
Capus,  G.,  258-261,   330, 

431,  580-82 
Chapman,  E.  F.,  291 
Charriere,  E.,  69 
Chavanne,  J.,  689 
Cherkaski,  Bekovitch,  337 
Cherkassoff,  A.,  497 
Clarke,    F.    C.    H.,    189, 

404,  469 
Clavijo,  Ruy  Gonzalez,  21 
Conolly,  A.,  345,  346 
Contarini,  Ambroise,  13 
Cordier,  H.,  459,  460 
Courteille,  Pavet  de,  28, 29 
Coxe,  W.,  479 
Crealock,  H.  H.,  156 


Daly,  568 
Daubree,  265 
Daukes,  F.  C,  188 
Davies,  128 
Davis,  Sir  F.,  65 
Debelak,  Julius,  199 
De  Blocqueville,  H.,  604 
De  Bode,  303,  591 
Defremery,  40 
De  Geoje,  J.,  631 
De  Guigne,  435 
De  Hell,   X.  H.,  595,  596 
Delacroix.  Petit,  33,  474 
De  Launay,  J.  B.,  121 
De  Mandeville,  J.,  13 
De  Marny,  N.  P.  B.,  567 
De  Pigny,  Fevry,  69 
De  Pise.  Rustician,  19 
De  Rubruquis,  G.,  13,  20 
De  Tassy,  G.,  308 
Dilke,  Ash  ton,  461 
Dmitrovsky,  N.  V.,  32 
Dorn,  6.,  272.  273 
Dr.igendorf,  583 
Dresser,  H.  E.,  566 
Drygalski,  A.  von,  572 
Dughlat,  Mirza  Haidar,  6 
Duncan,  196 

Ebu  Bekir  Mohammed  bin 
DjafarunNarshakhi,  283 
Edwards,  H.  S.,  274 
Elwes,  H.  J.,  171 
Ephremov,  F.  S.,  49 
Erschoff,  534 
Erskine,  25 

Eversman,  Edouard,  294 
Evliya  Effendi,  30 
Eyries,  333 


682 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


Faunthorpe,  J.  P.,  687 
Fawcett,  R.  H.,  235 
Fazl,  Ullah  Khan,  7 
Fedchenko,A.,4i6-i9,533. 

534-39,  683,  684 
Fedorow,  W.,  487 
Feisalin,  Mustava,  309 
Ferrier,  J.  P.,  517 
Forsyth,  D.,  164 
Finn,  James,  85 
Fmsch,  O.,  503 
Fischer,  F.  E.  L.,  491,  492 
Forgues,  E.  D.,  120 
Feynes,  Sieur,  31 
Frahn,  de  C,  39,  62 
Frost,  Thomas,  257 

Gaubil,  432 

Gavazzi,  Modesto,  318 

Gerstfeldt,  116 

Gloukhovskoy,  M.,  320 

Gobineau,  Comte  de,  142 

Goldsmid,  F.  J.,  180 

Golovin,  Ivan,  96 

Gohibef,  A.,  520 

Gould,  J,,  97 

Gowan,  W,  E.,  328,  472, 

473 
Greenhough,  J.  B.,  694 
Grodekoff,  N.  J.,  621,622 
Grover,  306,  307 
Giinther,  A.,  178 
Giissefekl,  F.  L.,  671 
Guyard,  M.,  362 

Hagemeister,  J.  de,  77 
Haiton,  13 

Hammer,  Joseph,  277, 278 
Hauptmann,  A.,  370 
Heeren,  A.  H.  L.,  71 
Ilellwakl,  F.  von,  181-83 
Helmersen,  G.  von,  72-74, 

99,  301,  657-660 
Henderson,  52 
Henvey,  F.,  420 
Herder,  F.,  450 
Hiouen  Thsang,  i 
Hochstetter,  Ferd.  v.,  571 
Honinski,  667 
Howorth,  H.  H.,  224,  397 
Humboldt,  A., 481-84,  598 
Hutton,  J.,  206 

Ides,  C.  Ysbrand,  476-78 
Ignatieff,  General,  359 
Ilminski,  24,  26 
Imbault-Huart,  C,  256 
Ivanofif,  336 
Ivanov,  N.  P.,  347 
Iwanow,  D.,  572 


Jakowlew,  658 
Jardot,  Al.  A.,  138 
Jaubert,  Amedee,  292 
Jenkinson,  A..  287-90 
Johnston.  A.  K,,  674 

!  Jones.  W.,  488 

I  Julien,  M.  Stanilaus,  i 
Just,  Leopold,  185 

Karazine,  279,  280 
Karelin,  442,  594 
Kazantseff,  Elia,  531 
Keane,  A,  H.,  264 
Ker,  D.,385,  386 
Kessler,  K.,  i74-77»  534 
Khanikoff,  N.,  89,  90,  113, 

139,    140,    302-5,    340, 

381 
Khoroshkhin,  A.  P.,  573 
Kiepert,  H.,  389,  574 
Kirilow,  442 
Kitto,  J..  114 
Klaproth,  J.,   58,   59,  60, 

409 
Koenen,  A.  von,  401 
Kolokoltzof,  Col., 377 
Koner,  W.,  540 
Koschkul,  F.,  607,  608 
Kostenko,   222,  321,  322, 

361-4,  579 
j  Krabbe,  534 
Kroneberg,  534 
Kiihlewein,  G.,  354 
Kuhn,  A.  von,  420 
Kuropatkin,   A.    N.,  472, 

473,  641,  682 

Laharpe,  506 

Lai,  Mohan,  515,  516 

1  Landres,  Frey  de,  44 
Lansdell,  H.,  507,  508 
Latham,  R.  G.,  236 
Ledebour,  C.  F,,  63,  64 
Lees,  W.  Nassau,  107 
Lehmann,  A.,  93 
Lejean,  G.,  281 
Lelewel,  Joachim,  92 
Lentz,  P.  E.,  251 
Lenz,  R.,  324 
Leonhard,  Gustav,  84 
Urche,  P.,  18 1,  365,  366, 

542,  543 
Levshine,  A.  J.,  68,  69,  70 
Lichtenstein,  H,,  294 
Lobysevitch,  Thco.,  525 
Lockhart,  W.  S.,  341 
Lomakin,  623 

'  Lomonossof,  A.,  424 
[Long,  James,]  193 


]  Loupandine.  664 
Lubomirski,  570 
\  Lusillin,  685,  686 
I  Lvoff,  Tatiana,  279 
I  Lyde,  Samuel,  105 

I  Maas,  A.,  670 
MacGahan,  J.  A.,  387,  388 
McGillivray,  W.,  481 
MacLachlan,  534 
Maieff,  N.  A.,    168,   214, 

329,  545-9 

Maksheev,  518,  519 

Maloma,  M.,  661 

Markham,  C,  21 

Markozoff,  Col.,  609 

Marsden,  W.,  16,  55 

Marshall,  L.,  329 

Martens.  534 

Martens.  M.  F..  238.  239 

Marthe.  F.,  137,  417,  524 

Marvin,  C,  646-653 

Mayr,  534 

Mehemmed  Salih,  338 

Mehemmed  Yusuf,  286 

Meiners,  C,  480 

Mejow,  V,  J.,  215 

Meyendorff,  Baron,  29 1 -3 

Meyer,  C.  A..  490,  491 

Michell,  J.,  75,  130,  131. 
133,  446,  447,  520 

Michell,  R.,  130, 144,  157, 
222,  322,  326,  337,  351. 
415,  422,454,  533,538, 
562,  592,  614,  628 

Middendorf,  A.,  255,  493 

Mielgunow.  605 

Miles,  The,  66 
I  Milman,  H.  H.,  511 

Mir   Abdoul  Kerim  Bou- 
I      khary,  35-39 
I  Mir  Ali  Shir,  4 
!  Mir  Izzut  Ullah,  51,  52 

Mirza  Mohammed  Mehdi 

Khan,  8 
I  Mollendorff,  O.  F.,  462 
I  Mollendorff,  P.  G.,  462 

Molloy,  Captain,  453 

Morawitz,  534 

Morgan,  E.  D,,  400,  413, 
449,  464,  470,  610 

Morier,  56,  83,  406 

Morley,  W.  H.,  107 

Mosheim,  L.,  45 
'  Motchoulski,  V.,  457,  458 

Mouchketoff,  I.,  227-29 

Mouravieff,  M.  N.,  342 
I  Munshi  Sadik  Mirza,  285 
I  Murray,  H.,  17,  53 


LIST  OF  A  UTHORS. 


683 


Murray,  J.  Wolfe,  636 

Nazaroff.  408 
Nebolsin,  P. .  94.  95 
Neumann,  K.  F.,  22 
Nevai'i,  5 
Neve,  Felix.  78 
Niemann,  370 
Nolde,Ed.  Th..  263 
Noschel,  A..  99 

O'Donovan,  E.,  642-44 
Oshanin,  327.  328,  577 
Osten  Sacken,4i2-I4,  530, 

679 
Ostroumoff,  N.,  521-23 

Paget.  John  C.  390 
Palgrave,  W.  G.,  167  } 

Pallas,  P.  S.,  43 
Pantussoff,  N.,  467 
Paquier,  J.  B..211-13 
Paschino,  P.  J.,  526,  527 
Perovski,  General,  75 
Pesterev,  Jegor,  436 
Petermann,  A.,  561,  681 
Petrovsky,  179 
Petrusevitch,  N.,  628-29 
Petzholdt,  A.,  543,  544 
Peyroine.  43 
Piankofif,  B..576 
Plan-Carpin,  Jean  du,  13 
Polo,  Marco,  13,  16-19 
Poltaratsky.  528-30 
Poole,  R.  S.,  208-10,  332 
Poole,  S.  L.,  208-10,  332 
Poutimstev,  M..  440 
Price,  D.,  50 
Prichard.  J.  C  76 
Prjewalsky.  N.  M.,  463-65 

682 
Pumpelly.  R.,  158 
Purchas.  475 
Pushchin,  597 

Radlofif.  W..  108-12 
Radozkovsky,  534 
Rawlinson,  G.,  619.  620 
Rawlinson,  H.  C,  356-58 
Reclus,  E.,  254,  360 
Regel.  A..  225,  226,  466.  i 

556,  682  i 

Regel,  E.,  202-4.  243,  450, ! 

554,  555 
Remusat,  J.  P.  A.,  61 
Rialle,  Girard  de,  190,  191 
Ritter,  Karl,  54 
Riza  Qouly  Khan,  339 
Roesler,  Robert,  382 


Romanovski,  M.,  157 
Rose,  Gustav,  486 
Rosenmiiller,  67 
Rukavkin,  A.,  349 
Ruprecht,  F.  J-,  414 

Sabir,  C.  de,  452 
Said  Rakim,  284 
Si.   Martin,    V.    de,    104, 

194,  380,  663 
Sarauvv,  160 
Saiissure,  534 
Schefer,  Charles,  36 
Schepelew,  A.,  165 
Schiltberger,  J.,  22,  23 
Schlagintweit,  R.,  148 
Schmidt,  E.,  366,  367 
Schrenk,  491 
Schuyler,  E.,  170 
Sedillot,  M.,  308 
Semenoff,  P,  P.,  446-9 
Senkovski,  Joseph,  57 
Severtsoff,  N.,  424-6,  458, 

534,  560-65,  679,  680 
Shakespear,  R.,  344 
Sheikh    Kemaleddin    Ab- 

durrezak,  9 
Sherefeddin  All  Zezdi,  33 
Sievers,  G.,  615 
Singh,  Sodi  Ilukum,  407 
Smythe,  P.  E.  F.  W.,  151 
Sobolef,  590 

Soliman,  Hauptmann,  369 
Solsky,  534 
Spalding,  H.,  384 
Spencer,  Herbert,  196 
Spruner,  K.  von,  668 
Spruner-Menke,  688 
Staudinger,  O.,  252 
Stebnitzky,  M.J. ,610-14 
Stewart,  C.,  15,  47 
Strahlenberg,  41 
Street,  O.,  250 
Stuart,  A.,  201 
Stumm,  Hugo,  373-76,  389, 

617,  618 
Suavi  Efifendi,  379 
Swalenburg.  694 

T.  L.,  144 
Tafel,  Lieut.,  617 
Tatarinov,  A.,  319 
Taylor,  Bayard,  100- 1 02 
Telfer,  J.  B.,  23 
Temple,  Richard.  264 
Terentief,  186-88 
Teste,  Augustin,  279 
Thonnelier.  Jules.  150 
Tietze,  Emil,  638 


j  Tillo.  Al.  A.,  391 
Timkowski,  G.,  439 

;  Timour,  15 
Tolstoi,  P..  89,  90 
Tomaschek,  W.,  232 
Towle.  G.  M.,  205 
Traub,  Paul,  383 
Trautvetter,  441 

I  Trench,  F.,  155 
Trotsky,  V.  H.,  168 
Tudela,  B.  Rabbi,  10-13 
Tychsen,  T.  C,  295 

Ujfalvy,  Charles  de,  216- 

219,  427-30,  498-500 
Ujfalvy,  Madame,  220, 221 
Ulianin,  534 
Unkowsky,  J.,  434,  435 
Urquhart,  80 

Valikhanof,  130 
Vambery,     A.,      118-26, 

246,    314-17,  421,    558* 

654,  655 
Veliaminoff-Zernof,     W., 

310-12 
Veniukof,  130-34,  378 
Vereschagine,  B..  145,  146 
Verne.  Jules,  242 
Vigne,  G.  T..  348 
Villeroi,  Bernard  de,  234 
Vincent,  C.  E.,  192 
Voelkel,  P.,  304,  320,  529 
Von  Krahmer,  134 

Wagner,  H..  152,  153 

Walker,  690,  691 

Weil,  423 

Weller,  E..  695.  696 

White,  14 

Wild.  H.,  231,  253 

Wilson.  H.  H..  79 

Wirgman.  Theodore,  182 

Worn;  J.,  296-98 

Wood,  H.,  392-95 

Wood,  John,  169 

Vadrintseff,  N.  M.,  505 
Yagmin.  A.,  513 
Yavorsky,  J.  L.,  325,  326 
Yazykov,  D.  J..  485 
Yule,  H.,  3.  18,  141,  169, 
669 

Zaleski,  B.,  129 
Zerbs,  Anton,  368 
Zimmermann,  82,  83,  406, 

598,  662 
Zwick,  H.  A.,  443 


684 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


Akhal  Oasis  and  India,  656 
Akmolinskoi  oblasti    Ob- 

zor,  501 
Amu-daria,  402 
Amu-daria  Expedition,632 

633 

Amu-DaryinskomOtdielie, 

586 
Aral,  Sea  of,  355 
Aralsee,  Nivellement,  398 
Astrakhan  d  Khiva,  343 
Aziiatskoi    Rossii    Karta, 

678 

Balkhash,  456 
Boukharie,  Affaires,  334 
Boukharie,    Captivite    en, 

335 
British  Subject,  135 

Caspian  Sea,  693 
Caucase,  Travaux  publics 

au,  634,  635 
Caucasienne,      Memoires, 

637 

Central  Asia,  Articles  on, 

136 
Centralasien.  Neue  Werke 

iiber,  172 
Central    Asian    Question, 

143,  173 
Central  Asia.  Russians  in, 

267 
Central  Asian  Routes,  106 
Chiwa,  353 

England  and  Russia,  240 
"  England,"  Central  Asian 
Question,  275 

Geographischesaus  Mittel- 

asien,  276 
Geographische,  Notizen,98 


ANONYMOUS. 
IH,  451  J 

Kara-Kum,  575  ! 

Khiva  en  Mars,  371  I 

Kokan,  Articles  on.  313  j 

Kokan,  Journey  to,  411  | 

Manuscrits,  489 
Mennonites.  331 
Merv  a  Samarcand,  603      i 
Meteoroiogische  Beobach- ' 

tungen,  405 
Mongolia,     Russian     Ex- ; 

plorations  in,  198 

Naturalistes,    Bull.     Soc. 

des,  266 
Notices  geographiques  sur 

Khokand,  410 

Old  Bed  of  Oxus,  241,  512 
Orenburg     nach     Chiwa, 

268.  269 
Oxus  Expedition.  625 

Pall  Mall  Budget,  551  ! 
Parliamentary  Reports,237  I 
Post  Map  of  Russia,  676  1 
Post-road  Book,  248  ' 

Recueil  d'itineraires.  233  ' 
Russia  and  Central  Asian  \ 

Khanates,  166  i 

Russia  and  Dependencies, 

127 
Russia,       Ethnographical 

Map  of.  697 
Russia,  Telegraph  Map  of, 

677 
Russian  Calendar,  245 
Russian  slaves,  249  1 

Russische      Eorschungen,  ! 

149 


Samarkand,  587,  588,  673 
Saturday  Review,  550 
Semipalatinskoi,  502 
Semiriechenskoi,  468 
Sibiri  Zapadnoi,  504 
Srednii  Asii,  184 


Temperatur  -  Beobachtun^ 
gen,  455  . 

Trans-Caspian,  Organiza- 
tion du,  639,  640 

Travaux     Geographiques, 

147 
Turcoman  Steppe,  630, 6^6 
Turcomans  Yomouds,  616 
Turcomane,      Population, 

593,  624 
Tui-comanen,    Unter   den, 

606,  645 
Turkestan,  557,  584,  58(», 

692 
Ticrkistan  Annual,  Inde\ 

to,  553 
Turkestan  Gazette,  541 
Turkestan  Gazette,   Indt\ 

to.  569 
Turkestan,  Klimavon,  559 
Turkestan,      Nachrichten 

aus,  585 
Turkistan  Temperatur,  552 
Turkestanische  Industrie- 

ausstellung,  532 
Turkestanskago        Karta, 

701 
Turkestanskago     Zapiski, 

578 
Turks,  History  of  the,  42 

Vsepoddanneiskiy  otchet, 
244 

World,  Ethnographical 
Map  of,  698 


I 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Vohitne  I.  is  to  be  understood  unless  otherwise  mentioned. 


Abbott  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  341 

Merv,  ii.  457 

Abdul  Aziz  Khan,  Mosque  of,  ii.  100 
Abdullah  Khan,  ruler  of  Bokhara,  ii.  71 

Tomb  of,  ii.  71,  137 

Ablutions  in  the  desert,  ii.  424 

—  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  135 
Aborigines  of  Zarafshan  province,  541 
Abramoff,  Gen.,  Dining  with,  471 

Victories  over  Bokhariots,  625 

Abu'l  Ghazi's  description  of  Vezir,  ii.  384 

—  Khair,  Submission  of,  404 
Accident  to  Author,  ii.  338 
Rosy,  ii.  377 

Sevier,  Mr.,  ii.  160 

Tatar  yemstchik,  363 

Accoucheure  among  Kirghese,  359 
Acquaintances  at  Omsk,  62 

Tiumen,  27 

Acrobats  at  Kitab,  ii.  16 

—  in  Kuldja.  243 

Adai  Kirghese  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  359 
Administration  of  Amu-daria  province, 

436 
Adventure  on  railway  at  Perm,  18 
Adventures  on  Turkoman  frontier,  ii.  466 
Afghanistan    to     Petersburg.    Highway 

from,  ii.  406 
Afghans  of  Zarafshan  province,  544 
Afrasiab-Kaleh,  Ruins  of,  564 
Agalmatholite  ornaments,  353 
Agriculture  of  Amu-daria  province,  434 

Bokhariots,  ii.  164 

Constantinovsk,  359 

—  Kirghese,  314,  338 

Kuldja  nomads,  192 

—  —  Merv,  ii.  478 

Semipolatinsk,  97 

Semirechia,  165 


j  Agriculture  of  Vierny,  278 

I Zarafshan  province,  6c8 

I  Agriculturists  in  Semipolatinsk,  315 

j  Aivazovsky.  M.,  Oil-painting  by,  ii.  504 

I  Ak-bugut,  Bed  of  the  Oxus  at,  ii.  389 

!  —  Wells  at,  ii.  391 

j  Ak-Kend.  Post-station  at.   196 

Ak-Mesjed,  Russian  capture  of,  617 

Ak-rabat,  Tomb  of,  ii.  207 

Ak-Serai  palace  at  Shahr,  ii.  32 

AkSu  river,  ii.  193 
,  Ak-tepe,  Arrival  at,  ii.  335 

—  Robbers  near,  ii.  336 

-—  Turkoman's  shop  at,  ii.  335 
Akhal  oasis.  Area  of,  ii.  449 

Dimensions  of.  ii.  449 

History  of,  ii.  450 

Settlements  of,  ii.  449 

—  ■  —  Tents  of,  ii.  450 
Troops  in,  ii.  494 

—  Tekkes,  expedition  against,  ii.  462 
Akhmed  Yasavi,  Mosque  of,  391 
Akmolinsk.  Administration  of,  50 

—  Agricultural  produce  of,  5 1 

—  Animals  of,  52 

—  Area  of,  42 

—  Books  for,  65 

—  Business  in,  54 

—  Climate  of,  50 

—  Cossacks  in,  66 

—  Crime  in,  57 

—  Distilleries  in,  55 

—  Fires  in,  54 

—  Houses  in,  54 

—  Industries  of,  54 

—  Introduction  to  Govenor  of,  41 

—  Medical  staff  in,  53 

—  Minerals  of,  51 

—  Population  of,  42 


686 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


Akmolinsk,  Province  of,  42,  46 

—  Punishment  for  personal  offences,  351 

—  Rivers  of,  47 

—  Russian  population  in,  53 

—  Surface  of,  47 

—  Tobacco  plantations  in,  52 

—  Towns  of,  53 

—  Uyezds  of,  50,  51 

—  Visit  to  Governor  of,  64 
Ala-Kul,  Altitude  of,  177 

Desiccated  lake-bed  near,  177 

district,  Fauna  of,  147 

Mammalia  of,  149 

lake.  Description  of,  146 

Fish  in,  148 

Lizards  near,  148 

Onithology  of,  147 

Ala-Tau  mountains,  268 

Morgan,  Mr.  D.,  on,  185 

Scenery  of,  270 

Alabaster  grotto  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  496 
Alai  expedition  in  Ferghana,  512 

—  plateau,  492 
Alexandrof  mountains,  361 
Alielis  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  445 
Aliken's  hotel  at  Vierny,  271 
Alikhanoff,  Lieut.,  at  Merv,  ii.  471 
Alim-Kul,  Death  of,  511,  621 

Defeat  at  Khokand,  510 

—  by  Khudaiar  Khan,  510 

Russians,   510 

Disaffection  against,  510 

Regent  of  Khokand,  510 

Waning  influence  of,  510 

Alim-Tu,   Russian   defeat   of  Taranchi 

rebels,  627 
"All's  well  that  ends  well,"  ii.  139,  505 
Almatinka,  Schools  at,  279 
Alpheraky,  M..  on  Kuldja  Lepidoptera, 

247,  ii.  596 

Vertebrata,  247 

Yuldus  sheep,  247 

Altyn-lmmel    and    Kuldja,    Stations 

between,  190 

Arrival  at,  188,  266 

pass,  189 

Villages  near,  187 

Alum  manufacture  in  Kohistan,  537 
Aman-Kutane  caravansary,  ii.  8 
Amphibians  of  Central  Asia,  ii.  529 
Amu-daria  Province,  425 

Agriculture  of,  434 

Area  of,  42 

Boundaries  of,  425 

Children's  diseases,  433 

Climate  of,  432 

Difficulties  of  the  nomads,  435 

— Dimensions  of,  425 

Diseases  of  mihtary,  433 


Amu-daria  Province,  Divisions  of,  434 

Geology  of,  426 

Health  of  population,  433 

Hydrography  of,  428 

Increase  of  cultivation,  434 

Inhabitants  of,  433 

Karakalpaks  in,  433 

—  Kyzyl- Kum  steppe,  426 

Meteorology  of,  432 

Mountains  in,  426 

Ophthalmia  among  natives,  433 

Population  of,  42 

—  Revenue  of,  437 

Russian  administration  of,  436 

Statistics  of  habitations  in,  433 

Taxes  in,  436 

Temperature  of.  432 

■ —  Towns  of,  398 

Amu  river,  Aground  in  the,  ii.  224 

—  —  at  Charjui,  ii.  199 

Kabakli,  ii.  213 

Nukus,  Delta  of,  ii.  241 

Banks  of,  ii.  199 

Bokhariot  frontier  camp,  ii.  221 

Branches  of,  ii.  242 

"  Camel's  Hump  "  on,  ii.  224 

Cliffs  on.  ii.  200 

Detonations  on,  ii.  220 

Fall  into  Aral  Sea,  ii.  241 

Fauna  of  islands,  ii.  218 

—  —  Fish  of,  ii.  243 

_ Flooding  of,  ii.  223 

—  Flora  of  banks  of,  ii.  223 

Fossil  remains  on,  ii.  200 

Game  on  islands  of,  ii.  218 

Ganoid  fishes  of,  ii.  245 

Journey  to  Kabakli,  ii.  209 

—  —  Kishak  gates  on,  ii.  241 

—  • —  Legend  of  Kyz-kala  fort,  ii.  214 

Linseed  farming  on,  ii.  222 

"  Lion's  Mouth  "  on,  ii.  224 

Muddiness  of.  ii.  219 

Native  boats  on,  ii.  200 

—  --       information  on,  ii.  219 
Navigability  of,  ii.  198 

■ Pitniak  curve  on,  ii.  224 

Precaution  against  robbers,  ii.  216 

—  —  Restiveness  of  horses,  ii.  209 

Ruined  towns  on,  ii.  215 

Ruins  on  banks,  ii.  214 

Scaphirhynchus  in,  ii.  243 

—  •-    Singing  boatmen  on,  ii.  221 

Steamers  on,  ii.  242 

—  .Strategical  importance  of,  ii.  194 
Temperature  on,  ii.  224 

Tugais  on,  ii.  215 

Vegetation  on  banks,  ii.  223 

Wolf  scare  on,  ii.  217 

Amulets  of  the  Turkomans,  ii.  447 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


6«7 


Amusements  at  Karshi,  ii.  48 
Shavat,  ii.  320 

—  of  the  Taranchis,  ii.  208 
Angren  river,  478 

Animal  life  in  a  sea-bed,  ii.  419 
the  desert,  ii.  172,  393 

—  products  of  Bokhara,  ii.  143 
Animals  of  Akmolinsk,  52 
Bokhara,  ii.  142 

Khivan  khanate,  ii.  269 

Merv,  ii.  478 

Semipolatinsk,  94 

Turkistan,  ii.  514 

Antiquities   at    Samarkand,    Purchases, 
611 

—  in  Tashkend  museum,  455 

—  of  Lake  Issik-Kul,  159 

Samarkand,  563 

Sergiopol.  145 

Antiquity  of  Khojeili,  ii.  349 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  339 

Ants  of  Turkistan,  ii.  576 
Apothecaries  of  Bokhara,  ii.  149 
Appendices  revised  by  Mad.  Fedchenko, 

"•  513 
Apples  of  Khiva,  ii.  267 
Aqueduct  at  Kyz-Kala,  ii.  214 
Arab  capture  of  Merv,  ii.  456 
Arabs  of  Zarafshan  province,  544 
Aral  Basin,  Depression  of,  385 

—  Sea,  Ancient  course  of  Oxus,  ii.  402 
Bed  of,  ii.  404 

Derivation  of  name,  429 

Dimensions  of,  429 

Disappearance  of,  ii.  403 

Fall  of  Amu  into,  ii.  241 

Fauna  of  islands,  430 

Fluctuation  of,  ii.  402 

Geological  changes  of,  385 

Geographical  problems  of,  ii.  402 

Harbours  of,  429 

Islands  of,  430 

Navigation  of,  409 

Oxus  junction  with,  ii.  242 

—  Reduction  of,  431 

Russians  on,  409 

Shores  of,  430,  432 

Winds  of,  429 

Aralo-Caspian  region.  Historical  discus- 
sion on,  ii.  403 

Murchison,  Sir  R.,  on,  ii.  403 

Rawlinson,  Sir  H.,  on,  ii.  403 

Travellers  in,  ii.  404 

Route,  ii.  231 

Arasan  sulphur  baths,  186 
Arbas  for  luggage  at  Khiva,  ii.  316 
Archbishop  of  Tobolsk,  Visit  to,  36 
Arendarenko,  M.,  Kindness  of,  610 
Argamak  horses  at  Khiva,  ii.  259 


Arganatinsk,  Arrival  at,  178 
Aris  river.  Description  of,  420 

Journey  along  the,  420 

Aristocratic  mariner,  ii.  499 
Armenian  literature,  583 

—  trading  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  499 
Armourers'  street  in  Bokhara,  ii.  134 
Arms  of  Charjui  soldiers,  ii.  186 
Kirghese,  313 

Turkistan  troops,  602 

Army  of  Bokhara,  ii.  21 

Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  68 

Arrest  of  Author  at  Chusovaia,  20 
Art  among  the  Kalmuks,  244 

—  of  Jewish  illumination,  ii.  116 
Artillery  of  the  Khivans,  ii.  306 
Artisans  of  Kuldja,  243 

Merv,  ii.  478 

Semipolatinsk,  104 

Artists,  Chinese,  262 

Aryks  of  Khiva,  ii.  252 

Asia  (Central),  Amphibians  of,  ii.  529 

Ants  of,  ii.  576 

Bees  of,  ii.  562 

—  —  Beetles  of,  ii.  552 
Bible-work  in,  ii.  237 

—  —  Bibliography  of,  ii.  654 
_  —  Book  scarcity  in,  584 

Chronology  of,  677 

Coins  of,  ii.  502 

Colleges  of,  586 

Colporteur  work  in,  ii.  304 

Crustacea  of,  li.  548 

Divorce  in,  ii.  353 

--  —  Earth  closets  in,  ii.  415 

Fishes  of,  ii.  530 

Fortresses  of,  ii.  321 

Fuel  of,  ii.  411 

Funerals  in,  ii.  250 

Gardens  in,  480 

Geological  features  of,  ii.  1 70 

History  of,  120 

Home  life  in,  ii.  352 

Jewellery  of,  ii.  286 

— -  —  Jews  of,  446,  520 
---  —  Maps  of,  ii.  679 

Marriage  in,  ii.  352 

Meteorology  of,  ii.  442 

Mineral  wealth  of,  380 

Mollusks  of,  ii.  537 

—  —  Money  of,  682 

Mongol  invasion  of,  ii.  69 

Pilgrim  showmen  in,  ii.  344 

Pioneers  of,  287 

Polygamy  in,  ii.  354 

Prisons  of,  661 

—  —  Routes  to,  10,  ii.  493 
Russian  trade  in.  462 

—  —  Scoliidae  of,  ii.  572 


688 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Asia  (Central),  vSeclusion  of  women 
in,  ii.  355 

Slaves  in,  ii.  329 

Sphegidae  of,  ii.  568 

Spiders  of,  ii.  543 

Sports  of  natives,  ii.  320 

— •  —  Statistics  of,  117 

Submarine  origin  of  desert,  ii.  438 

Timurid  sway  in,  ii.  69 

Trade  of,  ii.  286 

—  —  Travellers  in,  ii.  457 

Unfaithfulness  of  wives  in,  ii.  354 

Walls  in,  ii.  124 

Weights  and  Measures,  682,  ii.  285 

Zenana  work  needed  in,  ii.  356 

Asiatic  commerce,  ii.  133 

—  Jews'  synagogue,  446 

—  policy  of  Russia,  620 
-  Scriptures,  454 

—  Tashkend,  438,  457 

Asiatics  (Central),  Character  of,  ii.  299 

Fanaticism,  of,  ii.  300 

Ignorance  of,  ii.  123 

Morals  of,  ii.  299 

Religious  condition  of,  ii.  299 

— indifference  of,  ii.  300 

Askhabad,  Official  kindness  to  colpor- 
teurs at,  ii.  305 
Astarkhanid  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  72 
Astronomy  at  Samarkand,  565 
Asylum  at  Semipolatinsk,  138 

—  for  aged  at  Tashkend,  450 

orphans  at  Samarkand,  600 

Atkinson's  travels  in  Semirechia,  289 
Sungaria.  290 

Atrak  river,  ii.  439 

Fish  of,  ii.  439 

Turkoman  boats  on,  ii.  439 

Atrocities  of  Merv  Tekkes,  ii.  481 

Attek  oasis,  ii.  450 

— •  —  History  of,  ii.  451 

—  -    Hydrography  of,  ii.  452 

Lessar,  M.,  on  the,  ii.  451 

Settlements  in,  ii.  452 

Attendants,  Dismissal  of,  ii.  371 

—  in  desert.  Troubles  with,  ii.  414 
Aulie-Ata,  Arrival  at,  363 

Barber's  shop  at,  365 

Bazaar  at,  364 

Capture  by  Russians,  619 

Cemetery  at,  366 

Dearness  of  timber  at,  365 

Departure  from,  414 

Discontent  among  Kazaks,  509 

—  —  Domestic  animals,  Value  of,  419 

Kirghese  manufactures  at,  364 

—  wares  at,  364 

Lodgings  at.  ii.  330 

Market  at,  364 


Aulie-Ata,  Market-prices,  365 

Mennonites  in,  421 

Ornithology  of  district,  415 

Scriptures  for,  443 

—  —  Tomb  of,  366 
Walls  of,  ii,  124 

and  Tashkend,  Stations  bet\\  cen. 

414 
Aurora  Borealis  in  Turkistan,  377 
Author  pitched  off  camel,  ii.  3^8 

—  visited  by  Germans  at  Tashkend,  452 
Author's  desert  ride  in  the  night,  ii.  37S 

—  entry  into  Bokhara,  ii.  78 

—  fall  near  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  338 

-  fear  of  retribution  at  Bokhara,  ii.  138 

—  guard  of  honour  at  Kitab,  ii.  21 

—  itinerary,  xxx 

—  journal  in  danger,  ii.  415 

—  journey.  Antecedents  of,  3-5 
Cost  of,  4 

Danger  of,  8 

—  ' —  Summary  of,  ii.  505 

—  leadership  of  caravan,  ii.  414 

—  letter  to  Emir  for  Jews,  ii.  Ii8 

—  plans  concerning  Jews  of  Bokhara, 

ii.  103 

—  presents  from  Bek  of  Charjui,  ii.  up 

Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  29 

—  Kush-beggi  of  Bokhara,  ii.  132 

to  Emir,  ii.  28,  160 

—  religious  aims,  6,  7 

—  surveillance  in  Bokhara,  ii.  128 
Aves  of  Turkistan,  ii.  517 
Ayaguz  founded  by  Russians,  288 

Bahaud-din,  Ride  to,  ii.  137 

Tomb  of  Abdullah  Khan  at,  i..  ;  > 

Baian-aul,  Mines  near,  74 

Baikof's  mission  through  Sungaria,  124 

Baker,    Col.   Valentine,    on    Turkoman 

frontier,  ii.  466 
Baku,  Arrival  at,  ii.  500 

—  Eternal  fires  of,  ii.  500 

—  to  Tiflis  in  a  horse-box,  ii,  501 
Balakhane,  Oil  wells  at,  ii.  500 
Balkhan  mountains,  ii,  437 
Fruit-trees  on,  ii,  438 

—  -    Springs  in,  ii.  437 

Stephen,  Mr.  A.  C,  on,  ii.  437 

Balkhash  lake.  Dimensions  of,  179 
Fish  of,  180 

—  -    Harbour  of,  180 

Shores  of,  180 

—  -    -    Tributaries  of,  179 

View  of,  178 

Water  of,  180 
Balloting  for  Kirghese  judges,  349 
Bandits  on  the  Amu  river,  ii,  217 
Barabinski  Tatars,  Submission  of,  123 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


689 


Barat  Bek,  Death  of,  ii.  80 
Barber's  shop  at  AuHe-Ata,  365 
Barkhaiis  at  Patar.  516 
Barracks  at  Khokand,  1525 
Samarkand,  601 

—  -  Tashkend,  468 

Bartsch  Bros,  among  Kirghese,  ii.  303 
Bashkirs,  Submission  of,  402 
Basinerat  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  341 
Batchas,  or  dancing-boys,  210 

—  at  Bokhara,  ii.  89 

Charjui,  ii.  190 

Karshi,  ii.  48 

Khiva,  ii.  309 

Kitab,  ii.  15 

Shahr,  ii.  34 

Batchman  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  316 
Bath  at  Karshi,  ii.  45 

Petro-Alexandrovrk,  ii.  235 

Bathing-^ pools  at  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Batoum,  Scenery  at,  ii.  504 
Bayern,  Herr,  of  Tiflis,  ii.  502 
Bazaar  at  Aulie-Ata,  364 

—  —  Bokhara,  ii.  133 

Charjui,  ii.  185 

Kakir,  ii.  62 

Karaul,  ii.  63 

Karshi,  ii.  45 

Khiva,  ii.  284 

Khokand,  522 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  259 

Merv,  ii.  478 

Samarkand,  604 

Suidun,  262 

Tashkend,  458,  ii.  286 

Vierny,  278 

—  near  Kish  Kizil  Takir,  ii.  337 
"Bearding  the  lion,"  ii.  139 
Beasts  of  prey  in  Kuldja,  257 

"  Beauty  "  sleep  in  the  desert,  ii.  387 
Bed  of  Aral  Sea,  ii.  404 

Kitchkine-daria,  ii.  392 

Oxus  at  Ak-bugut,  ii.  389 

— Description  of,  ii.  393-95 

■  —  Length  of  old,  ii.  407 

Bedroom  of  Author  at  Khiva,  ii.  255 
Beekeeping  in  Kopal,  185 

Lepsinsk,  185 

Sarkun,  185 

Semipolatinsk,  102 

Semirechia,  185 

Sergiopol,  185 

Vierny,  185 

Beer  of  the  Kirghese,  338 
Beershops  in  Turkistan,  607 
Bees  of  Turkistan,  ii.  562 
Beetles  of  Turkistan,  ii.  552 
Beg  tribe  of  Tekkes  at  Merv,  ii.  477 
Begendjalri  Kir,  Camping  at,  ii.  421 

VOL.  IL 


Begendjalri,  Precipice  of,  ii.  417 
^^ggiJig  by  the  wayside,  ii.  3 
Bek's  official  staff  at  Charjui,  ii.  186 
Beklar  Bek  medresse  at  Tashkend,  458 
Benoist-Mechin,  Baron,  Journey,  ii.  473 

— on  the  Turkomans,  ii.  444 

Betik.  Welcome  lodging  at,  ii.  174 
Betrothal  among  the  Sai'ts,  ii.  353 
Beverages  of  the  Kirghese,  337 
Bibi-Khanum  medresse,  575 

Architecture  of,  575 

— Miraculous  lectern  in,  576 

^  —  ~  Tombs  in,  577 

Tomb  of,  577 

Wife  of  Tamerlane,  564 

Bible,  Comfort  of,  ii.  240 

—  Distribution,  27,  ii.  232,  301,  502 

—  Muhammadan  attitude  towards,  ii.  302 

—  Presentation  to  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  37 

—  searching  in  the  desert,  ii.  423 

—  Society  at  Ekaterineburg,  ii.  238 

— Irkutsk,  28,  ii.  239 

—  Tashkend,  453 

Tiflis,  ii.  501 

Author  assisted  by,  5 

Work  of,  ii.  238,  240,  303 

—  work  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  237 
—  Siberia,  ii.  237 

Biblical  customs  among  Kirghese,  301 
Bibliography  of  Russ.  Cent.  Asia,  ii.  654 

Turkistan,  470 

Bill  of  fare  at  Charjui,  ii.  178 
Birds  of  Khiva,  ii.  269 

prey  at  Manak,  ii.  326 

Turkistan,  415,  ii.  517 

Birthplace  of  Tamerlane,  ii.  32 
Births  in  Semipolatinsk,  108 
Blaramberg,  Gen.,  on  old  bed  of  Oxus, 

ii.  406 
Boat-building  at  Hassan  Kuli,  ii.  439 
Boatmen,  Compulsory  service  of,  ii.  205 
Boats  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  498 
Bokhara,  after  dark,  ii.  135 

—  Agriculture  of,  ii.  164 

—  Animal  products  of,  ii.  I43 

—  Animals  of,  ii.  142 

—  Apothecaries  of,  ii.  149 

—  Approach  to,  ii.  65 

—  Area  of,  ii.  124 

—  Armourers'  street  in,  ii.  134 

—  as  a  place  of  learning,  ii.  86 

—  Astarkhanid  rulers  of,  ii.  72 

—  "  Astonishing  the  natives  "  of,  ii.  91 

—  Author's  entry  into,  ii.  78 
fear  of  retribution,  ii.  138 

—  —  letter  to  Emir  for  Jews,  ii.  118 

offer  of  assistance  to  Jews,  ii.  109 

presents  to  Emir,  ii.  160 

—  Bathing-pools  of,  ii.  135 

44 


690 


j^ussia:v  central  as/a. 


Bokhara,  Bazaar  of,  ii.  133 

—  Bibliography  of,  ii.  667 

—  Book  scarcity  in,  ii.  134 

—  Bribery  in,  ii.  152,  187 
-  British  envoy  sent  to,  ii.  74 

—  Building  materials  in,  ii.  142 

—  Burnes'  visit  to,  ii.  73 

—  Capital  punishment  in,  ii.  152 

—  Caravan  routes,  ii.  55 

—  Caravansaries  in,  ii.  133 

—  Cistern  at  Haifa  Khu-daidat,  ii.  100 

—  City  of,  History  of,  ii.  66 

—  Clock  and  towers  at,  ii.  125 

—  Coal  at,  ii.  141 

—  Colporteurs  in,  ii.  304 

—  Commerce  of,  ii.  133 

—  ConoUy  imprisoned  at,  ii.  76 
killed  at,  ii.  76 

—  conquered  by  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  68 

—  Conversation  at  court,  ii.  154,  189 
with  Kush-beggi,  ii.  128 

—  Crops  of,  ii.  164 

— ■  Curiosities  of,  ii.  127 
purchased  in,  ii.  134 

—  Custodians  in,  ii.  140 

—  Dancing-boys  at,  ii.  89 

—  Danger  of  wealth  in,  ii.  187 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  163 

—  Deserted  streets  at  night,  ii.  92 

—  Desire  to  mount  a  minaret,  ii.  87 

—  Divan-beggi  medresse,  ii.  135 

—  Doctors  in,  ii.  149 

—  Earliest  people  of,  ii.  67 

—  Eastern,  Hospitality  of  natives,  ii.  52 

—  Education  in,  ii.  120 

—  Emir  of.  Audience  with,  ii.  26 

Character  of,  ii.  24 

Children  of,  ii.  188 

Conversation  with,  ii.  26 

Description  of,  ii.  24 

Drive  in  carriage  of,  ii.  30 

Harem  of,  ii.  155 

Hospitality  of,  ii.  160 

Hostility  to  England,  ii.  76,  77 

Insults  to  Russians,  ii.  76 

Manner  of  life  of,  ii.  153 

Palace  of,  ii.  125 

Presents  for,  ii.  27 

returned  by,  ii.  36 

to  Author,  ii.  29 

Schuyler's  description  of,  ii.  24 

Scriptures  accepted  by,  ii.  37 

Stremoukhof  s  account  of.  ii.  25 

Submission  to  Russia,  625 

Vambery's  description  of,  ii.  24 

Wives  of,  ii.  156,  355 

■  -  Espionage  of  Author  at,  ii.  94.  128 

—  Farm-houses  in,  ii.  165 

Fate  of  a  fallen  favourite,  ii.  80 


Bokhara,  Feasting  at.  ii.  154 

—  Female  seclusion  in,  ii.  156,  355 

—  fired  by  Mongols,  ii.  68 

—  Frontier  camp  of,  ii.  221 

—  Fruit-trees  of,  ii.  82 
Fuel  at,  ii.  142 

—  Furs  at,  ii.  134 

—  Gallop  round  walls  of,  ii.  loi 

—  Garden  produce  of,  ii.  142 

—  Gardens  of,  ii.  137,  165 

—  Gates  of,  ii.  loi 

—  Graveyards  of,  ii.  249 

—  Guest  and  prisoner  at,  ii.  140 

—  Guest-houses  in,  ii.  80 

—  Gunpowder  manufacture  in,  ii.  141 

—  Harvests  of,  ii.  164 

—  Hebrew  MSS.  in,  ii.  114 

—  -  Hindu  disabilities  in,  ii.  100 
Sarai  at,  ii.  100 

-  History  of,  ii.  66 

—  Horse-dealing  in,  ii.  132 
Horticulture  at,  ii.  85,  165 

—  Immorality  in,  ii.  189 

—  Irrigation  of,  ii.  165 

—  Jenkinson's  journey  to,  ii.  71 

—  Jewish  legacies  in.  ii.  no 

manuscripts  at.  ii.  1 10 

■ torahs  at,  ii.  I  lo 

—  Jews  of,  521,  ii.  103 

—  —  —  Interview  with,  ii.  loS 
Synagogue  at,  ii.  109 

—  Judges  in,  ii.  187 

—  Jumma  mosque  at,  ii.  95 

—  Kamensky's  agent  at,  ii.  88  . 

—  Khanate,  ii.  49 

Dimensions  of,  ii.  49 

Divisions  of,  ii.  50 

—  —  Mountains  of,  ii.  50 
Soil  of,  ii.  50 

—  Khudaiar  Khan  a  refugee  in.  509 
Kokol-task  medresse  in,  ii.  89 
Kush-beggi,  Visit  to,  ii.  125 
Land  value  at,  ii.  165 
Lecturing  the  Kush-beggi,  ii.  130 

—  -  Lepers'  quarter  at,  ii.  138 

—  Life  in  Emir's  harem,  ii.  355 
Lunatics  in,  ii.  250 

Treatment  of,  ii.  145 

-  Manghit  rulers  of,  ii.  72 

—  Medresses  of,  ii.  135 
Visits  to,  ii.  89 

Military  encampment  at,  ii.  93 

—  Milk  and  cream  at,  ii.  143 
Minerals  of,  ii.  141 
Miri-arab  medresse  in,  ii.  89 

—  Moslems  frustrated  by  Author,  ii.  112 

—  Mosque  of  Abdul  Aziz  Khan.  ii.  100 
Hazrel  Imlah,  ii.  lOO 

Mosques  of,  ii.  135. 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


691 


Bokhara,  Musical  entertainment  at,  ii. 
89,  90 

—  Namazi-gah  mosque,  ii.  123 

—  Nasr-Ullah,  late  Emir  of,  ii.  73 

—  Native  society  in,  ii.  150 

—  Natives  and  their  diseases,  ii.  144 

—  Official  letters  of  Author,  ii.  128 

—  Opinions  (Native)  of  Emir's  govern- 

ment, ii.  188 

—  Orchards  of,  ii.  165 

—  Patron  Saint  of,  ii.  71 

—  Perils  of  Dr.  Wolff  in,  ii.  77 

—  Perquisites  at,  ii.  479 

—  Persian  Jews  in,  ii.  108 

—  Persians  in.  ii.  150 

—  Pillage  of,  ii.  68 

—  Pink  salt  at,  ii.  141 

—  Population  of,  ii.  124 
Increase  of,  ii.  150 

—  Presents  to  Author,  ii.  132 
Kush-beggi,  ii.  132 

—  Prison  torture  at,  ii.  75 

—  Prisons  of,  ii.  151 

—  Prostitution  in,  ii.  15 1 

—  Public  pool  at,  ii.  147 

—  Punishment  for  theft,  ii.  151 
under  Manghit  rule,  ii.  73 

—  Rebellious  attitude  of  Author,  ii.  136 

—  Religious  buildings  in,  ii.  100 
duties  compulsory,  ii.  73 

—  Reticence  of  Kush-beggi,  ii.  129 

—  Ride  outside  walls,  ii.  123 

—  Righistan  of,  ii.  125,  135 

—  Rishta  disease  in,  ii.  146 

—  Robbery  in,  ii.  135 

—  Russian  agents  in,  ii.  88 

attempt  to  release  Stoddart,  ii.  76 

intercourse  with,  ii.  74 

missions  to,  ii.  75 

spies  at,  ii.  74 

warehouse  at,  ii.  88 

—  Sacred  singing  in,  ii.  91 

—  Samanid  rulers  of,  ii.  67 

—  Scarcity  of  monumental  inscriptions, 

ii.  100 

—  Schools  in,  ii.  120 

—  Seldjuk  rulers  of,  ii.  67 

—  Sevier's  attention  to  the  sick,  ii.  163 

—  Sheibanid  rulers  of,  ii.  71 

—  Shoemakers'  street  in,  ii.  133 

—  Sick  Jews  visited  by  Author,  ii.  113 

—  Silk  culture  at,  ii.  144 

—  Singing  and  dancing  at,  ii.  89 

—  Skin-dressing  at,  ii.  144 

—  Slaughter  of  defenders,  ii.  69 

—  Slavery  in,  ii.  185 

—  Slumbers  disturbed  at,  ii.  92 

—  Smokers  punished  in,  ii.  73 

—  Splendid  garden  at,  ii.  81 


Bokhara,  Stalls  in,  ii.  135 

—  Stations  to  Charjui,  ii.  177 
Katte-Kurgan,  ii.  137 

—  Stoddart,  Col.,  at,  ii.  74 

compelled   to   embrace  Islamism, 

ii-75 

imprisoned  at,  ii.  75 

killed  at,  ii.  76 

—  Streets  and  lanes  of,  ii.  135 

—  Subjects'  letters  read  by  Emir,  ii.  162 

—  Suburbs  of,  ii.  137,  165 

—  suing  for  peace,  624 

—  Sumptuous  lodging  at,  ii.  80 

—  Suspicious  hospitality  at,  ii.  82 

—  Tanning  at,  ii.  144 

—  Taxes  in  khanate  of,  ii.  187 

—  the  Noble,  ii.  86,  120 

—  Trade  of,  ii.  133 

—  Tunisian  Jews  in,  ii.  108 

—  "Twickenham  Ferry  "  in,  ii.  91 

—  Uigur  rulers  of,  ii.  68 

—  under  Abdullah  Khan,  ii.  ii 

—  Unnatural  practices  in,  ii.  158 

—  Uzbeg  rulers  of,  ii.  71 

—  Vegetation  at,  ii.  165 

—  Vocal  entertainment  by  Author,  ii.  91 

—  Walls  of,  ii.  124 

—  Water  of,  ii.  149 

—  Weaving  in,  ii.  144 

—  White  asses  at,  ii.  163 

—  Wine-drinkers  punished  in,  ii.  73 

—  Wolffs  journey  to,  ii.  77 
Bokhariot  ambassadors.  Welcome  from, 

ii.  10 

—  army,  ii.  21 

—  boats,  ii.  200 

—  bodyguard  at  Kitab,  ii.  20 

—  communications,  ii.  54 

—  conceit,  ii.  25 

—  conquest  of  Ferghana,  506 

—  courtiers,  Presents  to,  ii.  29 

—  cowardice,  ii.  88 

—  criminals  banished  to  Merv,  ii.  456 

—  cunning,  ii.  129 

—  curiosities,  ii.  185 

—  defeat  at  Uchum,  625 
--  • Zerbulak,  625 

by  Gen.  Romanovsky,  622 

—  diseases  cured  by  Issirik  grass,  ii.  57 

—  dislike  of  ruler,  ii.  188 

—  entry  into  Tashkend,  621 

—  -  etiquette,  ii.  13 
at  Kitab.  ii.  20 

-  evacuation  of  Khokand,  507 

-  exiles,  ii.  210 

-  ignorance,  ii.  124 

life  in  the  harem,  ii.  155 
manuscripts,  ii.  115 
negotiations  for  peace,  624 


692 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA 


Bokhariot  officers.  Reception  of,  ii.  20 

-  opinions  of  Russian  rule.  ii.  1 88 

-  rebellion  at  Karshi,  625 

—  refuge  in  S  mark  and,  623 

—  seizure  of  Khokand,  507 

—  shepherds,  ii.  211 

—  "  Siberia,"  210 

—  statistics,  Untrustworthiness  of,  ii.  39 

—  subjugation  of  Uarwazis,  ii.  53 

—  taxation,  ii.  58 

—  troops,  Cowardice  of,  ii.  22 

—  trophies  seized  in  Tashkend,  622 

—  village,  ii.  10 

—  weights  and  measures,  ii.  36 
Bolosoglo,  Capt.,  Entomological  expedi- 
tion of,  ii.  575 

Book  scarcity  in  Bokhara,  ii.  134 

Central  Asia,  584 

Books  at  Pavlodar,  Sale  of,  70 
— ■  bought  by  Muhammadans,  73 

—  for  Akmolinsk,  65 
distribution,  26 

Languages  of,  27 

Number  of,  27 

exiles  in  Tobolsk,  29 

Omsk,  65 

—  Russian  exiles,  6 

—  —  Semipolatinsk,  144 

hospitals,  144 

Sergiopol,  143 

Tinmen,  29 

—  presented  to  J  ews  at  Karshi,  ii.  48 

—  Sale  of,  38 

on  steamboat,  33 

—  Thankfulness  of  exiles  for,  28 
Borokhudzir,  Cotton-growing  at,  194 

—  Fortress  of,  193 

—  Fruit  at,  194 

—  Nursery  at,  193 

—  Ruined  towns  near,  195 

—  valley,  Chinese  emigrants  in,  194 
Boroldai  table  lands.  484 
Botanical  garden  at  Pishpek,  360 

—  specimens  in  Tashkend  museum,  456 
Botany  of  Khiva,  ii.  266 
Boundaries  of  Amu-daria  province,  425 
Syr-daria  province,  383 

Turkistan,  370 

Turkmenia,  ii.  434 

Brass-work  at  Khokand,  522 
Bravery  of  Dr.  Wolff,  ii.  77 
Breach  v.  Observance,  ii.  138 
Bread  at  Charjui,  ii.  178 

—  baking  in  the  desert,  ii.  412 
Breakdown  at  Kara-Su,  267 

—  near  Moldabavsk,  363 
Sam-Su,  353 

Breakfast  on  a  camel's  back,  ii.  415 
Breweries,  55 


Breweries  in  Turkistan,  607 

Western  Siberia,  55 

Bribery  in  Bokhara,  ii.  152,  187 
Bridge  at  Ilisk,  267 
British  Museum,  Presents  for,  275 
Brodowsky,  M.,  on  cotton  culture,  195 
Brody,  Jewish  refugees  at.  ii.  107 
Buddhist  idols  at  Tashkend,  456 

—  temple  in  Kuldja,  230 

Bugs  or  Hemiptera,  Study  of,  455 
Building  materials  at  Bokhara,  ii.  142 
Buildings  in  Kuldja,  243 

—  of  Asiatic  Tashkend,  440 

Khojend,  550 

Bukan-Tau  mountains,  426 
Bukhtarminsk,  Trading-place  of.  131 
Burnaby,  Capt.,  at  Khiva,  ii.  262 
Bumes,  Alex.,  at  Bokhara,  ii.  73. 
Karshi,  ii.  44 

Merv,  ii.  457 

Business  in  Akmolinsk,  54 
Butcher's  shrine  at  Samarkand,  588 
Butenau  plateau,  ii.  391 
Butler,  Capt.  F.  W.  H.,  on  Turkoman 

frontier,  ii.  466 
Butterflies  of  Turkistan,  ii.  581 
Buzgol-Khan  pass  at  Derlient,  ii.  51 

*'  Called  B.a.ck,"  Siberian  prisons  criti- 
cised in,  636 
Camel  accident  in  the  desert,  ii.  377 

—  amulets  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  447 

—  Breakfasting  on  the  back  of  a,  ii.  415 

—  caravan  at  Sari-bulak,  187 

—  cart  of  Kirghese,  1 40 

—  cradles  at  Kunia  Urgenj.  ii.  363 

—  loading  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  365 
Camel's  Hump  on  the  Amu,  ii.  224 
Camels,  "Demoralization"  of,  ii.  428 

—  Hire  of,  ii.  365 

Camp  of  Russians  near  Samarkand,  ii.  4 

Tamerlane,  ii.  4 

Campaign  against  Khiva,  ii.  283 

—  of  Skobeleff  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  464 
Campaigns  of  Tamerlane,  562 
Camping  at  Begendjalri  Kir,  ii.  421 

—  in  a  sea-bed,  ii.  419 

sight  of  the  Caspian,  ii.  426 

the  desert,  ii.  383 

Canals  at  Merv,  ii.  476 

—  near  Koplan-Bek,  423 
Sary  Kamish  lake,  ii.  407 

—  of  Khiva,  ii.  252 

Zarafshan,  535 

Capital  punishment  in  Bokhara,  ii. 
Capture  of  gazelle  at  Uzun  Kuyu,  ii 

I Khiva  by  Russians,  ii.  283 

I  Caravan  on  a  watercourse,  ii.  382 
I  —  routes  in  Bokhara,  ii.  55 


52 
413 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


693 


Caravan  routes  of  Syr-daria  province,  390 

—  travelling  in  a  sea-bed,  ii.  420 
Caravans,  Taxation  of,  ii.  187 
Caravansaries  in  Bokhara,  ii.  133 
Caravansary  at  Khiva,  ii.  285 

—  -  of  the  Karshi  steppe,  ii.  63 
Carlyle  on  Work,  4 
Carnage  at  Iliali,  ii.  332 

Carpet  manufactui-e  at  Merv,  ii.  478 
Carpets  of  the  Turkomans,  ii.  447 
Carriage  of  Emir,  Author's  drive  in,  ii.  30 
Carts  of  natives  at  Khiva,  ii.  316 
Caspian,  Camping  in  sight  of  the,  ii.  426 

—  Colporteurs  from  the,  ii.  240 

—  Jenkinson's  alleged  bay  of  the,  ii.  402 

—  Littoral  of  the,  ii.  437 

—  Passage  across  the,  ii.  499 

—  seaboard,  Russian  forts  on,  ii.  461 

—  sighted  from  the  deseit,  ii.  425 
Cathedral  at  Moscow,  15 
Cattle  at  Chirakchi,  ii.  40 
Hissar.  ii.  40 

—  breeding  in  Semipolatinsk,  10 1 
of  Kirghese,  316 

—  diseases,  319 

—  in  Kuldja,  243 

—  —  Semirechia,  166 

Zarafshan  province,  545 

—  losses  by  storms,  319 

—  market  at  Vierny,  276 

—  of  Merv,  ii.  478 

the  Steppe,  316 

Turkistan,  420 

—  sheds  in  the  desert,  ii.  394 
of  the  Kirghese,  319 

—  stealing  among  Kirghese,  412 
Caucasians  in  Turkistan,  392 
Caverns  at  Kaplan  Kir,  ii.  419 
Cemetery  at  Aulie-Ata,  366 

Khanki,  ii.  248  j 

Suili,  ii.  432  I 

—  Tobolsk,  35 

—  near  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  338 

Sary  Kamish  lake,  ii.  407 

Cereals  of  Turkistan,  483 
Ceremonies  of  Jahria  Brotherhood,  ii.  295 
Gestodes  of  Turkistan,  ii.  615  | 

Character  of  Kirghese,  308  j 

Charitonoff,  Col.,  Hospitality  of,  ii.  492   ! 
Charjui,  Amu-daria  at,  ii.  199 

—  Arms  of  soldiers,  ii.  186 

—  Arrival  at,  ii.  177 

—  Batchas  at,  ii.  190 

—  Bazaar  at,  ii.  185 

—  Bek's  official  staff,  ii.  186 
presents  to  Author,  ii.  1 90 

—  Bill  of  fare  at,  ii.  178 

—  Bread  at,  ii.  178 

—  Curiosities  of,  ii.  185 


I  Charjui,  Fortress  of,  ii.  177 

—  Gallows  at,  ii.  181 
Lodging  near,  ii.  176 

—  News  concerning  tarantass,  ii.  191 

—  Night  guard  at,  ii.  186 

—  officials.  Meeting  of,  ii.  1 76 

—  Parting  with  attendants  at,  ii.  191 

—  Pilau  at,  ii.  178 

—  Population  of,  ii.  177 

—  Prison  at,  ii.  183 

—  Reception  of  Author  at,  ii.  179 
-  Slave-trade  at,  ii.  185 

—  Start  for  the  Oxus,  ii.  190 

—  Trumpets  and  drums  at,  ii.  181 

—  Visit  to  Bek  of,  ii.  1 79 
Chastisement  in  the  desert,  ii.  396 
Chateau  at  Iliali,  ii.  333 
Cheleken,  Naphtha  springs  at,  ii.  496 
Chemical  analysis  of  Sary  Kamish  water, 

ii.  400 
Cherkassky  on  old  bed  of  Oxus,  ii.  406 
Chernaieff,  Gen.,  in  Turkistan,  619 

Supersession  of,  622 

Chess-playing  among  Turkomans,  ii.  444 
Chickens  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 
Chikishliar,  Russian  capture  of,  ii.  461 
Childbirth  among  Kirghese,  359 
Children  of  the  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  188 

Kirghese,  360 

Chimgan,  Sanatorium  at,  450 
Chimkent,  Cultivated  land  in,  421 

—  Derivation  of  name,  422 

—  Discontent  among  Kazaks,  509 

—  district.  Geology  of,  422 
— ■  Houses  in,  421 

—  Khokandian  defeat  at,  619 

—  Population  of.  421 

—  Russian  conquest  of,  620 

—  Scriptures  for,  443 

—  uyezd,  421 

China  basin,  Tragical  end  of  a,  ii.  389 
China,  Jewish  migration  to,  521 

—  Jews  in.  Traditions  of,  594 

—  Opium-smoking  illegal  in,  261 
Chinaz,  Syr  river  at,  387 
Chinchakhodzi,  Arrival  at,  264 

—  captured  by  Russians,  627 

—  Dungans  at,  200 

—  Station  at,  199 

Chinese  anxiety  for  Scriptures,  236 

—  bazaar.  Visit  to  a,  239 

—  Christians  in  Kuldja,  230 

—  coins,  240 

—  commissariat  officer  at  Kuldja,  Visit 

to,  235 

—  curiosities  in  Vierny,  275 

—  emigrants  in  Borokhudzir  valley,  194 

—  Gospels  in  Kuldja,  Sale  of,  236 

—  Governor  at  Suidun,  Visit  to,  257 


694 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Chinese  in  the  Hi  valley,  257 

—  influence  in  Khokand,  503 

—  junks  on  Lake  Zaisan,  131 

—  Massacre  of,  203 

—  p'ai  fang  at  Suidun,  204 

—  paintings,  262 

—  police-master,  Visit  to,  234 
Chirakchi  bekship,  ii.  40 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  43 

—  Poor  lodging  at,  ii.  42 

—  Presents  from  Bek  of,  ii.  43 
to  Bek  of,  ii.  41 

—  Price  of  corn  at.  ii.  40 

—  Sheep  and  cattle  at,  ii.  40 

—  Visit  to  Bek  of,  ii.  41 

—  Welcome  by  Bek  of,  ii.  41 
Chirchik  river,  478 
Chitarik,  Arrival  at,  ii.  64 
Cholera  in  Turkistan,  538 
Choristers  of  Jewish  Synagogue,  592 
Christian  persecution  of  Jews  in  Russia, 

ii.  105 

—  work  for  women  in  Cent.  Asia,  ii.  356 
Christianity,  Muhammadan  attitude  to- 
wards, ii.  302 

Chronology  of  Russ.  Central  Asia,  677 
Chrysidiformes  of  Turkistan,  ii.  579 
Chu  river,  Description  of,  359 

Fish  of,  359 

Chuchai,  House-building  at,  517 
Chulak  hills,  Route  over,  266 
Chupan-Ata  hill,  564 
Church  music  on  steamboat,  40 
Chusovaia,  Arrest  of  Author  at,  20 
Cistern  at  Hazret  Haifa,  ii.  100 

Kakir,  ii.  60 

Citadel  palace  at  Samarkand,  577 
Civilization,  An  oasis  of,  ii.  229 
Clayton,  Capt.,  on  Turkoman  frontier, 

ii.  466 
CliflFs  at  Kaplan  Kir,  ii.  418 

—  of  the  Ust  Urt,  ii.  392 

—  on  the  Amu-daria,  ii.  200 

Upper  Oxus,  ii.  208 

Climate  of  Akmolinsk,  50 

Amu-daria  province,  432 

Ferghana  province,  495 

Khivan  khanate,  ii.  331 

—  —  Khojend,  550 

Kohistan,  538 

Kopal,  159 

Kuldja,  224 

Marghilan,  497 

Osh,  497 

Pamir,  493 

—  —  Semirechia,  159 

Sergiopol,  1 59 

Tashkend,  449,  467 

the  Steppe,  44 


j  Climate  of  Turkistan,  37 1 
i Turkmenia,  ii.  440 

—  —  Vierny,  27 1 

Climbing  a  camel's  hump,  ii.  389 
Clock  and  towers  at  Bokhara,  ii.  125 
Coal  at  Bokhara,  ii.  141 

—  mines  in  Hi  valley,  198 

near  Khojend,  515 

Coinage  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  347 

—  in  Khiva,  ii.  285 

Coins  found  near  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

—  of  Central  Asia,  ii.  502 

Chinese,  240 

College  life  in  Khiva,  ii.  290 

—  of  Ulug  Beg,  ii.  72 

Yelenktosh,  ii.  72 

Colleges  of  Central  Asia,  586 

Samarkand,  586 

Colonization  of  Semirechia,  292 

•  the  Hi  valley,  203 

Colporteurs  among  the  Kirghese,  ii.  303 

—  at  Askhabad,  ii.  305 
Iliali,  ii.  333 

—  from  the  Caspian,  ii.  240 

—  in  Bokhara,  ii.  304 
Khiva,  ii.  304 

Comet,  Kirghese  notions  of  a,  ii.  364 

—  visible  at  Khoja-Moburak,  ii.  59 
Commerce  of  Bokhara,  ii.  133 
Communications  of  the  Steppe,  46 
Conceit  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  25 
Concert  among  the  Kirghese.  341 
Conflagrations  in  Akmolinsk,  54 
Conolly,  Capt.,  at  Khiva,  ii.  280 

imprisoned  at  Bokhara,  ii.  76 

killed  at  Bokhara,  ii.  76 

Conquests  of  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  273 

Tamerlane,  ii.  274 

Constantinople,    Muhammadan   worship 

at,  ii.  297 
Constantino vsk,  Agriculture  at,  359 
Conversation  with  Bek  of  Shahr,  ii.  33 

courtiers  at  Bokhara,  ii.  154 

Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  261,  272,  302, 

310,  486 

—  —   Kush-beggi  of  Bokliara,  ii.  128 
Cooking  utensils.  Purchase  of,  ii.  364 
Copper-mining  near  Kuldja,  199 
Coppersmiths'  Row  in  Khiva,  ii.  287 
Com  at  Chirakchi,  Price  of,  ii.  40 

—  mill  at  Manak,  ii.  325 

—  stores  in  Ust-Kamenogorsk,  316 

Zaisan  district,  316 

Coronation-stone  at  Samarkand,  577 
of  Tamerlane,  564 

Cossack  colonists  in  Semirechia,  292 

—  fisheries  on  Lake  Zaisan,  91 

—  gardening,  100 

—  plundering  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  341 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


695 


Cossack  population  of  Akmolinsk,  66 
--   —     -  Semipolatinsk,  66 

—  raids  on  Urgenj,  ii.  274 

—  sei-vice,  113 

settlers  in  Semirechia,  166 
Cossacks,  Arms  of,  602 
-  enslaved  by  Khivans,  ii.  276 

in  Turkistan,  601 
-  Uniforms  of,  603 
Cotton  cultivation  at  Borokhudzir,  194 

Merv,  ii.  478 

of  Cent.  Asia,  M.  Brodowsky  on,  195 

statistics,  195 
Counterfeit  coin  at  Merv,  ii.  478 
Court  of  Justice  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  358 

visitors  at  Kitab,  ii.  18 
Courtine  of  Catherine  II.  in  Petersburg, 

645 

Cells  for  military  officers,  648 

Garden  exercise  in,  648 

—  Library  for  prisoners,  647 

— -  —  Prisoners'  rooms,  647 

Trial  chamber,  647 

Visitors'  room,  646 

Cowardice  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  22,  88 
Cradle  accident  in  the  desert,  ii.  388 
Crazy  bridges  at  Kara-Kul,  ii.  168 
Creeds  in  Vierny,  280 
Crevasses  of  Kaplan  Kir,  ii.  420 
Crime  among  Kirghese,  411 

at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  354,  358 
in  Akmolinsk,  57 
-  Kuldja,  236 
~  Kirghese  idea  of,  347 
Criminal  exiles  in  Hi  valley,  258 
Cromie,  Mr.  W.  H.,  Translation  work 

of,  ii.  506 
Crops  in  Turkistan,  484 
of  Bokhara,  ii.  164 

—  Zarafshan  province,  545,  608 
Crustacea  of  Turkistan,  ii.  548 

Cufic  inscription  on  Kok-tash  stone,  579 
Curiosities  at  Tashkend,  458 
~-  for  British  Museum,  275 

from  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

in  Tashkend  Museum,  455 

—  of  Bokhara,  ii.  127 

—  Charjui,  ii.  185 
purchased  in  Bokhara,  ii.  134 

Curiosity  hunting  among  the  Sibos,  213 
Custody,  Release  of  Author  from,  24 
Customs  of  the  Dungans,  209 
•  —  Kirghese,  364 

Daily  bread  at  Charjui,  ii.  179 
Daily  News  Correspondent,  Merv,  ii.  467 
Dancing  boys,  or  Batchas,  209 

at  Bokhara,  ii.  89 

—  Kitab.  ii.  15 


Dancing  boys  dressed  as  girls,  ii.  90 

—  dervishes  at  Constantinople,  ii.  297 

Samarkand,  ii.  295 

Darkness  in  the  desert,  ii.  397 
Darwaz,  Iron  mines  near.  ii.  54 

—  Oshanin's  description  of,  ii.  54 
Darwazis  subjugated  by  Bokhariots,  ii.  53 
Daudan,  Crossing  the,  ii.  319 

Death  of  M.  Fedchenko,  ii.  513 
M.  Severtsoff,  ii.  508 

—  rate  in  Tashkend  hospital,  450 
Deaths  in  Semipolatinsk,  108 
Debtors  and  creditors  in  heaven,  ii.  220 
Decapitation  of  Muhammad-Emin,  ii.  457 
Deflection  of  the  Oxus,  Cause  of,  ii.  409 
Dekche,  Arrival  at,  ii.  393 

— ■  Urun-daria  at,  ii.  393 
De  Marny  on  Kyzyl-Kum  geology,  426 
Demerdjan  well,  ii.  429 
Demoralization  of  camels,  ii.  428 
Dependence  of  Merv  upon  Khiva,  ii.  486 
Derbent,  Iron  Gates  defile  near,_ii.  51 
Dervishes  at  Khiva,  ii.  298 
Desert,  Ablutions  in  the,  ii.  424 

—  Animal  life  in,  ii.  393 

—  around  Merv,  ii.  455 

—  "  Beauty  "  sleep  in.  ii.  387 

—  Bible-searching  in,  ii.  423 

—  Bread-baking  in,  ii.  412 

—  Breakfast  in,  ii.  380 

—  Camel  accident  in,  ii.  377 
loading  in,  ii.  387 

—  Camping  in,  ii.  383 

—  Caspian  sighted  from,  ii.  425 

—  Cattle-sheds  in,  ii.  394 

—  Character  of  guides,  ii.  397 

—  Correction  of  Murad  for  stealing,  ii.  396 

—  Cradle  accident  in,  ii.  388 

—  Dangers  of,  ii.  231 

—  Darkness  in,  ii.  397 

—  Dessert  in,  340 

—  Discipline  in,  ii.  387 

—  Doctoring  in,  ii.  378 

—  Fatigue  of  travelling  in,  ii.  423 

—  Forty  winks  in,  ii.  428 

—  Game-birds  of,  ii.  422 

—  "  Good-luck  "  in,  ii.  414 

—  Flurrying  drivers  in,  ii.  381 

—  "  In  bed  "  in,  ii.  415 

—  Inconveniences  of  travelling  in,  ii.  424 

—  Jackdaws  in,  ii.  422 

—  Krasnovodsk  sighted  from,  ii.  433 

—  Lack  of  comforts  in,  ii.  423 

—  locked,  ii.  229 

—  Low  spirits  in,  ii.  422 

—  Marmots  in,  ii.  422 

—  Order  of  march  in,  ii.  387 

—  Pastime  in,  ii.  423 

—  Perils  of,  ii.  172 


696 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Desert,  Preparation  for  crossing,  ii.  363 

—  Rate  of  travel,  ii.  492 

-  Reeds  and  rushes  in,  ii.  397 

—  Revival  of  hopes  in.  ii.  424 

—  Robbers  in,  ii.  394 

—  Ruins  in,  ii.  383 

—  Saxaul  fires  in,  ii.  411 

—  Sheep  and  goats  of,  ii.  382 

—  Sleeping  in,  ii.  173 
cages  in,  ii.  376 

—  Slow  progress  in,  ii.  395 

—  Submarine  origin  of,  ii.  438 

—  Subterranean  sheds  in,  ii.  394 

—  Temperature  in,  ii,  422 

—  Troubles  with  attendants,  ii.  414 

—  "Turning  policeman"  in,  ii.  396 

—  Ups  and  downs  of,  ii.  422 

—  Venison  in  the,  ii.  382 

—  Weariness  of  mind  in,  ii.  423 

—  Wild  hens  in,  ii.  422 
Deserts  of  Syr-daria  province,  384 
Desiccated  lake-bed  near  Ala-Kul,  177 
Desiccation  of  Turkoman  steppe,  ii.  405 
Dessert  in  the  desert,  340 
Detonations  on  the  Amu,  ii.  220 

Diet  of  prisoners  at  Omsk,  662 
Difficulties  of  desert  journey,  ii.  172 
Dinner  among  the  Kirghese,  339 

—  in  a  Turkoman  tent,  ii.  374 
"Diotrephes,"  Misbehaviour  of,  ii.  338 

—  return  to  civilization,  ii.  492 

—  Scamper  on,  ii.  59 
Disabilities  of  Jews  m  Russia,  ii.  104 
Disappearance  of  Aral  Sea,  ii.  403 
Discipline  in  the  desert,  ii.  387 
Diseases  among  Kirghese,  307 

- —  in  Semipolatinsk,  116 

—  —  Tashkend,  449 

—  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  144 

— • cured  by  Issirik  grass,  ii.  57 

Khivans,  ii.  308 

Dishonesty  of  attendants,   ii.  311,  365, 

371,  372 
Dispensary  at  Tashkend,  450 
Distilleries,  55 

—  in  Turkistan,  607 

Distribution  of  books,  etc.,  229,  235, 
279,  469,  670,  671,  ii.  232,  301 

Scriptures,  etc.,  6,  19,  26     29,  38, 

65,  68,  263,  442,  443,  454,  466, 
529,  611,665,  ii.  237 

—  Turkoman  tribes,  ii.  444 
Divan-beggi  medresse  at  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Divinity  and  medicine  conjoined,  18 
Divisions  of  Turkoman  tribes,  ii.  444 
Divorce  among  the  Kirghese,  328 

—  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  353 
Djan-Bulak,  Unruly  horse  at,  487 
Djiguitts  engaged  by  Author,  ii.  3 


Djus  Agach,  Miserable  station  at,  175 
Doctoring  a  ci-adle,  ii.  389 
Turkoman,  ii.  374 

—  in  the  desert,  ii.  378 
Doctors  in  Bokhara,  ii.  149 
Dog-fighting  at  Shavat,  ii.  320 
Dolgorouki,    Prince,      Sympathy     with 

Jews,  ii,  104 
Domestic  animals  in  Turkistan,  420 
comforts  in  desert.  Lack  of,  ii.  423 

—  expenses  in  Tashkend,  461 
Dress  of  Taranchis,  207 
Dresses  of  Kirghese,  312 
Drink  traffic  in  Turkistan,  607 

Drive  of  Author  in  Emir's  carriage,  ii.  30 
Driving  in  danger,  ii.  168 
Droshky  drive  in  Vierny,  272 
Drags,  Purchase  of,  18 
Drums  and  trum])ets  at  Charjui,  ii.  181 
Drunkenness  of  Turkistan  troops,  603 
Dungans  at  Chinchakhodzi,  200 
Jarkend,  196 

—  Customs  of,  209 

—  -  defeated  by  Taranchis,  203 

Description  of,  209 

—  Insurrection  against  China,  626 

—  Mosque  of,  in  Kuldja,  232,  255 

—  Music  of  the,  210 
Number  of,  209 
Origin  of,  208 

—  Rebellion  of,  203 

—  Shopkeepers  in  Kuldja,  240 
Vehicles  of,  210,  263 

Dungeons  at  Bokhara,  ii.  153 
Dust-storms  in  Ferghana  province,  496 
Dwellings  in  Kuldja,  253 
Dyeing-plants  in  Turkistan,  483 

"  Early  to  bed  and  early  to  rise,"  ii.  386 
Earth-closets  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  415 
Earthquakes  at  Tashkend,  468 
-  in  Turkistan,  378 
Eastern  sovereigns.  Scandal  concerning, 

"•  ^55  . 

Eatables  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 
Eating-houses  at  Vierny,  278 
Education  among  the  Kirghese,  358 
at  Samarkand,  600 

Vierny,  279 

-  in  Bokhara,  ii,  120 
Zarafshan  province,  600 

—  of  Turkistan  troops,  603 
Egen-Klych,  Dam  of,  ii,  383 
Eggs  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

in  Khiva,  ii.  364 
!  "  Ehbi  "  wind  in  the  Steppe,  181 
I  Ekaterineburg,  Arrival  at,  26 

Bible  Society's  agent  at,  ii.  238 
Elburz  and  Kopet  ranges,  ii.  438 


GENERAL   INDEX, 


697 


Election  among  the  Kirghese,  346 

—  Kirghese  ruffianism  at  an,  350 
Emigration  from  Kuldja,  256 
Emir  of  Bokhara,  sec  Bokhara. 
Enamelled  bricks  at  Samarkand.  587 
Enamelling,    Remarkable,     at     Khoja- 

Akhrar  medresse,  582 
Encampment  at  Jedurun,  ii.  392 

—  of  Bokhariot  troops,  ii.  93 

English    attempts    at    growing   Khivan 
melons,  ii.  266 

—  ingratitude,  ii.  500 

—  mediation  in  Khiva,  ii.  278 

—  perseverance,  ii.  4 

—  trade  competition  in  Turkistan,  464 
Enterprise,  Author's,  Danger  of,  8 

—  Victims  of  the  spirit  of,  ii.  431 
Entertainment  at  Kitab,  ii.  15 
Shahr,  ii.  34 

Entomological  expedition  of  Bolosoglo, 

ii-  575 
Epidemics  in  Zarafshan  province,  538 
Ersaris  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  444 
Erschoff,   N.  G..  on  Turkistan  Lepido- 

ptera,  ii.  581 
Escort  from  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  368 

—  on  the  Oxus.  ii.  201 
Etchmiadzin,  Walls  of,  ii.  124 
Eternal  fires  of  Baku,  ii.  500 
Ethnographical  specimens  in  Tashkend 

museum,    455 
Ethnography  of  Ili  valley,  206 
Ethnology  of  Ili  valley,  206 

Semirechia,  162 

Turkmenia,  ii.  144 

Zarafshan  province,  541 

Etiquette  at  Kitab,  ii.  20 

Evening  audiences  aboard  ship,  2 

Exaggeration  of  newspapers.  25 

"  Example  better  than  precept,"  ii.  56 

Excise  duties  in  Semipolatinsk,  112 

—  statistics,  56 

Execution  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  69 

—  stone  at  Samarkand,  i;79 
Executions  in  Bokhara,  ii.  152 
Exhibition  at  Moscow,  14 

Tract  distribution  in,  ii.  238 

Exiles  from  Bokhara,  ii.  210 

—  in  Tobolsk,  Books  for,  29 

—  Russian,  Books  for,  6 
Expeditions  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  461 
Exploration  of  the  Oxus,  ii.  193 

Thian  Shan,  294 

Explorations  of  Bokhara  mountains,  ii.  50 
Fedchenko,  492,  ii.  509 

Kostenko,  493 

Maieff,  ii.  50 

Oshanin,  ii.  50 

Osten-Sacken,  297 


Explorations  of  Poltoratzky,  297 
Kegel,  ii.  50 

—  —  Severtsoff,  494 
Exports  from  Khokand,  523 
Kuldja,  242 

I  —  of  Semipolatinsk,  107 
— Tashkend,  461 

Factories  in  Kuldja,  242 
Fairs  at  Tashkend,  462 

—  of  Semipolatinsk,  105 
Falconry  at  Manak,  ii.  326 
Fanaticism  of  Kirghese,  344 

Muhammadans,  ii.  298 

Fancy  goods  of  Tashkend,  459 

Fares  between   Tiumen   and   Semipola- 
tinsk, T^-] 
Farm-houses  at  Bokhara,  ii.  165 

near  Khiva,  ii.  254 

Shavat,  ii.  321 

Farming  on  the  Amu,  ii.  222 
Fatigue  of  desert  travelling,  ii.  423 
Fauna  of  Ala-Kul  district,  147 

—  ■ —  Amu  islands,  ii.  218 

—  —  banks  of  Lake  Zaisan,  91 

Ferghana  province,  499 

Khiva,  ii.  267 

Omsk,  80 

Pamir,  494 

—  —  Russian  Turkistan,  ii.  505 
Semirechia,  160 

-■ the  Steppe,  ii.  430 

j Turkmenia,  ii.  441 

!  Favours,  Official,  12 
I  Fazul,  Author's  native  servant,  ii.  3 
!  Feast  of  Tabernacles  at  Samarkand,  589 
!  Feasting  among  the  Kirghese,  339 
at  Bokhara,  ii.  154 

—  in  a  cemetery,  367 

j  Fedchenko,  M.,  Explorations  of,  492 

—  Fatal  accident  to,  ii.  513 

I  —  Madame,  Appendices  revised  by,  ii.  5 1 3 
I  —  on  Turkistan  Zoology,  ii.  506 
'  —  Travels  of,  ii.  509 

Feeding-time  on  the  Oxus,  ii.  203 

Feline  obtruders  in  tent,  ii.  6 
\  Felt  manufacture  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  447 

Felts  of  the  Turkomans,  ii.  447 
:  Female  missionaries.  Need  of,  ii.  356 
;  —  seclusion  in  Bokhara,  ii.  156 

Khiva,  ii.  355 

Ferghana  province,  490 

Alai  plateau,  492 

Area  of,  42,  491 

Baber,  ruler  of,  502 

: Bokhariot  conquest  of,  506 

j Climate  of,  495 

—  —  Dust-storms  in,  496 

i  —  —  Explorations  of  Fedchenko,  492 


698 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA, 


Ferghana  province  : 

Explorations   of  Kostenko,  493 

— SevertsoflF,  494 

Extension  under  Narbuta,  504 

Fauna  of,  499 

Form  of,  490 

Geology  of.  497 

Gharm-sol  in,  496 

Independence  of,  504 

Kara-Kul  lake,  495 

Lakes  of,  494 

Madali  and  his  conquests,  504 

Minerals  of,  497 

—  —  Pamir  mountains,  492 

Climate  of,  493 

Fauna  of.  494 

Flora  of,  494 

Petroleum  in,  498 

Pilgrimages  in,  500 

—  • —  Population  of,  42 

Rivers  of,  493 

Scriptures  for,  443 

Size  of,  490 

Skobeleff  in,  512 

Subjection  to  China,  503 

Surface  of,  491 

Tobacco  culture  in,  499 

Towns  of,  398,  499,  501 

Turquoise  in,  497 

—  —  Vegetation  of.  497 
Ferns  of  Zarafshan  province,  609 
Ferries  on  the  Upper  Oxus,  ii.  196 
Ferry-boat  on  the  Oxus,  ii.  176 
Festivals  of  the  Sarts,  ii.  250 
Feuds  of  the  Kirghese.  294 

Fever  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 

Fevers  in  Tashkend,  449 

Field  for  female  missionaries,  ii.  356 

Fifty-shilling  tea  !  264 

Fighting  ram  at  Khiva,  ii.  259 

Finland,  Bible-work  in,  ii.  240 

PMnsch,  Dr.,  on  fauna  of  Ala-Kul,  147 

Tuikistan  Zoology,  ii.  507 

Fire-worshippers  at  Surakhane,  ii.  500 
Fires  in  Akmolinsk,  54 

Semipolatinsk,  115 

Fish  at  Khojeili,  ii.  349 
Krasnovodsk,  ii.  496 

—  in  Ala-Kul  lake,  148 

Irtish  river,  79 

-—  Zaisan  lake,  90 

—  of  Amu-daria.  ii.  243 

— Price  of,  ii.  243 

Asia  (Central),  ii.  530 

—  Atrak  river,  ii.  439 

—  Balkhash  lake,  180 

—  —  Chu  river,  359 

—  —  Issik-Kul  lake,  159 
Khivan  khanate,  ii.  269 


Fish  of  Turkistan,  ii.  243,  530 

Zarafshan  rivei".  ii.  510 

Fisheries  on  Lake  Zaisan,  91 
Floating  down  the  Oxus,  ii.  200 
Flora  of  Amu  banks,  ii.  223 

Omsk,  80 

Pamir,  494 

Russian  Turkistan,  ii.  618 

Turkmenia,  ii.  440 

Zarafshan  province,  557 

Flour  mills  at  Manak,  ii.  325 
Fogs  in  Turkistan,  377 
Food  at  Karategin,  ii.  54 
•  Khanki,  ii.  251 

—  of  the  Kalmuks.  215 

Kirghese,  337 

Turkistan  troops,  603 

Turkomans,  ii.  446 

Fording  the  Zarafshan  river,  559 
Fords  of  Upper  Oxus,  ii.  195 
Forest  plantations,  ii.  8 
Forests  of  saxaul,  ii.  411 

Semipolatinsk,  93 

Semirechia,  160 

Fort  Vernoe,  270 
Fortress  at  Manak,  326 

Krasnovodsk,  ii.  498 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 

—  of  Borokhudzir,  193 
Charjui,  ii.  177 

—  —  Hazarasp,  ii.  313 
Iliali,  ii.  333 

—  —  Kaushid  Khan,  ii.  475 

—  —  Zmukshir,  ii.  332 
Fortress  Prison  in  Petersburg,  640 

Admission  difficult,  640 

Courtine  of  Catherine  II.,  642 

Eye-witnesses'  testimony,  651 

Misreoresentations  concerning,  642 

Newspaper  criticisms  on  Author's 

visit,  641 

Nineteenth  Century  on,  657 

Statements  of  ex-prisoners,  652 

Troubetzkoy  bastion,  641 

Visits  to  prisoners,  644 

Forts  along  Irtish  river,  127 

—  erected  in  Steppe,  408 
Syr-daria  province,  409 

—  of  Turkistan,  601 

'*  Forty  winks  "  in  the  desert,  ii.  428 
Fossil  remains  on  the  Amu-daria,  ii.  200 
French  travellers  at  Merv,  ii.  473 
Frontier  camp  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  221 

—  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  435 
Fruit  at  Borokhudzir,  194 
Vierny,  277 

-of  Khiva,  ii.  266 

Kuldja,  223 

Mcrv,  ii.  477 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


699 


Fruit-trees  at  Manak,  ii.  326 

in  Turkistan,  480 

— Turkmenia,  ii.  440 

of  Bokhara,  ii.  82 

on  the  Balkhan  mountains,  ii.  438 

Fuel  at  Bokhara,  ii.  142 

—  of  Asia  (Central),  ii.  411 

the  Kirghese,  352 

Funerals  among  the  Sarts,  ii.  248 
Fur  trade  at  Khokand,  523 
Furniture  at  Kakir,  ii.  62 

Furs  at  Bokhara,  ii.  134 

Gaieties  at  Tashkend,  452 

Gallop  round  walls  of  Bokhara,  ii.  loi 

Gallows  at  Charjui,  ii.  181 

Khiva,  ii.  308 

Galtchas  of  Zarafshan  province,  541 

-  Customs  of,  542 

—  Domestic  life  of,  542 

—  Government  of,  542 
--  Tribes  of,  543 

Game  birds  of  the  desert,  ii.  422 

—  on  the  Amu,  ii.  218 
Games  of  the  Kirghese.  556 
Ganoid  fishes  of  the  Amu,  ii.  245 
Garden  of  Kush-beggi  at  Bokhara,  ii.  81 

produce  of  Bokhara,  ii.  142 
Gardening  at  Bokhara,  ii.  83 

—  by  Cossacks,  100 

—  in  prisons,  668 

Gardens  of  Asia  (Central)  480 

Bokhara,  ii.  137,  165 

Iliali,  ii.  333 

Khiva,  ii.  252,  337 

Khojend,  550 

Kuldja,  224 

Merv,  ii.  476 

Petersburg  prisons,  645,  648 

Gates  of  Bokhara,  ii.  loi 

Tamerlane,  555 

Tashkend,  424 

Gazavat,  Aryk  and  town  of,  ii.  318 

—  Houses  at,  ii.  318 

—  Inhabitants  of,  ii.  318 

—  Turkomans  of,  ii.  319 

Gazelle  captured  at  Uzun  Kuyu,  ii.  413 
Gazelles  at  Porsu,  ii.  426 
Gazette  in  Tashkend,  ii.  292 
Gelun,  Clerical  functions  of  a,  217 

—  Duties  of  a,  216 

Geluns  among  the  Kalmuks,  215 

—  Tents  of  the,  216 

Generosity  of  M.  Ignatoff,  27,  32,  33 
Geographical  problems  concerning  Aral 
Sea,  ii.  402 

Oxus,  ii.  402 

Geography  of  Kara-boghaz  gulf,  ii.  427 
Geok  Tepe,  Russian  capture  of,  ii.  465 


Geok  Tepe,  Russian  losses  at,  ii.  465 

Skobeleff  at,  ii.  464 

Geological  changes  of  Aral  wSea,  385 

—  features  of  Central  Asia,  ii.  170 

—  formation  of  Khivan  khanate,  ii.  265 

—  phenomena  on  the  Oxus,  ii.  206 

— questions  concerning  the  Scaphirhyn- 

chus,  ii.  244 
Geology  of  Chimkent  district,  422 

Ferghana,  497 

Kohistan,  537 

Kyzyl-Kum  steppe,  426 

Thian  Shan  mountains,  155 

Turkistan,  378 

Zaisan  neighbourhood,  91 

German  visitors  at  Tashkend,  452 

Germans  in  Tashkend,  448 

Gharm-sol  in  Ferghana,  496 

Ghern,  M.,  at  Vierny,  274 

Gill,  Lieut.,  on  Turkoman  frontier,  ii.  466 

Gilyaks,    Men  and   bear  fights   among, 

ii.  211 
Ginsburg,  Dr.,  on  Hebrew  MSS.,  ii.  114 
Glaciers  of  Thian  Shan  range.  155 
Glaisher,  Mr.,  Instruments  lent  by.  8 
Glukhovsky's  reconnaissance  of  old  Oxus 

bed,  ii.  407 
Gluttony  of  the  Kirghese,  338 
Goats  of  the  Kirghese,  317 
Gods  of  the  Sibos,  212 
Goitre  at  Khokand,  546 

—  Remedies  for,  547 

—  Treatment  of,  547 
Goklans  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  445 
Gold  in  Turkistan,  381 

—  mining  in  Semipolatinsk.  103 
Golden  Horde.  Russian  conquest  of,  401 
"  Good  luck  "  in  the  desert,  ii.  414 
Gorge  in  the  Oxus  bed,  ii.  393 
Governors  of  Khivan  provinces,  ii.  314 
Granary  of  Tashkend,  478 

Grand    Duke    Michael's     reception    of 

Author,  II 
Grapes  of  Khiva,  ii.  267 
Grave  of  Gen.  von  Kaufmann,  448 
Graveyards  of  Bokhara,  ii.  249 
Great  Balkhan  mountains,  ii.  437 

—  Horde,  Submission  of,  288 
Grodekofif  on  the  Turkomans,  ii.  444 
Grotenhielm,  Gen.  von,  Hospitality  of, 

ii.  232 

kindness  to  colporteurs,  ii.  305 

Guest  and  prisoner  at  Bokhara,  ii.  140 

—  house  at  Karshi,  ii.  44 

Guides  in  the  desert,  Character  of.  ii.  397 
Guinea-worm  in  Bokhara,  ii.  146 
Gunpowder    manufacture    in    Bokhara, 

ii.  141 
Merv,  ii  47S 


700 


JiCrSSIAJV  CENTRAL  ASIA 


Gur-Emir  mausoleum,  566 

History  of  the,  570 

Relics  of  the,  571 

Tombs  in  the,  567 

Gurgan  river,  ii.  439 

Gypsies  of  Zarafshan  province,  543 

Habitations  in  Amu-daria  province.433 

—  of  Semirechia,  164 

Kirghese,  310 

Taranchis,  208 

Turkomans,  ii.  445 

Handoo  Kuh  mountains,  ii.  439 
Harbour  of  Lake  Balkhash,  180 
Harbours  of  Lake  Aral,  429 
Harem  of  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  155 

• —  Life  in  the,  ii.  355 

Khan  of  Khokand,  ii.  155 

Harkavy,  Dr.  A.,onHebrewMSS.,ii.  II4 
Har\-est  tax  at  Khiva,  ii.  271 
Harvests  of  Bokhara,  ii.  164 

Hassan  Kuli  Bay,  Boat-building  at,  ii.  439 
Havli  at  Manak,  Interior  of,  ii.  327  j 

—  Walls  of,  ii.  326  ! 
Havlis  near  Shavat,  ii.  321  j 
Hawks  for  falconry  at  Manak,  ii.  326       ! 

—  Training  of,  ii.  326 
Hazarasp  gate  at  Khiva,  ii.  311 

—  Governorship  of,  ii.  314 

—  Hermit's  cave  at,  ii.  313 

—  Population  of,  ii.  314 

—  Town  of,  ii.  312 

—  Tradition  concerning,  ii.  313 
Hazret   Haifa    Khu-daidat,    Cistern   at, 

ii.  ICXD 

—  Imlah,  Mosque  of,  ii.  100 

—  Russian  conquest  of,  620 
Head-dresses  of  Kirghese.  ii.  287 
Heaven,  Debtors  and  creditors  in,  ii.  220 
Hebrew  MSS.  at  Bokhara,  ii.  114 
Ginsburg,  Dr.,  on,  ii.  1 14 

Harkavy,  Dr.,  on,  ii.  114 

Hints  concerning,  ii.  1 14 

Wonderful  specimen  of,  ii.  115 

—  patriarchs,  Kirghese  resemblance  to, 

299 

—  pronunciation  at  Samarkand,  595 
Help  of  Bible  and  Tract  Societies,  5 
Hemiptera  seen  at  Tashkend,  455 
Herds  of  the  Kirghese,  322 

Heri  Rud  river  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  453 
Hermit's  cave  at  Hazarasp,  ii.  313 
Highway  from  Petersburg   to  Afghani- 
stan, ii.  406 
Hindu  disabilities  in  Bokhara,  ii.  100 

—  Sarai  at  Bokhara,  ii.  100 
Hindus  at  Khokand,  ii.  100 
Hindustan,  Route  to,  ii.  194 

Hints  concerning  Heljrew  MSS.,  ii.  1 14 


Hissar,  Cattle  at,  ii.  40. 

—  mountains,  535,  ii.  40 

Historical  discussion  on  Aralo-Caspian 

region,  ii.  403 
History  of  Akhal  oasis,  ii.  450 

Attek  oasis,  ii.  451 

Bokhara,  ii.  66 

Hi  valley,  201 

Kalmuks,  125 

Khivan  oasis,  ii.  264 

Khojend..  549 

Khokand,  502 

Maracanda,  560 

Hodjas  among  Kirghese,  346 

Holy  Communion  in  a  Roman  Catholic 

chapel.  228 
Home  comforts  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk, 

ii.  228 

—  entertainment  at  Khiva,  ii.  308 

—  life  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  352 
Horse-box,  Travelling  in  a,  ii.  501 

—  dealing  in  Bokhara,  ii.  132 

—  racing  in  Khiva,  ii.  320 
Horses  at  Khiva,  Cost  of,  ii.  259 
Petro-Alexandrovsk,  Cost  of.  ii.  259 

—  Sale  of,  ii.  236,  237 
Horticulture  at  Bokhara,  ii.  85,  165 
Hospital  at  Khokand,  525 

Petro-Alexandrovsk.  ii.  234 

Tashkend,  448 

—  patients  at  Samarkand,  599 

—  statistics  of  Semipolatinsk,  116 

Tashkend,  449 

Hospitality  at  Kainar,  ii.  1 1 

— -  —  Khojend,  513 

Krasnovodsk,  ii.  492 

Manak,  ii.  327 

—  —  Russian  consulate  at  Kuldja,  221 

—  of  Eastern  Bokhariots,  ii.  52 

Grotenhielm,  Gen.  von,  ii.  232 

Putimsoff,  Col.,  489 

the  Sarts,  ii.  300 

Sibos,  214 

Hospitals  at  Samarkand,  596,  598 

of  Semipolatinsk,  Books  for,  144 
Hotel  at  Vierny,  275 

—  -  "  Nicolaeff"  at  Tashkend,  424 
House-building  at  Chuchai,  517 

—  of  Khokand  merchant,  530 

—  rent  in  Tashkend,  461 
Household   commodities  in  Tashkend, 

461 
Houses  at  Iliali,  ii.  332 
Tashauz,  ii.  330 

—  in  Akmolinsk,  54 

Chimkent,  421 

Kuldja,  253 

Russian  Tashkend,  440 

Semipolatinsk,  114 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


701 


Houses  in  Viemy,  272  | 

—  of  ill-fame  in  Russ.  Turkistan,  ii.  299 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  352,  365 

Hiibsch,  Baron,  Kindness  of,  ii.  500 
Hungry  Steppe,  477 

Huzar  to  the  Oxus,  Stations  from,  ii.  52 
Hydrography  of  Amu  at  Kabakli,  ii.  213 

Amu-daria  province,  428 

Attek  oasis,  ii.  452 

Oxus,  Lower,  ii.  241 

Upper,  ii.  202 

Steppe,  44 

Tejend  oasis,  ii.  453 

Ichthyology  of  Turkistan,  ii.  530 
Idols  of  the  Kalmuks,  218 

Sibos,  212 

Igda,  Wells  of,  ii.  407 
Iginchas  among  the  Kirghese,  315 
Ignatoff,  M.,  Generosity  of,  27,  32,  33 
Ignorance  of  Asiatics,  ii.  123 

Bokhariots,  ii.  1 24 

Ildjik  on  the  Oxus,  ii.  206 

—  Dismissal  of  Oxus  escort,  ii.  208 

—  Journey  to,  ii.  204 

Ili  Kalmuks,  Religion  of  the,  217 

—  province  ceded  back  to  Chinese,  629 
Population  of,  201 

Roads  of  the,  201 

Ili  river.  Crossing  at  Kuldja,  224 

Avith  Cossack  escort,  225 

Steam  navigation  attempted,  252 

Ili  valley,  Cheapness  of  labour  in,  198 

Chinese  in,  257 

criminals  in,  258 

Colonization  of,  203 

Description  of,  190 

Ethnography  of,  206 

—  —  Ethnology  of,  206 

History  of,  201 

Iron-mines  in,  199 

Kalmuks  of,  214 

Khambi  in,  258 

Manchu  of,  257 

Military  colonists  of,  211 

Minerals  of,  198 

Mining  in,  198 

Mountains  of,  190 

Rebellion  in,  203,  626 

Russian  annexation  in,  626 

occupation  temporary,  627 

Sibos  of,  211 

—  —  Solons  of,  211 

Taranchis  inhabiting.  206 

Tchampani  in,  258 

—  Torgouts  in,  214 
Variety  of  races  in.  206 

Iliali.  Arrival  at,  ii.  332 

—  Carnage  at,  ii.  332 


Iliali,  Chateau  at,  ii.  t^t^i 

—  Colporteurs  at,  ii.  I'j^t, 

—  Fortress  of,  ii.  333 

—  Gardens  of.  ii.  333 

—  Houses  at,  ii.  332 

—  Khan's  residence  at,  ii.  333 

—  Market  days  at.  ii.  333 

—  Population  of,  ii.  333 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  332 
Ilisk,  Bridge  at,  267 

Illustrated    Scripture   texts,   see   Index, 

p.  XXV 

Immorality  in  Bokhara,  ii.  189 
Import  trade  of  Kuldja,  241 
Imports  of  Khokand,  523 

Semipolatinsk,  107 

Tashkend,  461,  462 

Imprisonment  of  Conolly  at  Bokhara,  ii. 
76 

Stoddart  at  Bokhara,  ii.  75 

India,  Will  Russia  conquer  ?  ii.  489 
Indian  tea  at  Khiva,  ii.  250 
Industries  of  Akmolinsk,  54 

Khiva,  ii  287 

Kuldja,  242 

Samarkand,  605 

Viemy,  278 

Industry  of  Semirechia,  164 
Inexperienced  postilions,  ii.  166 
Inhabitants  of  Gaza  vat,  ii.  318 

—  —  Khiva,  ii.  269 

Kungrad,  ii.  351 

Turkistan,  370 

Zarafshan  province,  544 
Inheritance  among  the  Kirghese,  330 
Insanity  al  Bokhara,  ii.  250 

— Treatment  of,  ii.  145 

Instruction  in  Khivan  colleges,  ii.  290 
Instruments,  Meteorological,  lent  by  Mr. 

Glaisher,  8 
Insurrection  in  Khokand,  512 
Insurrections  of  Kirghese,  408 
Interior  of  havli  at  Manak,  ii.  327 
Kirghese  tent,  336 

Turkoman's  tents,  ii.  445 
Interpreter  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  359 

—  Selecting  an,  16 

—  Yakoob,  ii.  3 

Interview  with  Governor  of  Tol)olsk,  35 

—  —  Jews  in  Bokhara,  ii.  108 
Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  261 

Russian  Minister  of  Interior,  ii 

Intoxicants  at  Manak,  ii.  326 

Introduction  to  Governor  of  Irkutsk,  18 

Introductions  at  Tiumen,  30 

Viemy,  276 

[  —  Scientific,  13 

Inundations  of  the  Steppe,  88 
'  Invalid  telegraphist  at  Konur-Ulen,  191 


702 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Iranian  history,  ii.  456 

—  population  of  Tashauz,  ii.  330 
Iranians  of  Turkistan,  392 
Irjar,  Rout  of  Bokhariots  at,  622 
Irkutsk,    Bible     Society's    Depot,     28, 

ii.  239 

—  Introduction  to  Governor  of,  18 
Iron  Gates  defile  at  Derbent,  ii.  51 

—  mines  in  Hi  valley,  199 

near  Darwaz,  ii.  54 

Irrigation  at  Bokhara,  ii.  165 

—  of  Khiva,  ii.  334 

Merv  oasis,  ii.  476 

the  Kirghese,  98 

Turkmenia,  ii.  439 

Zarafshan  province,  536 

—  works  at  Tarkend,  264 
Irtish  river,  85 

Consolidation   of    Russian  power 

on,   124 

Fish  of,  79 

P'orts  along,  127 

Russian  influence  on,  1 24 

Scenery  on,  87 

Tributaries  of,  88 

Voyage  up,  38 

—  Steppe,  Character  of,  79 

Russian  occupation  of,  120 

trade  with  natives,  124 

Ishrat  Khana  palace  at  Samarkand,  579 
Iskander-Kul  lake,  535 

Islamism  among  the  Kirghese,  343 
Islands  of  the  Oxus,  ii.  204,  241 

Fauna  of,  ii.  218 

Issik-Kul  lake.  Antiquities  of,  159 

Depth  of,  158 

Dimensions  of,  158 

—  Fish  of,  1 59 

—  —  —  Origin  of,  157 

. —  Proposed  Mission  at,  172 

Shores  of,  158 

Roads  to,  354 

Semenoft's  expedition  to,  295 

—  -     VeniukofTs  survey,  297 
Issirik  grass.  Diseases  cured  by,  ii.  57 
Ist-poos,  Fortress  of,  ii.  207 
Itinerary  from   Khiva  to  Krasnovodsk, 

ii.  493 

—  of  Author,  XXX. 

Russians    from    Iliali   to   Krasno- 
vodsk, ii.  425 
Ivanoff,  Gen.,  Governor  of  Samarkand, 

565 

Information  concerning,  612 

Victory  over  Turkomans,  ii,  463 

Jackdaws  in  the  desert,  ii.  422 
Jahria  Brotherhood,  Ceremonies  of,    ii, 
295 


Jakatut,  Inexperienced  postilions  at,  ii.  166 
Jarkend,  Dungans  at,  196 

—  Irrigation  works  at,  264 

—  Solons  at,  196 

—  Taranchis  at,  196 

Jasper  wainscoting  at  Tamerlane's  tomb, 

ii.   124 
Jedurun,  Camping  at,  ii.  392 
Jenkinson,  A.,  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  341 
Sary  Kaniish,  ii.  402 

—  —  in  Kharezm,  ii.  274 
Jenkinson's  alleged   "Bay  of   the  Cas- 
pian," ii.  402,  405 

—  journey  to  Bokhara,  ii.  71 
Jewellery  at  Khokand,  522 

—  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  286 

—  of  the  Turkomans,  ii.  447,  497 
Jewish  manuscripts  at  Bokhara,  ii.  no 

—  migration  to  China,  521 

—  persecution  at  Odessa,  ii.  107 

—  quarter  of  Samarkand,  589 

—  refugees  at  Brody.  ii.  107 

Jews  at  Karshi,  Books  presented  to,  ii.  48 

—  in  Asia  (Central),   Information  con- 

cerning, 446,  520 

■ Bokhara,  521,  ii.  103 

Astonishment  at  Author's  visit, 

ii.  Ill 

Author's    inquiry   for    Hebrew 

MSS.,  ii.  114 

letter  to  Emir  on  behalf  of, 

ii.  118 

'-   -   offer  of  assistance  to,  ii.  109 

—  ■ —  plans  concerning,  ii.  103 

Condition  of,  ii.  108 

from  Persia,  ii.  108 

— Tunis,  ii.  108 

— Interview  with,  ii.  108 

Prophecy  fulfilled,  ii.  108 

Torahs  of,  ii.  lie 

■ —  Visit  to  sick,  ii.  113 

—  —  China,  Tradition  of,  594 
Khiva,  ii.  269 

Merv,  ii,  479 

Moscow,  ii.  104 

—  —       Alleged  pei-secution  (Df,  ii.  104 

—  —  Russia,  Disabilities  of,  ii.  104 

Liquor  traffic  among,  ii  I06 

Money-lenders  among,  ii.  106 

Samarkand,  Hebrew  pronunciation 

of.  595 
—  Traditions  of,  594 

—  -    —  Tribes  of,  595 
Persecution  of,  ii.  105 
quarter  at  Samarkand,  5S9 
synagogue  at  liokhara,  ii.  109 

Karshi,  ii.  48 

Khokand,  519 

Tashkend,  445 


GENERAL  INDEX, 


1^1 


Jinghiz  Khan,  Army  of,  ii.  68 

Bokhara  conquered  by,  ii.  68 

Conquests  of,  ii.  69,  273 

Descendants  of,  ii.  72 

Sieges  of.  ii.  340 

Sons  of,  ii.  68 

Jizakh,  Khudaiar  Khan  at,  510,  511 
Klopatoff,  Dr.,  at,  ii.  147 

—  Road  from  Tashkend,  477  ! 
-  Russian  capture  of,  623  | 

march  to,  622  ! 

—  Scriptures  for,  443  \ 
foot  amongst  Kirghese  cattle,  318  1 
Joss-house  in  Kuldja,  232 

Journey  across  desert,  Rate  of  travel,  ii. 
492 

—  along  the  Aris  river,  420  ^ 

—  Author's  reasons  for,  3,  5  I 

Cost  of,  4  I 

Object  of,  6  j 

through  sandy  desert,  ii.  171  I 

to  Kitab,  ii.  7  i 

Journeys  of  M.  Semenoff,  296  j 

Judges  and  judgments  of  Kirghese,  347    \ 

—  Balloting  for,  349 

—  Election  of,  347 

—  in  Bokhara,  ii.  187 

—  salaries  among  Kirghese,  348 
Jumma  mosque  at  Bokhara,  ii.  95 

Interior  of,  ii.  96 

Service  in,  ii.  95 

Khiva,  ii.  259,  307 

Justice,  Court  of,  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii. 
358 

Kabakli,  Arrival  at,  ii.  210 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  213 

—  Presents  to  Bek  of,  ii.  211 

—  Provisioning  boat  at,  ii.  212 

—  Visit  from  Bek  at,  ii.  211 

--  Wolves  among  sheep  at,  ii.  210 
Kainar,  Descent  to,  ii.  9 

—  Refreshments  at,  ii.  1 1 
Kakir,  Bazaar  at,  ii.  62 

—  Cistern  at,  ii.  60 

—  Furniture  at,  ii.  62 

—  Native  oven  at,  ii.  62 

—  "  Unfurnished  apartments  "  at,  ii.  61 
Kalbinsk  mountains.  Gold   industry  in, 

103 
Kalim  of  a  Kirghese  bride,  323 
Kalmuk  art,  244 
Kalmuks  at  Kuldja,  243  " 

—  Characteristics  of,  214 

—  Destruction  of  Urgenj  by,  ii.  341 

—  Domestic  concerns  of,  215 

—  Family  life  of,  218 

—  Food  of,  215 

—  Foreign  influence  among,  220 


Kalmuks,  Geluns  among,  215 

—  History  of,  125 

—  Idols  of,  218 

—  Marriages  among,  218 

—  of  Hi  valley,  214 
Semirechia,  162 

—  Opposition  of,  to  Russians,  126 

—  Ostroumofif,  M.,  on  the,  215 

—  Prejevalsky,  Col.,  among  the,  244 

—  Religion  of,  217 

—  Russian  treaties  with,  128 

—  School  in  Vierny,  1 70 

—  Superstition  of,  220 

—  Zangs  among  the,  215 
Kamensky  Brothers,  carriers,  473 

Agent  at  Bokhara,  ii.  88 

Kaplan  Kir,  Ascent  from  bed  of,  ii.  420 
Bay  of,  ii.  417 

Caverns  at,  ii.  419 

Cliffs  at,  ii.  418 

Crevasses  of,  ii.  420 

First  Englishman  at,  ii.  420 

Phenomenon  at,  ii.  418 

Kara-boghaz  gulf,  ii.  427 

—  — Geography  of,  ii.  427 

Salt-fields  of,  ii.  427 

—  Chukum,  Street-sleeping  in,  549 

—  Kirghese,  Origin  of,  304 
Revolt  of,  512 

—  Kul,  Arrival  at,  ii.  167 

Crazy  bridges  at,  ii,  168 

Danger  of  roads  near,  ii.  168 

Journey  to,  ii.  166 

lake,  495,  ii.  169 

Salt-lakes  near,  ii.  141 

—  Su,  Breakdown  at,  267 
river.  Length  of,  ii.  440 

—  Tiube,  Arrival  at,  ii.  5 

Slumbers  disturbed  at,  ii.  6 

Tent  lodging  at,  ii.  5 

Karagatch  trees  at  Khiva,  ii.  258 
Karakalpaks,  Characteristics  of,  434 

—  in  Amu-daria  province,  433 

Khivan  khanate,  ii.  269 

Karakol,  Prisoners  at,  670 
Karamazar  mountains,  Minerals  in,  515 
Karamuk  Fort,  M.  Oshanin  at,  ii.  53 
Karategin,  Dimensions  of,  ii.  53 

—  Food  at,  ii.  54 

—  Oshanin's  exploration  in,  ii.  50 

—  Routes  in,  ii.  54 

—  Tajiks,  Strength  of,  ii.  54 

—  Trade  of,  ii.  54 

—  Wells  of,  ii.  379 
Karaul,  Altitude  of,  ii.  64 

—  Bazaar,  ii.  63 

—  guard-house,  ii.  63 
Karkaraly,  Mines  at,  74 
Karshi,  Arrival  at,  ii.  44 


704 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Karshi,  Altitude  of,  ii.  64 

—  Batcha  amusements  at.  ii.  48 
- —  Bazaar  at,  ii.  45 

—  Bokhariot  rebellion  at,  625 

—  Books  for  Jews  at.  ii.  48 

—  Bumes  at.  ii.  44 

—  Caravansary,  ii.  63 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  55 

—  Districts  of  Bekship,  ii.  46 

—  Entertainment  at,  ii.  44 

—  Guest-house  at,  ii.  44 

—  Jouniey  to,  ii.  43 

—  Kishlaks  at,  ii.  57 

—  Kok-Chum-Bass  mosque  at,  ii.  47 

—  Population  of,  ii.  44 

—  Presents  from  Bek  of,  ii.  47.  56 
to  Bek  of,  ii.  47 

—  Public  bath  at,  ii.  45 

—  Revenue  of  Bekship,  ii.  46 

—  Scarcity  of  harness  at,  ii.  55 

-  Shops  at,  ii.  45 

—  Slave-trade  at,  ii.  45 

—  Stations  to  Bokhara,  ii.  56 

—  Steppe,  Character  of,  ii.  64 

—  Synagogue  at,  ii.  48 

—  Tobacco  cultivation  near,  ii.  44 

—  Visit  to  Bek  of,  ii.  46 

—  Welcome  of  Bek  of,  ii.  44 
Kashgar,  Roads  to,  354 

—  -  Valikhanoff  at,  ii.  471 
Kashka-daria  oasis,  ii.  40 
Kassan,  Arrival  at,  ii.  56 
Kastek,  Journey  to,  353 

Katte  Kurgan,  Ride  towards,  ii.  136 

—  —  Russian  occupation  of,  625 
Scriptures  for,  443 

Kaufmann,      Gen.    von,     Governor     of 
Turkistan,  624 

—  —  Expedition  against  Khiva,  ii.  283 
— -  —  Grave  of,  448 

Victory  over  Bokhariots.  625 

Kaushid  Khan,  Fortress  of,  ii.  475 
Kazak  discontent,  509 

-  Khans,  ii.  276 

—  tombs  on  Butenau  plateau,  ii.  391 
Kazakhli.  Journey  to.  ii.  415 

-    wells,  ii.  416 

—  —  Depth  of,  ii.  416 

Specific  gravity  of  water,  ii.  416 

Kazalinsk,  Population  of,  390 

— Scriptures  for,  443 

Kazan,  Russian  conquest  of,  402 

Tatars  of,  401 
Kazi  of  Samarkand,  ii.  187 
Kazis  in  Bokhara,  ii.  187 
Keles  river,  422 

Kessler,   K.  F.,  on  Ichthyology  of  Tur- 
kistan, ii.    533 
Khambi  in  the  Hi  valley,  258 


Khana-Khaneh    prison   in    Bokhara,   ii 

152 
Khanate  of  Bokhara,  ii.  49 
Khanikoff,  M.,  on  Khiva,  ii.  261 
Khanki,  Arrival  at,  ii.  248 

—  Cemetery  at,  ii.  248 

—  Land  at.  Cost  of,  ii.  250 

—  Lunch  at,  ii.  250 

—  Native  food  at,  ii.  251 

—  Tombs  at,  ii.  248 
■—  Villages  near,  ii.  25 1 

Khans  abolished  in  Syr-daria  province 

407 
Kharezm,  Conquests  of  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii 

273 
—  Tamerlane,  ii.  274 

—  Jenkinson  in,  ii.  274 

—  lake,  ii .  404 

—  Slavery  in,  ii.  276 

—  under  the  Arabs,  ii.  273 

—  Uzbeg  Khans  of,  ii.  274 
Kheradj,  Journey  to,  ii.  203 
Khiva,  Annexation  by  Russia,  629 

—  Arbas  at,  ii.  316 

— ■  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  254 

—  Artillery  of,  ii.  306 

—  Aryks  of,  ii.  252 

—  Author's  presents  from  Khan,  ii.  31c 

—  Batchas  at,  ii.  309 

—  Bazaar  of,  ii.  :  84 

—  Bedroom  of  Author  at.  ii.  255 

—  Benoist-Mechin,  Baron,  at,  ii.  473 

—  Bibliography  of,  ii.  668 

—  Birds  of,  ii.  269 

—  Botany  of,  ii.  266 

—  Burnaby,  Capt.,  at,  ii.  262 

—  Canals  of,  ii.  252 

—  Caravansary  at,  ii.  285 

—  Carts  of  the  natives,  ii.  316 

—  Climate  of,  ii.  331 

—  Coinage  of,  ii.  285 

—  College  life  in,  ii,  290 

—  Colporteurs  in,  ii.  304 

—  Communications  of,  ii.  348 

—  Conolly,  Capt.,  at,  ii.  280 

—  Conquest  by  Russia.  629 

—  Consul  of  Khan  of,  ii.  246 

—  Coppersmiths'  Row  in,  ii.  287 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  315 

—  Dervishes  at,  ii.  298 

—  Diameter  of  city,  ii.  305 

—  Dimensions  of,  ii.  265 

—  Diseases  of,  ii.  308 

—  Divan-beggi,  Antecedents  of,  ii.  2i 

House  of,  ii.  255 

Interview  with,  ii.  256 

Premises  of,  ii.  257 

— Servants  of,  ii.  257 

Slaves  of,  ii.  257 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


705 


Khiva,  Divan-beggi,  Stud-yards,  ii.  259 
Wives  of,  ii.  257 

—  Eggs  in,  ii.  364 

—  English  mediation  in,  ii.  278 
officers  at,  ii.  76 

—  Entertainment  at,  ii.  308 

—  Farms  near,  ii.  254 

—  Fauna  of,  ii.  267 

—  Female  seclusion  in.  ii.  355 

—  Fighting  ram  at,  ii.  259 

—  Fish  of,  ii.  269 

—  Forced  labour  of  Khan,  ii.  370 

—  Fruits  of,  ii.  266 

—  Gallows  at,  ii.  308 

—  Gardens  of,  ii.  248,  252 

—  Geological  formation  of,  ii.  265 

—  Governors  of  provinces,  ii.  314 

—  Hazarasp  Gate  at,  ii.  311 

—  Horses,  Cost  of,  ii.  259 

—  Hostilities  against  Russia,  615 

—  Imports  and  exports  of,  ii.  285 

—  Indian  tea  at,  ii.  250 

—  Industries  of,  ii.  287 

—  Inhabitants  of,  ii.  269 

—  Irrigation  of,  ii.  334 

—  Jews  in,  ii.  269 

—  Journey    from     Petro-Alexandrovsk, 

ii.  247 

—  Jumma  mosque  at,  ii.  259,  307 

—  Karagatch  trees  at,  ii.  258 

—  Kaufmann's  expedition  against,  ii.  283 

—  Khan  of.  Attendants  of,  ii.  261 

Character  of,  ii.  312 

Conversations  with,  ii.  272,  302, 

310,  486 

Disastrous  reign  of,  ii.  282 

— Farewell  visit  to,  ii.  310 

Flight  of,  629,  ii.  283 

— Indemnity  to  Russia,  ii.  271 

Interview  with,  ii.  261 

Library  of,  ii.  262 

Officers  of,  ii.  261 

Prime  Minister  of,  ii.  256 

Recall  of,  629 

Reinstatement  of,  ii.  283 

Revenue  of,  ii.  270 

War  expenses  of,  ii.  271 

—  Khans  of,  ii.  275 

—  Lessar,  M. ,  at,  ii.  472 

—  Luggage  arbas  at,  ii.  316 

—  Manufactures  of,  ii.  287 

—  Manuscripts  of,  ii.  262 

—  Meat,  Price  of,  ii  364 

—  Medresses  of,  ii.  288 

—  Melons  of,  ii.  266 

Cultivation  in  England,  ii.  266 

—  Meteorology  of,  ii.  331 

—  Minaret  of,  ii.  290 

—  Money-changing  in,  ii.  285 

VOL.  II. 


Khiva,  Mosques  of,  ii.  288 

—  Musicians  of,  ii.  308 

—  Passport  compulsory  at,  ii.  262 

—  Pehlivan-Ata  mosque  at,  ii.  293 

—  Perovsky's  expedition  again>t,  ii.  277 

—  Population  of,  ii.  307 
khanate,  ii.  270 

—  Prison  at,  ii.  307 

—  Quadrupeds  of,  ii.  269 

—  Russian  capture  of,  ii.  283 
designs  on,  628 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  284 

—  Sights  of  the  town,  ii.  284 

—  Silk  factory  at,  ii.  287 

—  Silversmith's  shop  in,  ii.  287 

—  Slavery  in,  ii.  278 

—  Soil  of,  ii.  254,  265 

—  Souvenirs  of,  ii.  287 

—  Taxes  in,  ii.  270 

—  Tcherkassky's  expedition  to,  ii.  276 

—  Timber  at,  ii.  269 

—  to  Krasnovodsk.  Itinerary  from,ii.  493 

—  Tobacco  cultivation  at,  ii.  268 

—  Tombs  of  royalty  at,  ii.  293 

—  Trade  of,  ii.  285 

—  Tradesmen  of,  ii.  269 

—  Treaty  with  Russia,  ii.  282 

—  Turkomans'  horses  at,  ii.  259 

—  View  from  a  minaret,  ii.  305 

—  Walls  of,  ii.  305 

—  Weights  and  measures  of,  ii.  285 

—  Wild  animals  of,  ii.  269 

—  Winter  palace  of  Khan,  ii.  281,  306 
Khivan    Consul    accompanies    Author. 

ii.   246 

—  defeats  at  Merv,  ii.  457 

—  documents  and  seals,  ii.  262 

—  enslavement  of  Cossacks,  ii.  276 

—  logic,  ii.  487 

—  oasis,  Dimensions  of,  ii.  252 
History  of,  ii.  264 

—  occupation  of  Merv,  ii.  456 

—  slaughter  at  Merv,  ii.  457 
Khivans,  Foreign  relations  of  the,  ii.  271 

—  Sports  of  the,  ii.  320 
Khoja-Akhrar  medresse,  582 
Tradition  of,  582 

—  Moburak,  Comet  of  1882  visible  at, 

ii.  59 

Lodging  at,  ii.  58 

Sunrise  at,  ii.  59 

Village  of,  ii.  58 

Khojeili,  Antiquity  of,  ii.  349 

—  Fish  at,  ii.  349 

—  Havlis  at,  ii.  349 

—  Mennonite  colony  at,  ii.  349 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  349 

—  Town  of,  ii.  349 
Khojend,  Approach  to,  489 

45 


7o6 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Khojend,  Arrival  at,  489,  513,  549 

—  Boundaries  of,  550 

—  Buildings  of,  550 

—  Climate  of,  550 

—  Coal-mines  near,  515 

—  Derivation  of  name,  550 

—  Divisions  of,  549 

—  Gardens  of,  550 

—  History  of,  549 

—  Hospitality  of  Nachalnik,  513 

—  Mountains  on  Khokand  road,  515 

—  Population  of,  550 

—  Scriptures  for,  443 

—  Stations  to  Khokand,  514 
Samarkand,  551 

—  Storming  of.  623 

—  Summer  heat  at,  550 

—  Syr  river  at,  387 

—  Trade  of,  551 

—  Walls  of,  550 

Khokand,     Accession     of     Khudaiar 
Khan,  508 

—  Alim  Kul,  Regent,  510 
Defeat  of,  510 

—  Annexation  by  Russia,  512 

—  Author's  arrival  at,  517 

—  Barracks  at,  525 

—  Bazaar  at,  522 

—  Bokhariot  seizure  of,  507 

—  Departure  from,  5-^8 

—  Diseases  of,  547 

-  Exports  from,  523 

—  Fur  trade  at,  523 

—  Goitre  at,  546 

- —    Causes  and  remedy,  547 

-  Harem  of  Khan,  ii.  155 

—  Hindu  usurers  at,  ii.  100 

-  History  of,  502 

—  Hospital  at,  525 

—  House  of  native  merchant  at,  530 

-  Houses  near,  517 
~  Imports  of,  523 

-  incorporated  by  Russia,  629 

-  insurrection  against  Khudaiar,  512 

—  Jewellery  of,  522 

—  Jews'  synagogue  at,  519 

—  Khudaiar  proclaimed  Khan,  508 

—  Reign  of.  511 

■  —  Lepers'  hamlet  at,  528,  539 

—  Marionettes  at,  524 

—  Mulla  Khan,  ruler,  509 

—  Murad  Bek  medresse  at,  524 

—  Mussulman  Kul  as  ruler,  507 
Defeat  and  death  of,  509 

-  Palace  of  Khan,  525 

—  Paper  manufactory  at,  524 
Population  of,  524 

-  Prices  of  furs  at,  523 

—  Priest's  house  at,  ii.  100 


Khokand,  Prison  at,  525,  672 
in  a  palace,  529 

—  Puppet-show  at,  524 

—  Religious  war  against  Russia,  512 

—  Residence  of  M.  Ushakoff,  518 

—  Revolt  against  Khudaiar,  511 
of  prisoners  at,  673 

—  Routes  from  Peshawur  to,  532 

—  Russian  war  with,  298 

—  Sart  ascerdency  at,  509 

I  —  Scripture  distribution  at,  529 
j  —  Seclusion  of  women  in,  530 
I  —  Shah  Murad,  Death  of,  510 
{  —  Shir  Ali,  Reign  of  507 
I  —  Stations  to  Osh,  531 

—  Streets  of,  517 

j  —  Suppression  of  the  Khanate,  512 

I  —  Trade  of,  523 

I  —  Turbulence  of  Kipchaks,  507,  512 

Sarts,  507 

under  Chinese  influence.  503 

—  Vishnu  pictures  at,  ii.  100 

—  Walls  of,  524 

Khokandian  advance  to  Syr-daria,  614 

—  defeat  at  Aulie-Ata,  619 

Chimkent,  619 

Turkistan,  619 

by  Russians,  617 

—  fortresses,  615 

—  hostilities  against  Russia,  615 

—  subjugation  of  Kirghese,  615 

—  subservience,  519 
Khorassan,  Col.  Stewart  at,  ii.  471 
Khudaiar  Khan,  Accession  of,  508 
at  Samarkand,  510 

Bokhariot  assistance,  510,  511 

Defeat  of,  509 

driven  to  Bokhara,  509 

Recall  to  Khokand,  510 

Retirement  to  jizakh,  510 

Return  to  Khokand,  511 

Revolt  against,  51 1 

rusticating  at  Jizakh,  511 

Treaty  with  Russia,  511 

Trickery  of,  508 

Victory  over  Alim  Kul.  510 

Kibitkas  in  Turkistan,  434 

—  of  the  Kirghese,  315 
Kidnapping  in  Persia,  ii.  185 
Kilif  Bekship.  ii.  40 

—  The  Oxus  at,  ii.  196 

—  Village  of,  ii.  196 
Kindness  10  enemies,  ii.  67 
Kipchak,  Uzbeg  town  of,  ii.  24 1 
Kipchaks,  Slaughter  of,  509 

—  Turbulence  of,  507,  512 
Kirghese  accoucheurs,  359 

—  agriculture,  314,  338 

—  Appearance  of,  306 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


707 


KiRGHESE,  Arms  of,  313 

—  at  Suigati,  Visit  to,  333 

—  aul  moving,  321 

—  Authorities  on  the,  301 

—  batyrs,  112 

—  beer,  338 

—  beverages,  337 

—  Biblical  customs  among,  301 

—  birching  for  offences,  347 

—  books,  Demand  for,  282 

—  Cattle-breeding  of,  316 
diseases,  319 

Joot  among,  318,  319 

sheds,  319 

stealing  among,  412 

—  Character  of,  308 

—  Childbirth  among,  3:59 

—  children,  360 

—  Christian  creed  explained  to,  345 

—  Colporteurs  among,  ii.  303 

—  concert,  341 

—  Conscientiousness  of,  309 

—  Court  of  Justice,  ii.  358 

—  Customs  of,  364 

—  Dinner  among  the,  339 

—  Diseases  of,  307 

—  Divorce  among,  328 

—  Dresses  of,  312 

—  education,  358 

—  election,  346 

—  equestrienne,  ii.  360 

—  Etymology  of  name,  302 
— -  Fanaticism  of,  344 

—  Feasting  among,  339 

—  Feuds  of,  294 

—  Fines  for  murder,  347 

—  Food  of,  337 

—  Fuel  of,  352 

—  Gluttony  of,  338 

—  goats,  317 

—  governing  authorities,  310 

—  Habitations  of,  310 

—  Head-dresses  of,  ii.  287 

—  Herds  of,  322 

—  Hodjas  among,  346 

—  idea  of  crime.  347 
future  state,  345 

—  Iginchas,  315 

—  in  Khivan  Khanate,  ii.  270 

—  insurrections,  408,  617 

—  interpreter  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  359 

—  interrogatories,  341 

—  irrigation,  98 

—  Islamism  among,  343 

—  Judges,  Balloting  for,  349 

Judgments  of,  347 

Salaries  of,  348 

—  Kalim  of  a  bride,  323 

—  Kazaks,  Origin  of,  305 


KiRGHESE    Kazaks,  Russian  subjection 
of,  403 

—  Khivan  exactions  on,  615 

—  Khokandian  subjugation  of  615 

—  kibitkas  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  498 
in  Syr-daria  province,  315 

—  kidnappers,  ii.  329 

—  labour.  Cheapness  of.  103 

—  Land  distribution  among.  411 
laws,  411 

—  language,  357 

—  law  of  inheritance.  330 

—  laws,  350 

—  literature,  Dearth  of,  ii.  362 

—  Location  of,  309 

—  love-making,  324 

—  manufactures  at  Aulie-Ata,  364 

—  marriage  customs,  322 

—  memorials,  336 

—  mothers,  360 

—  Muhammadan  grave  at  Sary  Ba])a, 

ii.  425 

—  mullahs,  Ignorance  of,  346 

—  mythology,  357 

—  Native  courts  of,  112 

—  nomads.  319 

—  nomenclature,  360 

—  notions  of  a  comet,  ii.  364 
saint,  366 

—  Numbers  of,  303 

—  occupation  of  Sungaria,  285 

—  Occupations  of.  314 

—  offerings  at  tombs,  367 

—  oiliantchis,  ii.  90 

—  opinions  of  New  Testament.  357 

—  opposition  to  Russians  at  Mangyshlak, 

ii.  462 

—  Ornaments  of,  313 

—  Patron  saint  of,  391 

—  Physique  of,  306 

—  Poetry  of,  341 

—  politeness,  339 

—  Polygamy  among,  322 

—  Possessions  of,  316 

—  prisoners  at  Khiva,  ii.  307 

—  proverbs,  342 

—  punishments,  347,  350,  412 

—  racing  games,  556 

—  Ranks  among,  310 

—  religion,  343 

Kostenko  on,  343  | 

—  religious  feasts.  367 

—  resemblance   to    Hebrew  patriarchs, 

299 

—  riddles,  342 

—  rings,  357 

—  robbers,  Suppression  of,  286 

—  ruffianism  at  elections,  350 

—  schools,  358 


7o8 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


KiRGHESE,  Scriptures  purchased  by,  ii. 

303 

—  Shamanism  among,  343 

—  sheep,  317 

—  Slavery  among,  357 

—  Songs  of  the,  342,  ii.  90 

—  sorcery,  359 

—  steppe.  Primeval  character  of,  300 

—  Sub-divisions  of,  303 

—  submission  to  Russians,  285 

—  Taxation  of,  410 

—  Tents  of,  333 

Intei-ior  surroundings,  336 

—  Testaments,  281 

—  Tombs  of,  311 

—  traditions,  157,  177,  357 

—  trials,  346 

—  Troitzky,  M.,  among  the,  344 

—  Trousseau  of  a  bride,  326 

—  Turbulence  of,  406 

—  Usury  among,  316 

— -  Voting  by  ballot,  349 

—  Wanderings  of,  319 

—  wares  at  Aulie-Ata,  364 

—  Weapons  of,  313 

—  wedding  ceremonies,  326 
festivities,  327 

—  Wives  of,  340 

—  wolf-hunting,  ii.  211 

Kish  Kizil  Takir,  Bazaar  near,  ii.  337 
Kishak  Gates  on  the  Amu,  ii.  241 
Kishlak,  Meaning  of,  ii.  1 1 
Kishlaks  of  semi-nomads  at  Karshi,  ii.  57 
Kiskilenskaia,  Stone  ornaments  at,  353 
KiTAB,  Acrobats  at,  ii.  16 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  13 

—  Batchas  at,  ii.  1 5 

—  Bokhariot  etiquette,  ii.  20 

—  Court  visitors,  ii.  18 

—  Dancing-boys  at,  ii,  15 

—  Dress  for  audience  with  Emir,  ii.  22 

—  Entertainment  at,  ii.  15 

—  Guard  of  native  soldiers,  ii.  20 

—  Hospitality  at,  ii.  14 

—  Journey  to,  ii.  7 

—  Lodging  at,  ii.  14,  19 

—  Mountains  of,  ii.  9 

—  Mountebanks  at,  ii.  15 

—  Population  of,  ii.  39 

—  Procession  to  visit  Emir,  ii.  23 

—  Reception  at,  ii.  13 

of  Bokhariot  officers,  ii.  20 

—  Refreshmer\ts  at,  ii.  15,  28 

—  Ride  to,  ii.  12 

—  Spies  in  Emir's  palace,  ii.  20 
Kitchkine-daria,  Banks  and  bed  of,  ii.  392 
Kiziak  as  fuel,  352 

Kizil  Arvat,  M.  Lessar  at,  ii.  472 
Railway  at,  ii.  489 


Kizil  Arvat  route,  ii.  494 

Russian  advance  to,  ii.  462 

Klopatoff,  Dr.,  at  Jizakh,  ii.  147 

Kobadian  bekship,  ii  40 

Kohistan,  Alum  manufacture  in,  537 

—  Climate  of,  538 

—  district  of  Zarafshan,  537 

—  Geology  of,  537 

—  Population  of,  538 
Kok-Bari,  Game  of,  556 

—  Chum-Bass  mosque  at  Karshi,  ii.  47 
Kokine-Sai,  Coal  mines  at,  515 
Kokol-tash  medresse  in  Bokhara,  ii.  89 
Koktash  at  Samarkand,  564 

—  Inscription  on,  579 

—  Legendar}'  history  of,  577 

—  Uses  of,  578 

Kolpakovsky ,  Gen. ,  Complaisancy  of,  362 

Entry  into  Kuldja,  627 

Popularity  of,  362 

Kolutch,  Author's  native  servant,  ii.  3 
Komaroff,  Gen.,  Explorations  of,  ii.  575 
Konur-Ulen,  Invalid  telegraphist  at,  191 
Kopal,  Arrival  at,  187 

—  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  Climate  of,  159 

—  Description  of,  187 

—  Foundation  of,  289 

—  Prisoners  at,  670 
Kopet-dagh  mountains,  ii.  437 

Trees  on,  ii.  438 

Koplan-Bek,  Canals  near,  423 
Koran  of  Othman,  582 

—  Study  of  the,  ii.  292 
Korolkoff,  Gen.,  Hospitality  of,  608 
Visit  to,  566 

Korsakoff,  Prince  Dondukoff,  Pugnacity 

of,  ii.  107 
Kosh-ku-pryk  and  its  melons,  ii.  317 
Kostenko,  Capt.,  Explorations  of,  493 

on  Aral  Sea,  432 

Kirghese  religion,  343 

Krabbe,  Dr.  H.,  on  Worms,  ii.  615 
Krapotkine,  Prince,  on  Siberian  prisons, 

637 
Krasnovodsk,  Alabaster  grotto  at,  11. 

—  Armenian  trading  at,  ii.  499 

—  Arrival  at,  ii.  433 

-    Attendants  dismissed  at,  ii.  492 
Boats  at,  ii.  498 
Descent  into,  ii.  491 
-  Felt  manufacture  at,  ii.  447 

—  Fish  at,  ii.  496 

—  Fortress  at,  li.  497 

Good-bye  to  attendants  at,  ii.  499 
Governor's  house  at,  ii.  498 
Hospitality  of  Commandant,  ii.  492 

—  Itinerary  from  Khiva  to,  ii.  493 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


709 


Krasnovodsk,  Jewellery  of  Turkoman 
women,  ii.  497 

—  Kirghese  kibitkas  at,  ii.  498 

—  Mineral  oil  at,  ii.  496 

—  Nomad  curiosities  of,  ii.  498 

—  Population  of,  ii.  495 
.—  Provisions  at,  ii.  496 

—  Russian  establishment  at,  ii.  461 

—  Salt  exportation  from,  ii.  496 

—  Scanty  supplies  in,  ii.  495 

—  sighted  from  desert,  ii.  433 

—  Situation  of,  ii.  491 

—  Stores  at,  ii.  498 

—  Town  of,  ii.  495 

—  Turkoman  tents  at,  ii.  496 

—  Water  distillation  at,  ii.  495 
Kroneberg,  A.,  on  spiders,  ii.  543 
Kryloif,  Capt.,  Visit  to.  ii.  235 
Kuhn,  M,,  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  319 
KULDJA,  Acrobats  at,  243 

—  Arrival  at,  205,  221 

—  artisans,  243 

—  Beasts  of  prey  in,  257 

—  Bibliography  of,  ii.  671 

—  Book  distribution  at,  235 

—  Books,  Sale  of,  236 

—  Buddhist  temple  in.  230 

—  Buildings  in,  243 

—  Cattle  in,  243 

—  Chinese  Christians  in,  230 

Ofificer,  Visit  to,  235 

Police-master  at,  234 

—  Climate  of,  224 

—  Crime  in,  236 

—  Crossing  the  Hi,  224 

—  Dungan  mosque  in,  232,  255 
shopkeepers  in,  240 

—  Emigration  from,  256 

—  Exports  from,  242 

—  Factories  in,  242 

—  Fish  of,  247 

—  Fruit  of,  223 

' —  hatred  of  Chinese,  254 

—  Hazardous  drive  near,  224 

—  Holy  Communion  among  Romanists, 

228 

—  Hospitality  at  Russian  Consulate,  221 

—  Houses  in,  253 

—  Imports  of,  241 

—  Industries  of,  242 

—  Joss-house  in.  232 

—  Kalmuks,  Visit  to,  243 

—  Kolpakovsky,  Gen.,  Entry  of.  627 

—  Lepidoptera,  248,  ii.  596 

—  Mammalia,  247 

—  Market-place  in,  255 

—  Minerals  of.  198,  199 

—  nomads,  Agriculture  of,  192 

—  —  Statistics,  192 


KuLDjA,  Oil  factory  in,  242 

—  Opium  exported  from,  257 
smoking  in,  261 

—  Population  of,  233 

—  Prices  in,  238 

—  Province,  Towns  of,  398 

—  Religions  and  races,  234 

—  Reptiles  of,  248 

—  Restaurants  in,  241 

—  Roman  Catholics  in,  225 
—  Russian  Church  in,  227 

—  - —  occupation  of,  205 
rule  preferred,  254 

—  Schools  in,  232 

—  Shop-street  in  winter.  240 

—  Speculating  in  house  property,  258 

—  statistics,  243 

—  Sunday  in,  221 

—  Taranchi  bazaar  in,  223 
gardens  in,   224 

— mosque  in,  232 

—  Taranchis  in,  208 

—  Trade  in,  239 

—  Transitional  state  of,  205 

—  Vegetables  and  fruit,  239 

—  Vegetation  in.  257 

—  Vertebrata,  247 
Kum-sebshem,  Wells  of,  ii.  417.  419 
Kuino  steamship,  Journey  on,  ii.  499 
Kungrad.  Inhabitants  of,  ii.  351 

—  lake,  Shallowness  of,  ii.  242 

—  Routes  from,  ii.  351 

—  Town  of,  ii,  351 
Kunia-Urgexj,  Abbott  at,  li.  341 

—  Accident  to  Author  near,  ii.  338 

—  Antiquity  of,  ii.  339 

—  Arrival  at,  ii.  338 

—  Attendants,  Dishonesty  of,  ii.  365 
Dismissal  of,  ii.  371 

—  Basiner  at,  ii.  341 

—  Batchman  of,  ii.  316 

—  Bazaar  at,  ii.  359 

—  Bek's  fears    for   Author's    safety,  ii. 

367 

—  Camel  cradles  at,  ii.  363 
loading  at,  ii.  365 

—  Camels,  Delay  in  obtaining,  ii.  357 
Hiring  of,  ii.  365 

—  Cemetery  near.  ii.  358 

—  Chickens  at,  ii.  364 

—  Coinage  at,  ii.  347 

—  Coins  found  near,  ii.  364 

—  Cossack  plundering  of,  ii.  341 

—  Court  of  Justice  at,  ii.  358 

—  Curiosities  from,  ii.  364 

—  Danger  ahead  !  ii.  367 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  368 

—  Eggs  at,  ii.  364 

—  Erection  of,  ii.  339 


710 


RUSSIAA^  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Kunia-Urgen'j,  Escort  from,  ii.  368 

—  Houses  of,  ii.  352,  365 

—  Interpreter  and  guides,  ii.  373 

—  Jenkinson  at,  ii.  341 

—  Journey  to,  ii.  334 

—  Kalmuk  destruction  of,  ii.  341 

—  Kirghese  at,  ii.  359 

—  Kuhn,  M.,  at,  ii.  319 

—  Land  value  at,  ii.  369 

—  Lodgings  at,  ii.  352 

—  Luxuries  at,  ii.  364 

—  Mausoleums  of,  ii.  344,  347 

—  Meat  at,  ii.  364 

—  Minarets  of.  ii.  342 

—  Mosques  at,  ii.  365 

—  Native  life  at,  ii.  357 

—  Parting  view  of,  ii.  369 

—  Pheasants  at,  ii.  364 

—  Photographs  of,  ii.  341 

—  Prison  at,  ii.  358 

—  Provisions  at,  ii.  364 

—  Purchases  at,  ii.  363 

—  Rope  scarcity  at,  ii.  365 
•  —  Routes  from,  ii.  349 

—  Ruins  of,  ii.  339 
^  Schools  at,  ii.  365 

—  Shakespear  at,  ii.  341 
Route  from,  ii.  385 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  365 

—  Sieges  of  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  340 

—  Starting  for  the  Desert,  ii.  367 

—  Tamerlane's  siege  of,  ii.  340 

—  Tax-gatherer  of,  ii.  316 

—  Tomb  of  Tiurebek  Khanim,  ii.  345 

—  Vambery  at,  ii.  341 

Kunia  Vezir,  Camping  opposite,  ii.  383 

—  —  Jenkinson *s  description  of,  ii.  384 
Kunja  lake,  ii.  64 

Kurama,  Vegetation  of,  478 
Kuramas  in  Turkistan,  394 
Kuren-dagh  mountains,  ii.  437 
Kush-beggi    of  Bokhara,    Conversation 
with,  ii.  128 

Presents  from,  ii.  132 

to,  ii.  132 

Reticence  of,  ii.  129 

Visit  to,  ii.  125 

Kutban-Kul  lake,  494 
Kyz-Kala,  Legend  of,  ii.  214 

Subterranean  aqueduct,  of,  ii.  214 

Kyzyl  Kum  Steppe,  426 

Geology  of,  426 

Marshes  of,  426 

Mountains  of,  426 

Sands  of,  426 

Labour,  Cheapness  of,  in  Hi  valley,  198 

Lai-lak,  Meaning  of,  ii.  1 1 

Land  at  Bokhara,  Value  of,  ii.  165 


Land  at  Khanki,  Cost  of,  ii.  250 

Kunia  Urgenj.  Value  of.  ii.  369 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,    Cost    of,   ii. 

250 

—  communications  of  Khiva,  ii.  348 

—  distribution  among  Kirghese,  41 1 

—  laws  of  the  Kirghese,  411 

—  mollusks  of  Turkistan,  ii.  542 

—  of  Seven  Streams,  151 

—  revenue  of  Semipolatinsk,  112 

—  tortoises  of  the  Steppe,  ii.  430 
Language  of  the  Kirghese,  357 
Languages  of  books  for  distribution,  27 
Lake  Ala-Kul,  Description  of,  146 
Fish  in,  148 

Lizards  near,  148 

Ornithology  of,  147 

—  Issik-Kul,  Origin  of,  157 

—  Vamyshef,  Fortress  at,  127 

—  Zaisan,  89 

Chinese  junks  on,  131 

Cossack  fisheries  on,  91 

Fauna  of  banks,  91 

Lakes  in  old  bed  of  Oxus,  ii.  393 
the  Steppe,  44 

—  of  Ferghana  province,  494 
Semirechia,  157 

Last  rose  of  summer,  ii.  234 
Law,  "  Glorious  uncertainty  "  of,  ii.  358 
Lawlessness  of  Merv  Tekkes,  ii.  480 
Laws  of  the  Kirghese,  350 
Lawyers  in  Bokhara,  ii.  187 
Leaders  of  Kirghese  rebels.  112 
Lectern,  Miraculous.  576 
Lecturing  the  Kush-beggi,  ii.  130 
Legacies  of  Bokhariot  Jews,  ii.  1 10 
Legend  of  Kyz-kala  fortress,  ii.  214 
Legends  of  Shah-Zindeh  mosque,  572 
Lepers  at  Khokand,  528,  539 

—  quarter  near  Bokhara,  ii,  138 
Lepidoptera  of  Alpheraky,  M.,  248 
Kuldja,  248,  ii.  596 

Turkistan,  ii.  581 

Leprosy  in  Samarkand.  541 

Turkistan,  540 

Zarafshan  province,  538 

Lepsa,  Prisoners  at,  670 

—  river.  Description  of,  183 
Lepsinsk,  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  station,  182 

Lessar,    M.,    Chapters    on    Turkmenia 
revised  by,  ii.  435 

Journeys  of,  ii.  472 

on  the  Attek  oasis,  ii.  451 

Saryks,  ii.  445 

Letters  and  favours,  Ofiticial,  12 
Libraries  searched  for  liibliography,  ii. 

654 
Library  at  Tashkend,  470 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


7" 


Library  at  Vierny,  279 

—  of  Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  262 
Tamerlane,  582 

Linseed  farming  on  the  Amu,  ii.  222 
"  Lion's  Mouth  "  on  the  Amu,  ii.  224 
Liquor  traffic  among  Jews  in  Russia,  ii. 
106 

in  Turkistan,  607 

Little  Balkhan  mountains,  ii.  437 
Littoral  of  the  Caspian,  ii.  437 
Lizards  near  Ala-Kul  lake,  148 
Loading  camels  in  the  desert,  ii.  387 
Lodging  at  Aulie-Ata,  ii.  330 

Bokhara,  ii.  80 

Khoja-Moburak,  ii.  58 

Kitab,  ii.  19 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  352 

Tashauz,  ii.  330 

—  near  Charjui.  ii.  176 

Logic  of  the  Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  487 
Lomakin,  Gen.,  and  the  Yomud  Turko- 
mans, ii.  463 

Defeat  of,  in  Turkmenia.  ii.  464 

London,  Return  of  Author  to,  ii.  504 

—  to  the  Urals,  10 
Love-making  among  Kirghese,  324 
Lovers'  fortresses  on  the  Amu,  ii.  214 
Low  spirits  in  the  desert,  ii.  422 
Luggage  attacked  by  robbers,  ii.  336 
Lunatics  in  Bokhara,  ii.  250 
Lunch  at  Khanki,  ii.  250 
Lupandine,  M.,  on  bed  of  Oxus,  ii.  407 
Luxuries  at  Kunia  Urgenj.  ii.  364 

Macgregor.  Col.,  on  Turkoman  fron- 
tier, ii.  466 

MacLachlan,  R.,  on  Turkistan  Neu- 
roptera,  ii.  609 

Madrahim  medresse  at  Khiva,  ii.  289 

Maiefif,  Col.,  Assistance  from.  456 

Explorations  of,  ii.  50 

Routes  of,  ii.  51 

Mammalia  of  Ala-Kul  district,  149 

Kuldja  district,  247 

Semirechia,  160 

Turkistan,  ii.  515 

Manak.  Hawks  at,  ii.  326 

—  Corn-mill  at,  ii.  325 

—  Fruit-trees  at,  ii.  326 

—  Garden  at,  ii.  326 

—  Havli  at,  ii.  323 

Interior  of,  ii.  327 

Walls  of,  ii.  326 

—  Hospitality  at.  ii.  327 

—  Intoxicants  at,  ii.  326 

—  Oil-mill  at,  ii.  323 

—  Ruins  near,  ii.  327 

—  Uzbeg  society  at,  ii.  323 
Manchu,  Massacre  of,  203 


Manchu  of  the  Hi  valley,  257 
Manghit  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  72 
Mangyshlak,  Opposition  to  Russians  at, 

ii.  462 
Manufactures  of  Khiva,  ii.  287 
Manuscript  of  Old  Testament,  ii.  1 15 
Manuscripts  of  Bokhariot  Jews,  ii.  no 

Tamerlane,  583 

Maps  of  Central  Asia.  ii.  679 
Maracanda,  Histoiy  of,  560 
March  along  old  bed  of  Oxus,  ii.  391 
Marching  in  a  sea-bed,  ii.  420 
Marghilan,  Climate  of,  497 
Marionettes  at  Khokand,  524 
Market  at  Aulie-Ata.  364 

—  days  at  Iliali.  ii.  333 
■ —  Samarkand,  605 

—  prices  at  Aulie-Ata,  365 
MarkozofiF,  Reconnaissances  of,  ii.  406 

—  Turkmenian  failures  of,  ii.  462 
Marmots  in  the  desert,  ii.  422 
Marriage  among  the  Kalmuks,  218 

—  customs  among  the  Kirghese,  322 

—  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  35  2 
Semipolatinsk,  108 

Marsh,  Capt.,  on   Turkmenian  frontier, 

ii.  466 
Marshes  of  Kyzyl-Kum  steppe,  426 
Martens,  Prof,  von,  on  Turkistan  mol- 

lusca,  ii.  537,  542 
Mashrek,  Ruins  of,  ii.  383 
Massacre  at  Merv,  ii.  456 

—  of  Chinese,  203 

Khivans  at  Merv,  ii.  457 

Manchu,  203 

Massoretic  writing,  ii.  115 

Matmurad,  Prime  Minister  of  Khan,  ii. 

256 
Mausoleum  of  Nedjm-ud-din-Kubera,  ii. 

347 
Mausoleums  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  344 
Maievsky,  Col.,  Visit  to,  253 
Measures  of  Central  Asia,  682 
Meat  at  Khiva,  Price  of,  ii.  364 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

Mechanics  in  Semipolatinsk,  104 
Medical  staff  of  Akmolinsk,  53 
Medicine  and  divinity  conjoined,  18 
Medresse  at  Tashauz,  ii.  330 

—  of  Shir-Dar,  586 

Tillah-Kari,  586 

Ulug-Bek,  585 

Medresses  of  Bokhara,  ii.  89,  135 
Khiva,  ii.  288 

Samarkand,  564,  586 

Melons  at  Vierny,  277 

—  of  Khiva,  ii.  266 

Attempted  cultivation  in  Eng- 
land, ii.  266 


712 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Melons  of  Kosh-ku-pr>'k,  ii.  317 
Memorials  of  the  Kirghese,  336 
Men  and  bear  fights,  ii.  2ii 
Mendicant  prisoners  at  Bokhara,  ii.  153 
Mennonite  colony  at  Khojeili,  ii.  349 
Mennonites  in  Aulie-Ata,  421 

—  of  the  Volga,  ii.  350 
— Persecution  of,  ii.  350 
Merchandise  of  Khokand,  522 
Merchant  at  Khokand,  Visit  to,  530 
Merke,  Author's  delay  at,  362 
Mertvy  Kultuk  route,  ii.  493 
Merv,  Abbott  at,  ii.  457 

—  Agriculture  of,  ii.  478 

—  Alikhanoff,  Col.,  at,  ii.  471 

—  Animals  of,  ii,  478 

—  Arab  capture  of,  ii.  456 

—  Artisans  of,  ii.  478 

—  as  annexed,  ii.  475 

—  Bazaar  of,  ii.  478 

—  Beg  tribe  of  Tekkes  at,  ii.  477 

—  Benoist-Mechin,  Baron,  at,  ii.  474 

—  Bokhariot  criminals  banished  to,  ii. 

456 

—  Burnes,  Alex.,  at,  ii,  457 

—  Canals  at,  ii.  476 

—  Carpet  manufacture  at,  ii.  478 

—  Cattle  of,  ii.  478 

—  Cotton  cultivation  at,  ii.  478 

—  Counterfeit  coin  at,  ii.  478 

—  Daily  Neius  correspondent  at,  ii.  467 

—  Dependence  upon  Khiva,  ii.  486 

—  desert,  Historical  associations,  ii.  456 

—  Dissentients  in,  ii.  488 

—  French  travellers  at,  ii.  473 

—  Fruit  of,  ii.  477 

—  Gardens  of,  ii.  476 

—  Gunpowder  manufacture  at,  ii.  478 

—  Jews  of,  ii.  479 

—  Khivan  defeats  at,  ii.  457 
occupation  of",  ii.  457 

—  Lessar,  M.,  at,  ii,  472 

—  Manufactures  of,  ii.  478 

—  Massacre  at,  ii.  456 
of  Khivans  at,  ii   457 

—  Mongol  sacking  of,  ii.  69 

—  Moscow  Gazette  on  submission,  ii,  483 

—  Murgab  river  at,  ii,  476 

—  oasis  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  454 
Area  of,  ii.  476 

Irrigation  of,  ii.  476 

Occupations  of  Tekkes,  ii.  478 

Population  of,  ii.  477 

Vegetation  of,  ii.  476 

—  O'Donovan,  Mr.,  at,  ii.  467 

—  Otamish  Tekkes  of,  ii,  477 

—  Persian  siege  of,  ii.  457 

—  Population  of,  ii.  483 

—  Produce  of,  ii,  479 


Merv,  Rulers  of,  ii.  480 

—  Russian  advance  to,  ii.  460 

—  Shakspear  at,  ii.  457 

—  Slavery  in,  ii.  479 

—  Submission  to  Russia,  ii.  48'? 

—  Suspicious  movement  of  Russians  at. 

"•485 

—  Tekkes,  Distribution  of,  ii.  477 

Divisions  of,  ii.  477 

Number  of,  ii.  477 

—  Tomb  of  Sunjur  Shah,  ii.  456 

—  Trade  of,  ii.  479 

—  Uzbeg  occupation  of,  ii.  456 

—  Visit    to,   abandoned   by  Author,    ii, 

495 

—  Wolff,  Dr.,  at,  ii.  457 

Mervis.  Moral  characteristics  of.  ii.  479 

—  Religious  characteristics  of,  ii.  479 
Meteorological  instruments  lent  by  Mr. 

Glaisher,  8 

—  observations  in  Turkistan,  374 

—  tables  of  Turkistan,  376 
Meteorology  of  Amu-daria  province,  432 
Central  Asia,  ii.  442 

Khiva,  ii.  331 

Omsk.  48,  49 

Pamir,  493 

Semipolatinsk.  137 

Tashkend,  469 

Miankal  island,  535 

Midnight  intruders,  ii.  6 

Military  buildings  of  Semipolatinsk,  114 

—  encampment  at  Bokhara,  ii,  93 

—  hospital  at  Khokand.  525 
Semipolatinsk,  115 

—  notions,  ii.  194 

Milk  and  cream  at  Bokhara,  ii.  143 
Minaret  of  Khiva,  ii.  290 
Minarets  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  342 
Mineral  oil  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  496 

—  springs  near  Zaisan  lake,  92 
Minerals  near  Sergiopol,  145 

—  of  Akmolinsk.  51 

Bokhara,  ii.  141 

Ferghana,  497 

Hi  valley,  198 

Karamazar  mountains,  515 

Turkistan,  379 

Mines  at  Karkaraly,  74 

—  near  Baian-aul,  74 

—  of  the  Steppe,  74 
Miniature  fortresses,  ii.  321 
Mining  in  the  Hi  valley,  198 
Minister  of  Interior,  Interview  with,  ii 
Miri-arab  medresse  in  Bokhara,  ii,  89 
Mirza  Akhmet,  Bek  of  Tashkend,  509 

—  Khoort,  Croesus  of  Bokhara,  ii.  150 

—  Yusuf,  Parting  with,  ii.  166 


Misbehaviour  of  "  Diotrephcs,' 


?8 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


m 


Mission    proposed    at    Lake   Issik-Kul, 

172 
Missionary  work  of  Russians,  ii.  303 
Missions  to  Mongolia,  ii.  404 

Muhammadans,  ii.  303 

Mokanna.  Prophet  of  Khorassan,  ii,  456 
Mc^dabavsk,  Breakdown  near,  363 
Mollusks  of  Turkistan,  ii.  537 
Money  arrangements  at  Tashkend,  473 

—  changing  at  Khiva,  ii.  285 
Samarkand,  610 

—  lending  Jews  in  Russia,  ii.  106 

—  of  Central  Asia,  682 

Mongol  invasion  of  Central  Asia,  ii.  69 
Mongolia,  Missions  to,  ii.  404 
Mongolians  in  Turkistan,  392 
Monumental  inscriptions    scarce   in  Bo- 
khara, ii.  100 
Monuments  of  the  Munammadans,  5S0 
Moonlight  suppers  on  Oxus,  ii.  203,  206 
Morals  of  Asiatic  people,  ii.  299 
Moravitz,  Dr.  P".,  on  bees,  ii.  562 
Morgan,  Mr.  Delmar,  at  Sergiopol,  145    \ 

on  Ala-Tau  range,  185 

the  "  Ehbi  "  wind,  181  ; 

Moscow,  Arrival  at,  14  j 

- —  Cathedral  at,  15  ! 

—  Exhibition  at,  14 

Gospel  distribution  at,  ii.  238 

—  Gazette  on  Merv  submission,  ii.  483 

—  Jews  in,  ii.  104 

Moslem  pilgrimages,  ii.  294  ; 

Moslems  frustrated  by  Author,  ii.  112       ! 
Mosque  at  Karshi,  ii.  47  I 

—  of  Abdul  Aziz  Khan,  ii.  100  ! 

Akhmed  Yasavi,  391 

Hazret  Imlah,  ii.  100 

Namazi-gah,  ii.  123 

Shah  Zindeh,  571 

Mosques  at  Bokhara,  ii.  135 

Khiva,  ii.  288  ! 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  365  i 

Samarkand,  586 

Shahr,  ii.  39 

Tashauz,  ii.  330  ' 

Mothers,  Kirghese,  360  ! 

Moths  of  Turkistan,  ii.  581  I 

Mountains  of  Eastern  Bokhara,  ii.  50        ' 

Hi  valley,  190  j 

Kitab,  ii.  9  1 

Kyzyl-Kura  Steppe,  426  | 

Sernirechia,  152  j 

Syr-daria  province,  384 

Turkmenia.  ii.  437  j 

Zarafshan  province,  533  i 

Mountebanks  at  Kitab,  ii.  15  ! 

Mud  walls  of  havli  at  Manak,  ii.  326         I 
Muhammadabad,  Stewart  andO'Donovan  1 
at,  ii.  469 


Muhammad,  Rosy,  as  Author's  servant, 
"•359 

—  Eniin,  Decapitation  of,  ii.  457 
Muhammadan  monuments,  580 — 595 

—  persecution  of  Jews,  ii.  105 

—  sanctity,  ii.  344 

—  studies  at  Khiva,  ii.  290 

—  tomb  at  Sary  Baba,  ii.  425 
INIuhammadans,  Attitude  towards  Chris- 
tianity, ii,  302 

—  Books  bought  by,  73 

—  Fanaticism  of,  ii.  298 

—  Missions  to,  ii.  303 

—  Religious  orders  of,  ii.  295 

—  Russia's  responsibility  towards,  ii.  293 
Mulberries  at  Khiva,  ii.  267 

Mulla  Khan,  ruler  of  Khokand,  509 
Mullahs,  Ignorance  of  Kirghese.  346 
Murad  Bek  medresse  at  Khokand,  524 
Muraviefif  on  old  bed  of  Oxus.  ii.  406 
Murchison,    Sir    R.,   on    Aralo-Caspian 

region,  ii.  403 
Murgab  river,  ii.  454 

—  —  at  Merv,  ii.  476 

—  valley  at  Penjdeh,  ii.  454 

Desolation  of,  ii.  455 

Museum  at  Russian  Tashkend,  441 
Tashkend,  455 

Mushketoff,   M.,    on   geology   of  Thian 

Shan,  155 
Music  at  Khiva,  ii.  308 
Petro-Alexandrovsk.  ii.  233 

—  -  of  the  Dungans,  210 
Sarts,  ii.  91 

Musical  enteitainment  at  Kitab,  ii.  15 

—  reception   of  Author   at   Charjui,  ii. 

179 
Mussulman  Kul,  ruler  of  Khokand.  506 

Defeat  and  death  of,  509 

Mussulmans,  Characteristics  of,  ii.  299 
Mutillidae  of  Turkistan.  ii.  575 
Mythology  of  Kirghese,  357 

Nachalnik  of  Khojend.  Hospitality  of, 

513 

Nakshbendi,  Religious  order  of,  582 
Namazi-gah  mosque,  ii.    123 
Names  of  the  Oxus.  ii.  192 
Naphtha  springs  at  Cheleken,  ii.  496 

—  works  on  the  Kizil  Arvat  line,  ii.  496 
Napier,   Capt.    Hon.    G.,  on   Turkoman 

frontier,  ii.  466 
Nasr-Ullah,  late  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  73 
National  Exhibition  at  Moscow,  14 
Native  boats  on  the  Amu-daria,  ii.  200 

—  carts  in  Khiva,  ii.  316 

—  dispensary  at  Tashkend,  450 

—  -  gain  by  Russian  rule  in  Turkmenia,  ii, 

490 


I 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


Native  house  near  Khokand,  517 

—  houses  in  Kuldja,  253 

—  ignorance  at    Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii. 

234 

—  society  in  Bokhara,  ii.  150 
Nau.  Surrender  to  Russians,  623 
Navigation  of  Aral  Sea,  409 

—  -  Upper  Oxus,  ii.  197 
Naziroff,  Lieut.,  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  472 
Neuroptera  of  Turkistan,  ii.  609 
New  Siberian  steamer,  32 

—  Testament,  Kirghese  opinions  of,  357 
Newspaper  exaggeration,  25 

Night  guard  at  Charjui,  ii.  186 

—  time  in  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Nihilistic  cunning,  25 

Nineteenth  Century  on  Russian  prisons, 

675 
Nocturnal  visitors,  ii.  6 
Nogai  Bi,  Possessions  of,  356 
Nomad  curiosities  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  498 

—  population  of  Kuldja,  192 
Nomads  of  Kuldja,  Agriculture  of,  192 
Nomenclature  of  the  Kirghese,  360 
Northern  Lights  in  Turkistan,  377 
Nukus,  Delta  of  the  Amu  at,  ii.  241 

—  Meteorology  of,  432 

Number  of  books  for  Author's  distribu- 
tion, 27 
Numbers  of  the  Kirghese,  303 
Nuratagh  hills.  Rock  salt  of,  ii.  141 
Nursery  at  Borokhudzir,  193 

Oases  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  449 
Object  of  Author's  journey.  6 
Observanda,  xxxii 
Observatory  at  Russian  Tashkend,  441 

Samarkand,  564 

Tashkend,  467 

—  of  Ulug  Bek.  585 

Occupations  in  Russian  Tashkend,  441 

—  of  Kirghese,  314 

Merv  Tekkes,  ii.  478 

Turkomans,  ii.  447 

Ocean,  Dry  bed  of,  ii.  418 

Odessa,  Arrival  of  Author  at.  ii.  504 

—  Jewish  persecution  at,  ii.  107 
English  opinion  on,  ii.  107 

—  Parting  with  Mr.  Sevier  at,  ii.  504 
O'Donovan,  Mr.,  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  467 

killed  in  Soudan  war,  ii.  468 

Letter  of,  468 

Offerings  at  Kirghese  tombs,  367 
Oificers'  club  at  Tashkend,  451 

—  of  Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  261 
Otficial  letters  and  favours,  12 
Officials,  Over-zealousness  of,  24 
Oil  factory  in  Kuldja,  242 

—  mill  at  Manak,  ii.  323 


Oil  painting  by  M.  Aivazovsky   ii.  504 

—  wells  at  Balakhane,  ii.  500 
Oiliantchis,  or  singers,  ii.  90 

Old   Testament,    Wonderful    MSS.   of, 

ii.  115 
Omsk,  Acquaintances  at,  62 

—  Arrival  at,  41 

—  Books  for  prisons  at,  65 

—  Cossack  school  at,  134 

—  Decline  of,  60 

—  Departure  from,  66 

—  Description  of  town  of,  59 

—  Fauna  of,  80 

—  Flora  of  80 

—  Kirghese  school  at,  358 

—  Meeting  the  Governor-General  of,  76 

—  Meteorology  of,  48,  49 

—  Prison  at,  661 
Diet  in,  662 

—  Schools  in,  63 

—  Visit  to  Acting-Governor,  64 

—  Visits  to  inhabitants,  63 

—  and  Semipolatinsk,  .Stations  between. 

66 
Opium  exports  from  Kuldja,  257 

—  smoking  in  Kuldja,  261 
Orchards  at  Bokhara,  ii,  165 
Orenburg,  Forts  erected  at,  404 

—  Kirghese,  Taxation  of,  410 

—  road.  Towns  on,  389 

—  routes,  ii.  229 

—  Ship-building  at,  409 
Oriental  customs  illustrated,  ii.  429 

—  duplicity,  ii.  372 

—  garden  at  Bokhara,  ii.  83 

—  oath-taking,  ii,  499 

—  politeness,  519 

—  worship,  ii.  297 

Origin  of  Kara-Kirghese,  304 
Ornaments  of  Kirghese,  313 

the  Turkomans,  ii,  447 

Ornithology  of  Ala-Kul  district,  147 

Aulie-Ata  district,  415 

Turkistan,  415 

Orography  of  Semirechia,  151 
Orphan  asylum  at  Samarkand,  600 
Orthodox  Christian  Brotherhood  :  Kal- 
muk  school,  170 

Rules  of.  169 

Orthoptera  of  Turkistan,  ii,  613 

Osh,  Climate  of,  497 

Oshanin,  M.,  of  Tashkend  Museum,  455 

Collection  of  Hemiptera,  455 

Description  of  Darwaz,  ii.  54 

Explorations  of,  ii,  50,  53 

Presents  from,  456 

Osten-Sacken,  Baron,  Explorationsof.  297 
Ostroumoff,  M.,  on  Mussulman  charac- 
teristics, ii.  299 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


715 


Ostroumofif,  M.,  on  the  Kalmuks,  215 
Otamish  Tekkes  of  Merv,  ii.  477 
Othman,  Koran  of,  582 
Oven  at  Kakir,  ii.  62 
Overcrowding  in  prisons,  672 
Over-zealousness  of  officials,  24 
Ovis  Polii  :  remarkable  sheep,  244 
Oxus  river.  Author's  arrival  at,  ii.  176 

bed  at  Ak-biigut,  ii.  389 

Description  of,  ii.  393-395 

Glukhovsky's     reconnaissances 

of,  ii.  407 

Russian  survey  of,  ii.  406 

Stebnitzky's  reconnaissances  of, 

ii.  407  _ 

Course  (Ancient)  of,  ii.  402 

Fourfold  change  of.  ii.  405 

Deflection  of,  ii.  409 

—  —  Delta  of,  ii.  241 

Dimensions  at  Pitniak,  ii.  225 

Discharge  of.  ii.  225 

Diversion,  Feasibility  of.  ii.  406 

Feeding-time  on,  ii.  203  j 

Ferry-boat  on,  ii.  176  I 

— •  —  Floating  down,  ii.  200 

Geographical  problems,  ii.  402       ! 

Junction  with  Aral,  ii.  242  I 

Lower.  Basin  of,  ii.  241 

—  European  authors  on,  ii.  245 

Hydrography  of,  ii.  241 

Islands  of,  ii.  241 

Towns  on,  ii.  241 

Names  of,  ii.  192 

Old  bed,  Description  of,  ii.  390 

Journey  in  the,  ii.  382 

Lakes  in,  ii.  393 

Length  of,  ii.  407 

Lupandin,  M..  on,  ii.  407 

Petrusevitch,  Col.,  on,  ii.  408 

Primitive  boat  on,  ii.  176 

Reconnaissances   of  Col.   Marko- 

zofif,  ii.  406 

Source  of,  ii.  193 

Stations  from  Huzar  to.  ii,  52 

Upper,  Change  of  boats  on,  ii.  208 

Cliffs  on,  ii.  208 

Compulsory    service    of  boat- 
men on,  ii.  205 

—  —  —  Dismissal  of  escort   at   Ildjik, 

ii.  208 

Escort  of  Author  on,  ii.  201 

Extortion  of  Toksaba,  ii.  207 

Ferries  on,  ii.  196 

•  Fords  of,  ii.  195 

Fortress  of  Ist-poos,  207 

Geological  phenomena,  ii.  206 

Hydrography  of,  ii.  202 

Islands  in,  ii.  204 

Journey  to  Ildjik,  ii.  206 


Oxus  river.  Upper,  Journey  to  Kheradj, 
ii.  293 

Ustik,  ii.  205 

Moonlight  suppers  on,  ii.  206 

Navigation  of,  ii.  197 

Scarcity  of  fuel  on,  ii.  198 

Survey  of,  ii.  196 

Tomb  of  Ak-rabat,  ii.  207 

Turkoman  boats  on,  ii.  207 

Villages  on,  ii.  202 

Wood,  Lieut,,  on,  ii.  193 

Paderin,  M.,  Hospitality  of,  221 
Palace  at  Samarkand,  566 

—  of  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  125 

Khan  at  Tashauz,  ii.  328 

of  Khokand,  525 

Pamir  mountains,  492 

—  Climate  of,  493 

—  Fauna  of,  494 

—  Flora  of,  494 

—  Meteorology  of,  493 
Panj  river,  ii.  193 

Pantussoff,  M.,  Distrib.  of  books  by,  667 

on  crime  in  Kuldja,  236 

Paper  manufactory  at  Khokand,  524 

Parasites  in  Turkistan,  ii.  615 

Parkes,   Sir  H.,   Encouraging- opinions 

of,  2 
Parting   with  Mr.     Sevier    at    Odessa, 

ii-  5?4 
Pastime  in  the  desert,  ii.  423 
Patar,  Shifting  sands  at,  515 
Patron  saint  of  Bokhara,  ii.  71 
Pavlodar,  Arrival  at,  70 

—  Cheapness  of  provisions  at,  71 

—  Sale  of  books  at.  70 
Peaches  of  Khiva,  ii.  267 
Peculiarities  of  Turkistan  rivers,  385 
Pecuniary  assistance,  4 
Pehlivan-Ata  mosque  at  Khiva,  ii.  293 
Peikand,  Ruins  of,  ii.  166 
Penjakend,  Scriptures  for,  443 
Penjdeh,  Valley  of  the  Murgab  at,  ii.  454 
Peril  of  riches  in  Bokhara,  ii.  187 
Perils  of  the  desert,  ii.  172 

road,  ii.  168 

Perm,  Arrival  at,  17 

—  Departure  from,  19 

—  Police  examination  of  Author  at,  22 

—  Railway  adventure  at,  18 

—  Return  of  Author  to,  under  arrest,  21 
Perovsk,  Scriptures  for,  443 
Perovsky,     Gen.,     Expedition     against 

Khiva,  ii.  277 
Perquisites,  ii.  12 

—  at  Bokhara,  ii.  479 
Persecution  of  Jews  in  Odessa,  ii.  107 
Central  Asia,  ii.  105 


7i6 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Persecution  of  Jews  in  Russia,  ii,  105 

Mennonites,  ii.  350 

Persia,  Prison  in,  ii.  185 

Slaves  from,  ii.  185 

rsian  architecture  at 

—  Jews  in  Bokhara,  ii.  108 

—  siege  of  Merv,  ii.  457 

—  slaves  in  Khivan  khanate,  ii.  270 

Turkmenia,  ii.  482 

Persians  at  Merv.  Defeat  of,  ii.  457 

—  in  Bokhara,  ii.  150 
Peshawur  routes  to  Khokand,  532 
Peter  the  Great,  Aggressiveness  of,  127 
Petersburg,  Departure  for,  1 1 

—  Favourable  reception  at,  1 1 

—  Fortress  prison  in,  640 

—  to  Afghanistan,  Highway  from,  ii.  406 
Petro-Alexandrov'sk,   Bible  Society 

Agent  near,  ii.  305 

Colporteurs  at,  ii.  305 

Crime  at,  ii.  354,  358 

Departure  from,  ii.  247 

Fever  at,  ii.  234 

Fish  at,  ii.  243 

Fortress  at,  ii.  234 

Home  comforts  at,  ii.  228 

Horses  at,  C^ost  of,  ii.  259 

Sale  of,  ii.  236,  237 

Hospital  at,  ii.  234 

Journey  to  Khiva,  ii.  247 

Land  at.  Cost  of,  ii.  250 

Meteorology  of,  432 

Native  ignorance  at,  ii.  235 

Provisions  at,  ii.  235 

Public  bath  at,  ii.  235 

Schools  at,  ii.  234 

—  —  Scripture  distribution  at,  ii.  237 
Shopping  at,  ii.  235 

—  —  Social  evening  at,  ii.  233 

Tarantass  arrival  at,  ii.  236 

Sale  of,  ii.  236 

Town  of.  ii.  234 

Troops  at,  ii.  234 

—  -  Visit  to  Capt.  Kryloff,  ii.  235 
Wages  at.  ii.  235 

Weather  at,  ii.  233,  331 

Welcome  at,  ii.  228 

Winter  preparations  at,  ii.  233 

Petroleum  in  Ferghana,  498 
Petrovsky,  M.,  on  Bokhariot  commerce, 

»•  133 

Turkistan  trade,  462 

Petrusevitch,  Gen.,  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  467 

on  old  bed  of  Oxus.  ii.  408 

the  Turkomans,  ii.  444 

Pevtzoff,  Lt.-Col.,  Assistance  of,  ii.  236 
Pheasants  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 
Photographs  of  Kunia  Drgenj,  ii.  341 
Physiology  of  Turkomans,  ii.  444 


Picture  worship,  ii.  303 

Pictures,  Superstition  regarding,  ii.  21,  37 

Pilau  at  Charjui,  ii.  178 

Pilgrim  showmen  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  344 

Pilgrimages  in  Ferghana,  500 

Pillage  of  Bokhara,  ii.  68 

Pink  salt  at  Bokhara,  ii.  141 

Pioneers  of  Central  Asia,  287 

Pisces  of  Kuldja,  247 

Pishpek,  Botanical  garden  at.  360 

—  Prisoners  at,  670 

Pitniak,  Dimensions  of  Oxus  at,  ii.  225 

—  curve  on  the  Amu.  ii.  224 
Plants  collected  by  Semenoff,  ii.  620 
Plants  of  Turkistan,  482 

Zarafshan  province,  557 

Ploughing  and  threshing,  ii.  7 
Poetry  of  the  Kirghese.  341 
Police  examination  of  Author  at  Perm,  22 
Politeness  of  Orientals,  519 

the  Kirghese,  339 

Political  agents  on  Turkoman  frontier, 

ii.  466 
Poltoratzky,  Col.,  Explorations  of,  297 
Polygamy  among  the  Kirghese,  322 

—  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  354 
Pomerantzofif,  M.,  on  Tashkend  tempera- 
ture, 469 

Pond  of  Poi-su,  ii.  425 
Pools  at  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Poppy  culture  in  Turkistan,  257 
Population  of  Asiatic  Tashkend,  440 

Bokhara,  ii.  124 

Increase  of,  ii.  150 

Charjui.  ii.  177 

—  —  Chimkent.  421 

Hazarasp,  ii.  314 

Hi  province,  201 

Iliali,  ii.  333 

—  ■ —  Karshi.  ii.  44 

—  - —  Kazalinsk,  390 

—  —  Khiva,  ii.  307 

—  —  Khivan  khanate,  ii.  270 

Khojend,  550 

Khokand.  524 

Kitab,  ii.  39 

Kohistan,  538 

Krasnovodsk.  ii.  495 

Kuldja,  233 

Merv,  ii.  483 

oasis,  ii.  477 

Russian  Tashkend,  441 

Samarkand,  605 

Semipolatinsk,  1 07 

Semirechia,  164 

Shahr,  ii.  39 

Shurakaneh,  ii.  227 

Tashauz,  ii.  330 

Tashkend,  399 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


7^7 


244 


at 


Population  of  the  Steppe,  45 

Turkistan,  370 

according  to  races.  391 

city,  391 

Density  of,  396 

— Locality  of.  397 

Vierny,  274 

Zarafshan  province,  544 

Porsu,  Gazelles  at.  ii.  426 

—  Pond  of.  ii.  425 

—  Temperature  at,  ii.  425 

—  Wild  boar  at,  ii.  426 
Post-house   "  chambre  de  toilette,"  175 

—  office  statistics  of  Semipolatinsk,  339 

—  roads  in  Semipolatinsk,  141 
— Syr-daria  province,  391 

—  station  at  Ak-Kend,  196 

Postal  communication  in  Semirechia,  292 
Posting  service  in  Senapolatinsk,  141 
Precipice  of  Begendjalri,  ii.  417 
Prejevalsky,  Col.,  among  Kalmuks, 

on  Turkistan  zoology,  ii.  507 

Present     from     Chinese     Governor 
Suidun,  263 

—  to  Bek  of  Karshi,  ii.  47 

—  Shahr,  ii.  30 

Presents  for  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  27 

—  from  Bek  of  Chirakchi,  ii.  43 

Charjui,  ii.  190 

Karshi,  ii.  47,  56 

—  Shahr,  ii.  34 

Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  29 

—  returned  by  Emir,  ii.  36 

—  to  Bek  of  Chirakchi.  ii.  41 

Kabakli,  ii.  211 

Bokhariot  courtiers,  ii.  29 

Kush-beggi  of  Bokhara,  ii.  132 

Priest's  house  at  Khokand,  ii.  100 
Prison  at  Charjui,  ii.  183 

Karakol,  670 

Khiva,  ii.  307 

Khokand,  525,  672 

Kopal,  670 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  358 

Lepsa,  670 

Omsk,  661 

Pishpek,  670 

Samarkand,  606,  673 

Semipolatinsk,  664 

Tashkend.  671 

Tokmak,  670 

Vierny,  666,  668 

—  dungeons  at  Bokhara,  ii.  153 

—  Fortress,  in  Petersburg,  640 

—  gardening,  668 

—  gardens,  645,  648 

—  in  Persia,  ii.  185 

—  -  literature,  662 

—  -  Overcrow  ding  in,  672 


Prison  revolt  at  Khokand,  673 

—  statistics,  665 

—  torture  at  Bokhara,  ii.  75 
Prisoners'  diet  at  Omsk,  662 

—  rooms  at  Petersburg,  647 
Prisons  in  Russia.  Exaggerations,  663 

Nineteenth  Century  on,  675 

Semirechia,  Report  on.  667 

I  —  of  Bokhara,  ii.  151 
Omsk,  Books  for,  65 

I Russian  Central  Asia,  661 

i Overcrowding,  672 

-  —  SemipolatinsK,  Books  for,  144 

Siberia,    Criticisms     in    "Called 

Back,"  636 

Do  we  know  the  truth?  630 

—  Doubts  concerning,  631 

Opinions  of  residents,  634 

Prince    Krapotkine's      censure 

and  its  value,  637 

Supposed      preparations      for 

visit  to,  631 

Supposition  examined,  632 

Swedish  testimony,  635 

Prostitution    in    Bokhara,     Punishment 
for,  ii.  151 

Turkistan,  ii.  299 

Project  of  Author  considered  hopeless,  8 
Proverbs  of  the  Kirghese,  342 
Provincial  statistics,  Russian.  96 
Provisions  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  496 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

Pavlodar,  Cheapness  of,  71 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  235 

Tara,  Cheapness  of,  40 

Tashkend.  461 

I  —  for  Turkistan  troops,  603 
i  Public  bath  at  Karshi,  ii.  45 
i  —  corn  stores  in  Ust-Kamenogorsk  dis- 

■  trict,  316 

} Zaisan  district,  316 

j  —  houses  in  Zarafshan  province,  607 

—  librar)'  at  Russian  Tashkend,  441 
i  Publications,  Religious,  Distribution  of,  6 

Punishment  for  personal  offences  at  Ak- 
I  molinsk,  351 

! theft  in  Bokhara,  ii.  151 

I  Punishments  among  Kirghese,  347 
i  Puppet-show  at  Khokand,  524 

■  Purchase  of  a  tarantass,  17 

telega  at  Tinmen,  31 

drugs,  18 

Puschkin  steamer.  To  Odessa  in.  504 
I  Putimsoff,  Col ,  Hospitality  of,  489 

Quadrupeds  of  Khiva,  ii.  269 
Quarrels  of  stallions  on  the  Amu,  ii.  209 

Races  inhabiting  Semipolatinsk.  94 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL   ASIA. 


Races  inhabiting  Vierny,  274 
Racing  games  of  the  Kirghese,  555 
Radoszkovsky,    O.    K.,    on    Turkistan 
Chrysidiformes,  ii.  579 

Mutillidae,  ii.  575 

Sphegidae,  ii.  568 

Railway  adventure  at  Perm,  18 

—  at  Kizil  Arvat,  ii.  489 
Rain  scarcity  in  Turkistan,  372 
Ram-fighting  at  Shavat,  ii.  320 
Raskohiik  fanatic  in  prison,  664 
Ratepayers  in  Semipolatinsk,  109 
Rawlinson,    Sir   H.,  on  Aralo-Caspian 

region,  ii.  403 
Rebellion  in  Hi  valley,  203 
Reception  by  Grand  Duke  Michael,  ii 

—  room  at  Kitab.  ii.  26 
Reconnaissances  of  bed  of  Oxus,  ii.  406 
Recruiting  statistics,  1 14 

Recruits  on  the  march,  74 

Red  river,  ii.  194 

Reeds  and  rushes  in  the  desert,  ii.  397 

Refreshment  stalls  in  Bokhara,  ii.  135 

Refreshments  at  Kainar,  ii.  11 

Kitab,  ii.  15 

Refusal  of  Author's  requests  in  Bokhara, 

ii.  129 
Regel,  Dr.,  Exploration  of.  ii.  50 
Release  of  Author  from  custody,  24 
Religion  of  the  Kalmuks,  217 

Kirghese,  343  ^ 

Religions  and  races  of  Kuldja,  234 

—  of  Semipolatinsk,  108 

Vierny,  280 

Religious  aims  of  Author,  6,  7 

—  beliefs  in  Russian  Tashkend,  441 

—  character  of  Author's  journey,  3 

—  Tract  Society,  Help  of,  5 
Reptiles  of  Kuldja,  248 
Restaurants  in  Kuldja,  241 
Revenue  of  Amu-daria  province,  437 

Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.  270 

Revolt  of  prisoners  at  Khokand,  673 
Riches  among  Bokhariots,  ii.  150 
Riddles  of  the  Kirghese,  342 

Ride  outside  Bokhara,  ii.  123 

—  to  Baha-uddin,  ii.  137 
Kitab,  ii.  12 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  226 

-*-  towards  Katte- Kurgan,  ii.  136 
Riding  and  racing,  ii.  59,  62 

—  with  dumb  guides,  ii.  226 
Rifle  practice  at  Samarkand,  604 
Righistan  of  Bokhara,  ii.  125,  135 
Rings  worn  by  Kirghese,  357 
Rishta  disease  in  Bokhara,  ii.  146 
I  reatment  of,  ii.  146 

—  Fedchenko's  investigations  of,  ii.  512 
Rivers  in  the  Steppe,  44 


I  Rivers  of  Akniolinsk,  47 

Ferghana  province,  493 

Semipolatinsk,  84 

Semirechia,  156 

Turkistan,  385 

Turkmenia,  ii.  439 

Roads  of  Hi  province,  201 

Syr-daria  province.  389 

Zarafshan  province.  545 

—  to  Tssik-Kul,  354 

Kashgar,  354 

Robbers  in  the  desert,  ii.  394 
Tejend  oasis,  ii.  455 

—  Luggage  attacked  by,  ii.  336 

—  on  the  Amu.  Precautions  against,  ii, 

216 
Robbery  in  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Rock  .salt  in  Nuratagh  hills,  ii. 
Roman   Catholic    request    for 

service,  227 

—  Catholics  in  Kuldja,  225 
Romanovski.   Gen.,    Victory 

khariots,  622 
Rope  scarcity  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii 
Rosy,  Accident  to.  ii.  377 
Roubles,  Value  of,  xxxii 
Route  over  Chulak  hills, 

—  to  Hindustan,  ii.  194 


141 

religious 


over   Bo- 


365 


266 


—  Tashauz,  ii.  327 


351 


Routes  from  Kungrad,  u. 

—  to  Central  Asia,  10 
Ruffianism  at  Kirghese  elections,  350 
Ruins  in  the  desert,  ii.  383 

—  near  Borokhudzir,  195 
Tokmak,  356 

—  of  Bibi-Khanum  medresse.  575 
Peikand,  ii.  166 

—  on  Amu  banks,  ii.  214 

Taldyk  banks,  ii.  242 

Rulers  of  Merv,  ii.  480 
Russia,  Asiatic  policy  of.  620 

—  Disabilities  of  Jews  in.  ii.  104 
Russia's  responsibility  towards  Muham- 

madans,  ii.  293 
Russian  advance  to  Merv,  ii.  460 

the  Syr-daria.  400 

Trans-Hi  region,  290 

—  agents  in  Bokhara,  ii.  88 

—  annexation,  402 
of  the  Steppe,  287 

—  attempt  to  release  Stoddart,  ii.  76 

—  camp  near  Smarkand,  ii.  4 

—  Central  Asia,  Bil)liography  of,  ii.  654 
—  Definition  of,  42 

History  of,  120 

Prisons  of,  661 

—  church  in  Kuldja,  227 

—  conquest  of  "  Golden  Horde."  401 
Kazan,  402 


GENERAL  IXDEX. 


719 


Russian  exiles,  Books  for,  6 

—  fishing  station  at  Hassan  Kuli,  ii.  439 

—  forts  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  461 

—  Government.  Bokhariots  on,  ii.  188 

—  hospital  at  Kuldja,  Book  distribution 
.  in,  235 

—  influence  on  the  Irtish.  124 

—  inhabitants  of  Turkistan,  393 

—  intercourse  with  Bokhara,  ii.  74 

—  invasion  of  India,    Feasibility  of,  ii. 
.  .^94 

—  itinerary  from  Iliali  to  Krasnovodsk, 

ii.  425 

—  maps  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  435 

—  march  on  Tashkend,  620 

—  missionary  work,  ii.  303 

—  missions  to  Bokhara,  ii.  75 

—  occupation  of  the  Irtish,  120 

Administration  of  new  territory,  134 
Export  trade  with  China,  133 
Frontier  fortified,  131 
Submission  of  Kalmuks,  127 

—  Tatars,  123 

Trade  at  Semipolatinsk,  132 

—  on  the  Irtish  124 
Trading-place  of  Bukhtarminsk,  131 

■  Ust-Kamenogorsk,  131 

Treaties  with  Kalmuks.  128 

—  occupation  of  Turkistan,  614 

—  population  in  Akmolinsk,  53 

—  prisons,  Nineteenth  Century  on,  675 

—  provincial  statistics,  96 

—  reconnaissance  of    Khivan   oasis,    ii. 

318 

—  rule  in  Turkmenia,   Native  gain  by, 

ii.  490 

—  vSamarkand,  596 

—  slaves  in  Khiva,  ii.  278 

—  spies  at  Bokhara,  ii,  74 

—  subjection  of  Kirghese  Kazaks,  403 

—  survey  of  old  Oxus  bed,  ii.  406 

—  Tashkend,  440 

—  Trade  in  Central  Asia,  462 

—  Turkistan,  P^lora  of,  ii.  618 
Prostitution  in,  ii.  299 

- —  war  with  Khokandians,  298 

—  warehouse  at  Bokhara,  ii.  88 
Russians  on  the  Aral  Sea,  409 
Russo-Turkoman  relations,  ii.  460 

Saint.  Kirghese  notion  of  a,  366 

—  Saviours  Cathedral  at  Moscow,  15 
Saint's  tomb  at  Khiva,  ii.  294 
Sairam  lake,  Road  to,  200 

Salaries  of  Kirghese  judges,  348 
Sale  of  books  at  Taldi-Kuduk,  175 

on  steamboat,  TyT, 

Scriptures  in  Kuldja,  236 

Salors  of  Tui-kmenia,  ii.  445 


Salt  deposits  in  Turkistan,  537 

—  exportation  from  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  496 

—  fields  of  the  Kara-boghaz,  ii.  427 

—  lakes  near  Kara-Kul,  ii.  141 
Samanid  races  of  Bokhara,  ii.  67 
Samara,  Migration  from,  ii.  238 
Samarkand,  Ancient  ruins  of,  563 

—  Antiquities  of  563 

Schuyler,  Dr.,  on,  564 

Ujfalvy,  M.,  on,  564 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  559 

—  Astronomical  instruments  at,  565 

—  Attendants  for  journey,  610 

—  Barracks  at,  601 

—  Bazaar  of,  604 

—  Bibi-Khanum  medresse.  575 

—  Bird's-eye  view  of  581 

—  Bokhariot  refuge  in,  623 

—  Butcher's  shrine  at,  588 

—  Chupan-Ata  hill,  564 

—  Citadel  of,  601 
palace  at.  577 

—  Colleges  of,  586 

—  conquered  by  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  69 

—  Conquests  of,  561 

—  Dancing  dervishes  at,  ii.  295 

—  Decline  of,  562 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  i 

—  Devastation  by  nomads,  563 

—  Dimensions  of,  581 

—  Distribution  of  Scriptures  at,  611 

—  Education  at,  600 

—  Enamelled  bricks  at,  587 

—  Endowment  of  medresses  at,  586 

—  Execution  stone  at,  579 

—  Executions  at,  563 

—  Foundation  of,  560 

—  Gur-Emir  at,  564 
mausoleum,  566 

—  Horse-buying  at.  610 

—  Hospital  for  military,  596 

—  Hospitals  for  natives,  598 

—  Industries  of,  605 

—  Interpreter  necessary  at,  610 

—  Ishrat  Khana  palace  at,  579 

—  J  ews'  quarter  at,  589 

Hebrew  pronunciation  of,  595 

Tribes  of,  595 

—  Kazi  of,  ii.  187 

—  Khoja-Akhrar  medresse,  582 

—  Khudaiar  Khan  at,  510 

—  Kindness  of  M.  Arendarenko,  610 
Gen.  Ivanoff,  612 

—  Koktash  stone  at,  564,  577 

—  Koran  of  Othman,  582 

—  Korolkofif,  Gen.,  Visit  to,  566 

-  Legend  concerning  Tamerlane,  570 

—  Leprosy  in,  541 

—  Library  of  Tamerlane,  582 


720 


RUSSIAN-  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Samarkand,  Market  days  at,  505 

—  Medre>ses  of,  564,  586 

—  Money-changing  at,  610 

—  Mosques  of,  586 

—  Observatory  at,  564,  585 

—  Orphan  asykuii  at,  600 

—  Palace  of  Governor,  565 

—  Patients  in  hospital,  599 

—  Population  of,  605 

—  Prison  at,  606,  673 
Cleanliness  of,  675 

Lavatory  arrangements,  675 

—  Purchase  of  antiquities,  61 1 

—  Rifle  practice  at,  604 

—  Russian  camp  near,  ii.  4 
—  capture  of,  625 

—  Sart  disease  at,  596 

—  Schools  of,  593,  600 

—  Scriptures  for,  443 

—  Shah  Zindeh  mosque,  564,  571,  573 

—  Shir-Dar  medresse,  585 

—  Shrines  of,  588 

—  Spastic  paralysis  at,  599 

—  Suburban  gardens  of,  ii.  4 

—  Synagogue  of  Jews,  592 

—  Tamerlane's  burial-place  at,  564 
capital,  562 

—  Telegraphing  to  London,  612 

—  Tillah-Kari  medresse,  586 

—  Trade  of,  604 

—  Tradition  of  Jews,  594 

—  Vegetation  near.  ii.  8 

—  Visit  to  Jew's  house,  589 
Jewish  Rabbi,  593 

—  Weavers  and  their  products,  606 
Sam-Su,  Breakdown  near,  353 
Sanatorium  at  Chimgan,  450 
Sand  floods  at  Patar,  515 

Sands  of  Kyzyl-Kum  Steppe,  426 

—  Shifting,  ii.  1 70 
Sandstorm  on  the  Steppe,  181 
Sandy  surroundings,  ii.  171 
Sarakhs,  Heri  Rud  river  at,  ii.  453 
Sari-bulak,  Camel  caravan  at,  187 
Sarkan,  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  Missionary  operations  in,  169 
Sart  bazaar,  Visit  to,  240 

—  curiosities  at  Tashkend,  458 

—  Disease,  Cause  of,  598 

Characteristics  of,  597 

Treatment  of,  598 

—  pastime  of  Kok-Bari,  556 

—  school  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 
Sarts,  Ascendency  of,  in  Khokand,  509 

—  Betrothal  among  the.  ii.  353 

—  Festivals  of  the,  ii.  250 

—  Funerals  among  the,  ii.  248 

—  Hospitality  of  the,  ii.  300 

—  Music  of  the,  ii.  91 


Sarts,  Songs  of  the.  ii.  90 

—  Turbulence  of  the,  507 
Sary  Baba,  Tomb  at,  ii.  425 

—  Kamish,  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  397 
Jenkinson  at,  ii.  402 

lakes,  ii.  398 

Canals  near,  ii.  407 

— . Cemeteiy  near,  ii,  407 

Crossing  the  basin  of,  ii.  403 

•  Saxaul  forests  near,  ii.  411 

^-'^/ater  of.  Buoyancy  of,  ii.  400 

—  -^ Chemical  Analysis  of,  ii.  400 

Specific  gravity  of,  ii.  399 

Wells  of,  ii.  394 

Saryks  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  445 

—  Lessar,  M.,  on  the,  ii.  445 

—  Settlements  on  Upper  Murgab,  ii.  455 
Satinsk,  Dr.,  on  Sart  disease,  599 
Saussure,  H.  de,  on  Orthoptera,  ii.  613 
Scoliidae,  ii.  572 

Saxaul,  Fires  of,  ii.  411 

—  Forests  of,  ii.  411 

Scandal  concerning  Eastern  Sovereigns, 

ii-  155 
Scaphirhynchus,     Geological     questions 
concerning,  ii.  244 

—  in  the  Amu  river,  ii.  243 
Scenery  at  Batoum,  ii.  504 

—  of  the  Ala-Tau  range,  270 
School  at  Samarkand,  593 

—  for  Cossacks  at  Omsk,  134 
Schools  at  Almatinka,  279 

Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  365 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 

Tashkend,  466 

—  —  Vierny,  279 

—  in  Bokhara,  ii.  120 

Method  of  study  in,  ii.  121 

Kuldja.  232 

Omsk,  63 

—  of  Samarkand,  600 

j Semipolatinsk.  138 

Semirechia,  172 

the  Kirghese,  358 

Schuyler,    Dr.,  on   Muhammadan    wor- 
ship, ii.  295 

Samarkand  antiquities.  564 

Schuyler's  description   of  Emir   of  Bo- 
khara, ii.  24 

—  "Turkistan,"  ii.  162 

Scientific  explorations  of  Cien.  Komaroft", 

ii-  575  . 

—  introductions,  1 3 
Scoliidae  of  Turkistan,  ii.  572 
Scripture  analogies,  ii.  124 

—  distribution  at  Khokand,  529 

Samarkand,  61 1 

Tiumen,  29 

in  Tobolsk,  29 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


721 


Scripture  illustrations,  see  Index,  p.  xxv 
Scriptures  bought  by  Muhammadans,  73 

—  Chinese  anxiety  for,  236 

—  sold  to  Kirghese,  ii.  303 
Sea-bed,  Animal  life  in  a,  ii.  419 

Camping  in  a,  ii.  419 

Marching  in  a,  ii.  420 

Seikiz  Khan,  Road  to,  ii.  421 
Well  of,  ii.  421 

Seldjuk  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  67 
Self-esteem  of  Khivan  Consul,  ii.  247 
Semenotf,  M.,  Expeditions  of,  295,  296 
on  Thian  Shan  mountains,  152 

—  —  Plants  collected  by,  ii.  620 
Seminary  for  training  schoolmasters.  465 
Semipolatinsk,  Accidental  deaths  in, 

117 

—  Administration  of.  ill 

—  Agriculture  of,  97 

—  Agriculturists  in,  315 

—  Animals  of,  94 

—  Area  of,  42 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  82 

—  Artisans  in,  104 

—  Asylum  at,  138 

—  Beekeeping  in,  102 

—  Births  in,  108 

—  Books  for  hospitals,  144 
prisons,  144 

—  Cattle-breeding  in,  loi 

—  Cereals  grown  in,  98 

—  Cossack  population  of,  66 

—  Criminal  statistics,  665 

—  Deaths  in,  108 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  141 

—  Diseases  in,  116 

—  Economy  of,  96 

—  Etymology  of,  136 

—  Excise  duties  in,   112 

—  Exports  of,  107 

—  Fairs  of,  105 

—  Fires  in,  115 

—  Forests  of,  93 

—  Gardening  in,  100 

—  Gold-mining  in,  103 

—  Governor's  report,  97 

—  Harvest  statistics,  99 

—  Hospital  statistics,  1 16 

—  Houses  in,  1 14 

—  Imports  of,  107 

—  Indui^try  of,  103 

—  Land  revenue,  112 

—  Local  products  of,  106 
rates  in,  112 

—  Location  of  population,  109 

—  Marriages  in,  108 

—  Mechanics  in,  104 

—  Meteorology  of,  137 

—  Military  building,  114 

VOL.  II. 


Semipolatinsk.  Military  hospitals  of, 

"5 

—  Personal  liabilities  in,  113 

—  Population  of,  42,  107 

—  Post-office  statistics,  139 
roads  in,  141 

—  Posting  service  in,  141 

—  prison,  664 

Birching  in,  664 

—  —  Books  for,  665 

Morality  of  inmates,  664 

Raskolnik  fanatic  in,  664 

—  province,  Dimensions  of,  83 

—  Public  buildings  of,  1 14 
health  of,  115 

—  Races  inhabiting,  94 

—  Ratepayers  in,  109 

—  Religicms  of,  108 
— ■  Rivers  of,  84 

—  Scarcity  of  bread  in,  140 

—  Schools  of,  138 

—  Situation  of,  136 

—  Taxation  in,  iii 

—  Towns  of,  95 

—  Trade  of,  105,  132,  139 

—  Traders  at,  286 

—  Vaccination  in,  117 

—  Violent  deaths  in,  117 

—  Visit  to  Governor  of,  137 

—  Wild  animals  of,  94 

—  and  Omsk,  Stations  between,  65 
Semirechia,  Agriculture  of,  165 

—  Area  of,  42 

—  Atkinson's  travels  in,  289 

—  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  Books  distributed  in,  671 

—  Boundaries  of,  151 

—  Cattle  in,  166 

—  Civil  administration  of,  291 

—  Climate  of,  159 

—  Colonization  of,  292 

—  Cossack  settlers  in,  166 
— •  Dimensions  of,  151 

—  Educational  affairs  of,  172 

—  Ethnology  of,  162 

—  Fauna  of,  160 

—  Forests  of,  160 

—  Habitations  of,  164 

—  Industry  of,  164 

—  Knlmuks  of,  162 

—  Lakes  of,  157 

—  Mammals  of,  160 

—  Mountains  of,  152 

—  Orography  of,  151 

—  Orthodox  Christian  Brotherhood,  169 

—  Population  of,  42,  164 

—  Postal  communication  in,  292 

—  prisons,  Official  report  of,  667 
Voluntary  committees.  668 

46 


']22 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA 


i 


Semirechia  province,  Towns  of,  398 

—  Religious  affairs  of,  172 

—  Rivers  of,  156 

—  Russian  occupation  of,  282 

—  Schools  in,  172 

—  Statistics  of,  164 

—  Taranchis  in,  163,  168 

—  Trade  progress  in,  291 
Sepulchres  at  Khanki,  ii.  249 
Sergiopol,  Antiquities  of.  145 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  143 

—  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  Climate  of,  159 

—  Decline  of,  145 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  174 

—  Distribution  of  books  at,  143 

—  Foundation  of,  288 

—  Minerals  near,  145 

—  Remarkable  skulls  found  near,  145 

—  Road  to,  142 

—  Scientific  discovery  at,  288 

—  Situaion  of,  145 

—  Sundiy  at,  143 

Serpitzky.   Col.,    Visit   to,    in   camp   at 

Tashkend,  468 
Servant,  A  new,  ii.  359 
Servants'  wages  in  Tashkend,  461 
S.'ven  Streams,  Land  of,  151 
Severtsofif,  M.,  Explorations  of,  494 

Fatal  accident  to,  ii.  508 

on  Turkistan  animals,  ii.  514 

zoology,  415 

Sevier,  Mr.  A.  H.,  as  interpreter,  17 

—  Accident  to,  ii.  166 
horse  of,  ii.  209 

—  Attention  to  sick  in  Bokhara,  ii.  163 

—  Farewell  to,  at  Odessa,  ii.  504 
Shadman-Malik,  Bridge  of,  563 
Shah  Murad,  Death  of,  510 

—  Zindeh  mosque,  564,  571 

legends  concerning,  572 

Ornamentation  of,  573 

Places  of  devotion  in,  574 

Shahr-i-sabz,  Ak-Serai  palace  at,  ii.  32 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  30 

—  Batchas  at,  ii.  34 

—  Bek  of,  Conversation  with,  ii.  33 

Presents  from,  ii.  30,  34 

to,  ii.  30 

Visit  to,  ii.  32 

—  Bokhariot  rebels  in,  625 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  ii.  40 

—  Entertainment  at,  ii.  34. 

—  Historical  associations  of,  ii.  32 

—  Information  from  courtiers  at,  ii.  36 

—  Mosques  and  medresses,  ii.  39 

—  Population  of,  ii.  39 

—  Torchlight  procession  at,  ii.  34 

—  View  of,  ii.  9 


545 


40 
382 


Shakespear,  Lieut.,  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii. 

341 

Merv,  ii.  457 

Conduct  of  Russian  slaves,  ii.  278 

Route  of,  ii.  385 

Shalgin,  M.,  on  goitre  disease,  547 
Shamanism  among  the  Kirghese,  343 
Shavat,  Dog-fighting  at,  ii.  320 

—  Farm-houses  near,  ii.  321 

—  Lodging  at,  ii.  319 

—  Ram-fighting  at,  ii.  320 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  320 

—  Town  of,  ii.  320 
Sheep  in  Zarafshan  province, 

—  of  the  Steppe,  317 

Thian  Shan.  245 

Yuldus,  247 

—  and  cattle  at  Chirakchi,  ii. 

goats  of  the  desert, 

Sheibanid  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  71 
Sheikh-djeili  mountains,  427,  ii.  241 
Shepherd  at  Karategin  wells,  ii.  380 
Ship-building  at  Orenburg,  409 
Shir-Dar  medresse,  585 
Shirabad  bekship,  ii.  40 

—  river,  ii.  196 

Shirish,  a  remarkable  plant,  557 
I  Shoemakers'  street  in  Bokhara,  ii.  133 
Shopping  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  235 
Shops  in  Iliali,  ii.  332 

—  -  Karshi,  ii.  45 

Khiva,  ii.  284 

Khojeili,  ii.  349 

Kuldja,  240 

—  —  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  365 
Tashauz,  ii.  330 

Shrine  of  a  Samarkand  butcher.  588 
Shrines  of  Samarkand,  588 
Shrubs  of  Turkistan,  480 
j  Shurakaneh,  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  227 

—  Houses  at,  ii.  227 

i  —  Population  of,  ii.  227 
\       Taxes  in,  436 
Siberia,  Bible  work  in,  ii.  237 
j  —  Bibliography  of,  ii.  673 
j  Siberia's  one  monument,  36 
1  Siberian  prisons,  see  "  Prisons." 

—  steamer,  32 
Sibo  curiosities,  213 

encampment.  Visit  to  a,  212,  222 
superstition,  213 
Sibos,  Hospitality  of,  214 

—  Household  gods  of  the,  212 

—  Number  of,  212 

—  of  the  Hi  valley,  21  r 

—  Sickness  among  the.  213 
Silk  culture  at  Bokhara,  ii.  144 
-    factory  at  Khiva,  ii.  287 
Silver-mining  near  Kuldja,  199 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


723 


Silversmith's  shop  in  Khiva,  ii.  287 
Sin,  Conviction  of,  from  reading  Scrip- 
ture, ii.  240 
Singing  oarsmen  on  the  Amu,  ii.  221 

—  and  dancing  at  Bokhara,  ii.  89 
Skin-dressing  at  Bokhara,  ii.  144 
Skobeleff  at  Zmukshir,  ii.  332 

—  in  Ferghana,  512 

Turkmenia,  ii.  464 

Skulls  found  near  Sergiopol,  145 
Slaughter  of  Bokhariots,  ii.  69 
Slave-trade  at  Charjui,  ii,  185 
Karshi,  ii.  45 

of  the  Tui^komans,  ii.  481 

Slavery  in  Bokhara,  ii.  185 

Kharezm,  ii.  276 

Merv,  ii.  479 

Slaves  in  Central  Asia,  Cruelty  to,  ii.  329 

Former  condition  of,  ii.  329 

Release  of,  ii.  329 

Sleep  on  horseback,  ii.  379 
Sleeping  in  the  desert,  ii.  173.  376 
Slumbers  disturbed  at  Bokhara,  ii.  92 
Snow  bridges  of  Thian  Shan  range.  155 
Social  evening  at  Petro-Alezandrovsk,  ii. 

233 
Society,  Bible,  Help  of,  5 

—  Religious  Tract,  Help  of,  5 
Sogdiana,  Capital  of,  561 
Soil  of  Bokhara  khanate,  ii.  50 

Khiva,  Character  of,  ii.  254 

Solomon,  Throne  of.  500 
Solons  at  Jarkend,  196 

—  of  the  Hi  valley,  211 

Solsky  on  Turkistan  beetles,  ii.  552 
Songs  of  the  Kirghese,  342,  ii,  90 
Sorcery  among  Kirghese,  359 
Soup  in  the  desert,  ii.  429 
Souvenirs  of  Khiva,  ii.  287 
Spastic  paralysis  at  Samarkand,  599 
Sphegidae  of  Turkistan,  ii.  568 
Spiders  of  Turkistan,  ii.  543 
Spies  in  Emir's  palace  at  Kitab,  ii.  20 
Spirit  distilleries,  55 
Sponge-plant  at  Tashkend,  456 
Sports  of  Central  Asiatics,  ii.  320 
Staff,  Bek's  official,  ii.  186 
Stalls  in  Bokhara,  ii.  135 
Starovers,  Sect  of,  665 
Stations     between     Altyn-Immel     and 
Kuldja,  190 

Aulie-Ata  and  Tashkend,  414 

Bokhara  and  Charjui,  ii.  177 

Katte-Kurgan,  ii.  137 

Huzar  and  the  Oxus,  ii.  52 

Karshi  and  Bokhara,  ii.  56 

Khojend  and  Khokand,  514 

Samarkand,  551 

Khokand  and  Osh,  531 


Stations    between    Semipolatinsk     and 
Sergiopol,  141 

Sergiopol  and  V'ierny,  174 

Tashkend  and  Jizakh.  477 

Khojend,  478 

Tiumen  and  Semipolatinsk,  37 

Vierny  and  Aulie-Ata,  353 

Statistics  of  Central  Asia,  1 1 7 

cotton,  195 

crime  in  Kuldja,  236 

Semipolatinsk,  665 

crops  in  Turkistan,  484 

domestic  animals  in  Turkistan,  420 

drink  traffic  in  Tui-l-cistan,  607 

j education  in  Zarafshan  prov.,  600 

habitations,  Amu-daria  prov.,  433 

Kuldja,  243 

nomads,  192 

Semipolatinsk  hospital,  116 

post-office,  139 

Semirechia,  164 

prisons,  668 

Suidun,  258 

Tashkend  hospital,  449 

trade  at  Tashkend,  462 

Ura-Tiube,  553 

Vierny,  274 

Zarafshan  province,  544 

—  Recruiting.  114 

—  Religious,  of  Kuldja,  234 

—  Russian  provincial,  96 

—  Ureliability  of  native,  118 
Stealing  in  the  desert,  ii.  396 

Steam  navigation  of  Upper  Oxus,  ii.  197 
Steamboat,  Church  music  on,  40 

—  passengers,  40 

—  Siberian,  32 

Steamers  on  Amu  river,  ii.  242 

Syr-daria  river,  410 

Steamship  Samarkand  on  Upper  Oxus, 

ii.  197 
Stebnitzky's  reconnaissances  of  old  Oxus 

bed,  ii.  407 
Stephen,  Mr.  C,  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  440 

on  Balkan  mountains,  ii.  437 

Steppe.  Boundaries  of  the,  43 

—  Cattle  of,  316 

—  Climate  of,  44 

—  Communications  of,  46 
-  Dimensions  of.  43 

—  ''Ehbi"  wind  on,  181 

—  Fauna  of,  ii.  430 

—  Forts  erected  in,  408 

—  Government  of,  411 
General  of,  42 

—  Hydrography  of,  44 

—  Inundations  of.  88 

—  Kirghese,  Administration  of,  411 

—  Lakes  in,  44 


724 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Steppe,  Mines  of  74 

—  Population  of,  43,  45 

—  Rivers  in,  44 

—  Russian  annexation  of,  287 

—  Sandstorm  on,  181 

—  Sheep  of,  317 

—  Summer  appearance  of.  69 

—  Surface  of,  44 

—  Tortoises  of,  ii.  430 

—  Vegetation  of,  45,  486 
Stewart,  Col.,  Journey  of,  ii.  469 

at  Khorassan,  ii.  471 

on  slavery  at  Charjui,  ii.  185 

Tekke  Turkomans,  ii.  471 

Stoddart,  Col.,  at  Bokhara,  ii.  74 
compelled  to  embrace  Islamism, 

ii-  75 

imprisoned  at  Bokhara,  ii.  75 

killed  at  Bokhara,  ii.  76 

Stone  ornaments  in  Kiskilenskaia,  353 
Stores  at  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  498 
Street-sleeping  at  Kara-Chukum.  549 
Streets  and  lanes  of  Bokhara,  ii.  135 

—  of  Khokand,  5 1 7 

Russian  Tashkend.  440 

Stremoukhof  s  account  of  Emir,  ii.  25 

slavery  in  Bokhara,  ii.  185 

Student's  life  at  Khiva,  ii.  290 
Subterraneous  sheds  in  the  desert,  ii.  394 
Suburbs  of  Bokhara,  ii.  165 
Suidun,  Bazaar  at.  262 

—  Chinese  p'ai  fang  at,  204 

—  Russian  occupation  of,  627 

—  Statistics  of,  258 

—  Visit  to  Chinese  Governor  at,  257 

—  Walls  of,  259 

Suigati,  Author's  arrival  at,  356 

—  Election  of  judges  at,  347 

—  Visit  to  Kirghese  at,  333 
Suili,  Cemetery  at.  ii.  432 

—  Wells  of,  ii.  431 
Sulphur  baths  at  Arasan,  186 
Sultans  in  Syr-daria  province,  407 
Sumbul,  a  remarkable  plant,  557 
Summary  of  Author's  journey,  ii.  505 
Summer  appearance  of  Steppe,  69 

—  heats  of  Turkistan,  373 
Sun-worship,  Remains  of,  ii.  413 
Sunday  in  Kuldja,  221 

Sergiopol,   143 

Tashkend,  448 

Sundukli,  Sands  of,  ii.   170 
Sungaria,  Atkinson's  travels  in,  290 

—  Baikofs  mission  through.  124 

—  Extinction  of,  130 

—  Kirghese  occupation  of,  285 

—  Rebellion  in,  626 
Sungarian  AlaTau  mountains,  185 
Sunjur  Shah,  Tomb  of,  at  Merv,ii.  465 


Sunni  law  against  pictures,  ii.  yj 

—  superstition,  ii.  21 

Sunrise  at  Khoja-Moburak,  ii.  59 
Superstition  of  the  Kalmuks,  220 

—  regarding  pictures,  ii.  21 
Surakhane,  Fire-worshippers  at.  ii.  500 
Surface  of  Akmolinsk,  47 

Turkistan,  371 

Surkhab  river.  Crazy  bridges  over.  ii.  53 
Swimming  horses  on  the  Oxus,  ii.  196 
Sycamore  forests  in  Zarafshan.  608 
Synagogue  at  Bokhara,  ii.  109 

Karshi.  ii.  48 

Khokand,  519 

—  choristers,  592 

—  of  Samarkand  Jews,  592 
Syr-daria,  Area  of,  42 

Khokandian  advance  to,  614 

Population  of,  42 

province,  383 

Administrative  failures,  406 

Boundaries  of,  383 

Caravan  routes,  390 

Communications  of,  389 

Deserts  of.  384 

Extent  of,  383 

Feuds  of  natives,  405 

Forts  erected  in,  409 

Khans  abolished  in,  407 

Kirghese  kibitkas  in,  315 

— Kuramas  in,  394 

Mountains  of,  384 

■ —  Population  as  to  creeds.  395 

Classification  of,  395 

Post- roads  of,  391 

I Roads  of,  389 

Russian  advance  to,  400 

criminal  laws,  411 

Scriptures  for,  443 

' Sultans  appointed  in.  407 

, Surface  of,  3^4 

' Town  on  Orenburg  road,  389 

i Towns  of,  398 

—  —  river,  386 

I Affluents  of,  388 

I at  Chinaz,  387 

Khojend,  387 

Banks  of.  388 

I  — Embouchure  of,  388 

I Sources  of,  386 

Steamers  on,  410 

Table-lands  of  Boroldai,  484 

—  perquisites,  ii.  12,  479 
Tailly,  Dishonesty  of,  ii.  31 1 
Tajik  literature,  ii.  292 

—  sacred  songs,  ii.  91 

j  —  weaver*;  at  Samarkand,  606 
Tajiks  of  Karategin,  Strength  of,  ii.  54. 


I 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


725 


Tajiks  of  Zarafshan  province,  541 
Takhta-Karacha  pass,  ii.  7 
Taldi-Kuduk,  Sale  of  books  at.  1 75 
Taldyk  river,  Ruins  on  banks,  ii.  242 
Tambourine  music  at  Khiva,  ii.  309 
Tamerlane,  Birthplace  of,  ii.  32 

—  Camp  of.  ii.  4 

—  Campaigns  of,  562 

—  Capital  of,  562 

—  Conquests  of,  ii.  275 

—  Coronation  stone  of,  564 

—  Court  splendour  of,  562 

—  Gates  of,  555 

—  Ishrat  Khana  palace  of,  579 

—  Legend  concerning,  570 

—  Library  of.  582 

—  Manuscripts  of,  583 

—  Siege  of  Urgenj  by,  ii.  340 

—  Summer  palace  of,  571 

—  Tomb  of,  564,  569,  ii.  3 

Enamel  work  of,  587 

Wainscoting  of,  ii.  124 

—  Wife  of,  564,  575 
Tanning  at  Bokhara,  ii.  144 
Tara,  Arrival  at,  39 

—  Cheapness  of  provisions  at,  40 
Taranchi  amusements,  208 

—  bazaar  in  Kuldja,  223 
Visit  to,  238 

—  gardens  in  Kuldja,  224 

—  Kuldja,  238 

—  mosque  in  Kuldja,  232 

—  rebellion.  203,  626 

—  victory  over  Dungans,  203 
Taranchis  at  Jarkand,  196 

—  Description  of,  206 

—  Dress  of,  207 

—  Habitations  of.  208 

—  of  Semirechia,  163,  168 
Tarantass  abandoned  in  desert,  ii.  172 

—  arrival  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  236 

—  difficulty  in  desert,  ii.  172 

—  Narrow  escape  of,  ii.  241 

—  on  fire,  ii.  58 

—  Purchase  of  a,  17 

—  Sale  of,  ii.  236 

—  Shipment  of,  ii.  191 
Tarbagatai  mountains.  84 

Target  practice  of  Turkistan  troops,  604 
Tashauz,  Arrival  of  Author  at,  ii.  327 

—  Departure  from,  ii.  331 

—  from  palace  roof,  ii.  330 

—  Houses  at,  ii.  330 

—  Iranian  population  of.  ii.  330 

—  Lodgings  at,  ii.  330 

—  Medresse  at,  ii.  330 

—  Mosques  at.  ii.  330 

—  Palace  of  Khan  at,  ii.  328 

—  Route  to,  ii.  327 


Tashauz,  Ruins  near,  ii.  331 

—  Shops  of,  ii.  330 

—  Temperature  of,  ii.  331 

—  Town  of,  ii.  330 

—  Trade  of,  ii.  330 

TashkEnd,  Alim  Kul  at.  Death  of,  511 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  423 

—  Asylum  for  aged  at,  450 

—  Barracks  at,  468 

—  Bazaars  of,  458,  ii.  286 

—  Beklar  Bek  medresse  at,  458 

—  Bible  Society  at,  453 

—  Bokhariot  entry  into,  621 

—  Buildings  of,  440 

—  Camp  at,  468 

—  Characteristics  of,  439 

—  Climate  of.  449,  467 

—  Death-rate  in  hospital,  450 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  475,  485 

—  Diseases  in,  449 

—  Dispensary  for  natives.  450 

—  Divisions  of,  438 

—  Domestic  expenses  in.  461 

—  Earthquakes  at,  468 

—  Faii-s  at,  462 

—  Fancy  goods  in  bazaar.  459 

—  Fevers  in,  449 

—  Furs  at,  Prices  of,  523 

—  Gaieties  at,  452 

—  Gates  of,  424 

—  German  visitors  at,  452 

—  Germans  in,  448 

—  Granary  of,  478 

—  Grave  of  Gen.  Kaufmann  at,  448 

—  Hospital  at,  448,  449 

—  Hotel  at,  424 

—  House-rent  in,  461 

—  Household  commodities  at,  461 

—  Imports  and  exports,  461 

—  Jews'  synagogue,  445 

—  Khokandian  sortie  from,  620 

—  March  of  Russians  on.  620 

—  Meteorology  of,  469 

—  Money  arrangements  at,  473 
--  Museum,  455 

— -  —  Antiquities  in,  455 

Botanical  specimens  in,  456 

Buddhist  idols  in,  456 

Curiosities  in,  455 

Ethnographical  specimens  in,  455 

— -  --  Hemiptera  in,  455 
Sponge-plant  in,  456 

—  Observatory  at.  441.  467 

—  Officers'  club  at.  451 

—  Population  of,  399,  440 

—  Prison  at.  671 

—  Provisions  at,  461 

—  Public  library,  470 

—  Russian,  Creeds  of,  441 


726 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Tashkend,  Russian  Gazette  in,  ii.  292 

Houses  of,  440 

Inhabitants.  Ages  of,  442 

Library  in,  441 

Museum  in,  441 

Observatory  in,  441 

Occupations  in,  441 

Population  of,  441 

Religious  beliefs  in,  441 

repulse  at,  620 

Streets  of,  440 

Theatre  in.  441 

—  Sart  curiosities,  458 

—  Schools  at,  466 

—  Scripture  distribution  at,  442,    443, 

469,  ii.  239 

—  Seminary  for   training   schoolmasters 

at,  465 

—  Servants'  wages  in,  461 

—  Situation  of,  476 

—  Stations  to  Jizakh,  477 
Khojend,  478 

—  Storming  of,  620 

—  Sunday  in,  448 

—  Surrender  to  Russians,  622 

—  Temperature  of,  467 

—  Trade  of,  462 

—  Treachery  in,  621 

— -  Visit  to  Governor-General,  442 

—  Wages  in,  461 

—  Wagonette  disposal  at,  473 

—  Walls  of,  423 

—  and  Aulie-Ata,  Stations  between,  414 
Tashkendian  turbulence,  510 

—  wanderers,  357 

Tatar  yemstchik.  Accident  to,  363 
Tatars  of  Kazan,  401 

—  Submission  of,  123 
Tax-gatherer  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  316 
Taxation  of  Orenburg  Kirghese,  410 
Taxes  in  Amu-daria  province,  ii.  316 
Bokhara,  ii.  58,  187 

Khivan  khanate,  ii.  270 

Semipolatinsk,  11 1 

Tchampani  in  the  Hi  valley,  258  | 

Tcherkassky's  expedition  to  Khiva,  ii.  , 
276  I 

Technicalities  of  Hebrew  MSS.,  ii.    115  ' 
Tejend  oasis  in  Turkmenia,  ii.  453 

Hydrography  of,  ii.  453  ! 

Robbers  in,  ii.  455  | 

Tekkes,  Food  of  the,  ii.  446  | 

—  of  Merv,  Atrocities  of,  ii.  481 

—  Distribution  of,  ii.  477 

Divisions  of,  ii.  477 

Lawlessness  of,  ii.  480 

Number  of,  ii.  477 

Occupations  of,  ii.  478  j 

Unattractiveness  of,  ii.  480 


I  Tekkes  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  444 
I  Temperature  at  Porsu,  ii.  425 

—  of  Amu-daria  province,  432 
Tashkend,  467 

the  desert,  ii.  422 

—  —  Turkistan,  371 
Temuchin,  see  Jinghiz  Khan. 
Tent  lodging  at  Kara-Tiube,  ii.  5 
Tents  of  the  Akhal  oasis,  ii.  450 

Kalmuk  Geluns,  216 

Kirghese,  333 

— Turkomans,  ii.  445 

Theatre  at  Russian  Tashkend,  441 
Thian  Shan  mountains,  Exploration  of, 
152,  294 

Extent  of,  153 

Geology  of,  155 

— Glaciers  of,  155 

Ranges  of,  154 

Snow  bridges  of,  155 

Valleys  of,  1 56 

Volcanoes  (supposed)  in,  156 

sheep,  245 

ValikhanofTs  exploration,  296 

Threshing  and  ploughing,  ii.  7 

Throne  of  Solomon.  500 

"  Through  Siberia,"  Different  estimates 

of,  630 
Tiflis,  Author's  arrival  at,  ii.  501 

—  Bayern,  Herr,  of,  ii.  502 

—  Bible  distribution  from,  ii.  502 
Society  at,  ii.  501 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  ii.  502 

—  Weather  at.  ii.  502 
Tillah-Kari  medresse,  586 
Timbek's  residence  at  Khokand,  518 
Timber  at  Aulie-Ata,  Dearness  of,  365 
Khiva,  ii.  269 

Timur,  sec  Tamerlane. 
Timurid  sway  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  69 
Timurids,  Capital  of  the,  560 
Tiumen,  Acquaintances  at,  27 

—  Arrival  of  Author  at,  26 

—  Book  distribution  at,  29 

—  Introductions  at.  30 

—  Purchase  of  a  telega  at,  31 
Tiurebek  Khanim,  Tomb  of,  ii.  345 
Tobacco  cultivation  at  Khiva,  ii.  26S 
in  Akmolinsk,  52 

Ferghana,  499 

near  Karshi,  ii.  44 

Tobolsk,  Archbishop  of,  Visit  to,  36 

—  Books  for  exiles  in,  29 

—  Cemetery  at,  35 

—  Governor  of,  Interview  with,  35 
Togus-tepe  hills,  ii.  425 
Tokmak,  Prison  at,  670 

—  Old  road  to,  356 

—  Ruins  near,  356 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


727 


Tomb  at  Sary  Baba,  ii.  425 

—  of  Abdullah  Khan,  ii.  71,  137 

Pilgrimages  to,  ii.  137 

Ak-rabat,  ii.  207 

Aulie-Ata,  366 

Bibi  Khamim,  577 

Nedjm-ud-din-Kubera,  ii.  347 

Sunjur  Shah  at  Men',  ii.  456 

—  —  Tamerlane,  ii.  3 

Wainscoting  of,  ii.  124 

Tiiirebek  Khanim,  ii.  345 

Tombs  at  Khanki,  ii.  248 

—  of  Kirghese,  311 

royalty  at  Khiva,  ii.  293 

—  on  Butenau  plateau,  ii.  391 
Torahs  of  Jews  at  Bokhara,  ii.  no 
Torchlight  procession  at  Shahr.  ii.  34 
Torgouts  of  the  Hi  valley,  214 
Tortoises  of  the  Steppe,  ii.  430 
Torture  of  prisoners  at  Bokhara,  ii.  75 
Town  of  Gazavat,  ii.  318 

Krasnovodsk,  ii.  495 

Kungrad,  ii.  351 

Omsk,  59 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 

Shavat,  ii.  320 

Tashauz,  ii.  330 

Towns  of  Akmolinsk,  53 

Ferghana  province,  398,  499 

Kuldja  province,  398 

Semipolatinsk,  95 

Semirechia,  398 

Syr-daria  province,  398 

Zarafshan  province,  398 

—  on  Lower  Oxus,  ii.  241 
Orenburg  road.  389 

Tract  distribution  in  Moscow  Exhibition, 

ii.  238 
—on  railway  journey,  19 

—  —  Success  of  former  efforts,  27 

—  Society,  Help  of,  5 

Trade  in  a  Chinese  bazaar,  239 
Kuldja  bazaars,  239 

—  of  Bokhara,  ii.  133 

Central  Asia,  ii.  286 

Karategin.  ii.  54 

Khiva,  ii.  285 

Khojend,  551 

Khokand,  523 

Mei-v,  ii.  479 

Samarkand,  604 

Semipolatinsk,  139 

Tashauz,  ii.  330 

Tashkend,  462 

Vierny,  278 

—  progress  in  Semirechia,  291 

—  statistics  of  Turkistan,  462 
Tradesmen  of  IChiva.  ii.  269 
Tradition  concerning  Hazarasp,  ii.  313 


Tradition  of  Khoja-Akhrar,  5S2 

—  —  Tamerlane's  library,  582 
Traditions  of  Jews  in  China,  594 

Kirghese,  157,  177,  357 

Samarkand  Jews,  594 

Tragical  end  of  a  china  basin,  ii.  389 
Training  of  hawks,  ii.  326 
Trans-Hi  mountains,  268 

region,  Russian  advance  to.  290 

Translation  work  of  Mr.  W.  H.  Cromie, 

ii.  506 
Travellers,  Aralo-Caspian,  ii.  404 
— ■  in  Central  Asia,  ii.  457 

—  on  the  threshold  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  465 
Travelling  in  a  horse-box.  ii.  501 
Travels  of  M.  Fedchenko,  ii.  509 
Treaty  between  Khiva  and  Russia,  ii.  282 

Russia  and  Khan  of  Khokand,  511 

Trees  of  Turkistan,  479 

Zarafshan  province.  608 

—  on  Kopet-dagh  mountains,  ii.  438 
Trials  among  the  Kirghese,  346 
Tribes  of  Khivan  khanate,  ii.  270 

Samarkand  Jews,  595 

Troitzky,  M.,  with  the  Kirghese,  344 
Troops  in  Akhal  oasis,  ii.  494 

Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  234 

Turkistan,  74,  601 

Arms  of,  602 

—  Drunkenness  among,  603 

Education  of,  603 

Food  of,  603 

■  Moral  standard  of,  603 

Target  Practice  of,  604 

—  Uniforms  of.  602 

Troubetzkoy  prison  in  Petersburg,  C42 
Cells  of,  642 

—  —  Diet  of  prisoners,  644 

Garden  exercise,  645 

Occupants  of,  643 

Visits  from  friends,  644 

Women's  quarters,  645 

Troubles  with  attendants  in  desert,  ii.  414 
Trousseau  of  a  Kirghese  bride,  326 
Trumpets  and  drums  at  Charjui,  ii.  181 
Tuar,  Arrival  of  Author  at.  ii.  424 
Tugais  on  the  Amu,  ii.215 

Tura  river.  Voyage  on,  33 
Turco-Tatar  races,  392 
Turkish  dialects,  ii.  292 
Turkistan  :    Ak-Mesjed    captured   by 
Russians,  617 

—  Animals  of,  ii.  514 

—  Ants  of,  ii.  576 

—  Archbishop  of,  Vi-^it  to.  280 

—  Aulie-Ata  captured  by  Russians,  619 

—  Aurora  Borealis  in,  377 

—  Beershops  in,  607 

—  Bees  of,  ii.  562 


728 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


TURKISTAN,  Beetles  of,  ii.  552 

—  Bibliography  of,  470,  ii.  674 

—  Birds  of,  ii.  517 

—  Boundaries  of,  37 

—  Breweries  in,  607 

—  Butterflies  of,  ii.  581 

—  Capture  of,  by  Russians,  619 

—  Cattle  of,  420 

—  Caucasians  in,  392 

—  Cereals  of,  483 

—  Chimkent  captured,  619 

—  Cholera  in,  538 

—  Chrysidiformes  of,  ii.  579 

—  city,  Population  of,  391 

—  Climate  of,  371,  372,  375 

—  Conquest  of,  504 

—  Cossacks  in,  601 

—  Crops  in,  484 

—  Crustacea  of,  ii.  548 

—  Definition  of,  369 

—  Dimensions  of,  370 

—  Distilleries  in.  607 

—  Domestic  animals  in,  420 

—  Drink  tiaffic  in,  607 

—  Dungans  in,  209 

—  Dyeing  plants  in,  483 

—  Earthquakes  in,  378 

—  English  competition  in,  464 

—  Fauna  of,  ii.  506 

—  Fedchenko  on  zoology  of,  ii.  506 

—  Fish  of,  ii.  243,  530 

—  Flora  of,  ii.  618 

—  Fogs  of,  377 

—  Fortified  post-stations,  488 

—  Forts  of,  601 

—  —  captured  by  Russians,  618 

—  Fruit-trees  in,  480 

—  General  Government  of,  369,  624 

—  Geology  of,  378 

—  Gold  in,  381 

—  Government,  Reorganization  of,  629 

—  Governor's  residence.  442 

—  Humidity,  Want  of,  2)7Z 

—  Ichthyology  of,  ii.  530 
--  Inhabitants  of,  370 

—  Iranians  of,  392 

—  Karamazar  mountains  in,  515 

—  Kaufmann  appointed  Gov.-Gen..  624 

—  Khivan  encroachments,  615 

—  Khokandian  advance,  614 
fortresses  in,  615 

subjugation  of  Kirghese,  615 

—  Kibitkas  in,  434 

—  Kirghese  insurrections  in,  617 

—  Kuramas  in,  394 

—  Lepidoptera  of,  248,  ii.  581 

—  Leprosy  in,  540 

—  Liquor  traffic  in,  607 

—  Mammalia  of,  ii.  515 


TuRKiSTAN,     Meteorological     observa- 
tions, 374 
tables,  376 

—  MiUtai-y  affairs  in,  601 

—  Minerals  of,  379 

—  Mining  operations,  Decrease  of,  38 1 

—  Mollusks  of,  ii.  537 

—  Moniiolians  in,  392 

—  Mountains  of,  534 

—  Mutillidae  of,  ii.  575 

—  Neuroptera  of,  ii.  609 

—  Officers,  Moral  standard  of,  603 

—  Ornithology  of,  415 

—  Orthoptera  of,  ii.  613 

—  Plants  of,  482,  ii.  620 

—  Poppy  fields  in,  257 
■ —  Population  of,  370 

according  to  races,  391 

Classification  of,  394 

Density  of,  396 

—  —  Locality  of,  397 

—  Prostitution  in,  ii.  299 

—  Races,  .Settled  and  nomad,  396 

—  Rain,  Scarcity  of.  372 

—  Reptiles  of,  ii.  528 

—  rivers,  Direction  of,  386 
Peculiarities  of,  385 

—  Russian   advance.   Consolidation  of, 

617 

inhabitants  of,  393 

invasion  of,  616 

—  —  —  on  Syr-daria,  615 

occupation  of,  614 

repulse  at  Tashkend,  620 

victory  over  Khokandians,  617 

—  Salt  deposits  in.  537 

—  Scoliidae  of,  ii.  572 

—  Scriptures  for.  443 

—  Sheep  of,  246 

—  Shrubs  of,  480 

—  Sphegidae  of,  ii.  568 
Spiders  of,  ii.  543 

—  Summer  heats  of.  373 

—  Surface  of,  371.  479 

—  Surrender  of  Tashkend,  622 
Table-lands  of,  484 

—  Temperature  of,  371 
Trade  statistics  of,  462 
Tribes  of,  479 

—  Troops  in,  74,  601 

—  -     Arms  of,  602 

Education  of.  603 

Uniforms  of,  602 

—  Turko-Tatar  races  in,  392 

—  Vegetation  of,  374,  478,  487 

—  Vermes  of,  ii.  615 

—  villages.  Number  of,  399 

—  Wine-cellars  in,  607 

—  Zoology  of,  415 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


729 


TURKMENIA,  Adventures  on  frontier,  ii. 
466 

—  Akhal  oasis  of,  ii.  449 

—  Alielis  of,  ii.  445 

—  Alikhanoff,  Lieut.,  in,  ii.  471 

—  Area  of,  ii.  436 

—  Attek  oasis  of,  ii.  450 

—  Bibliography  of,  ii.  677 

—  Boundaries  of,  ii.  435 

—  Chikishliar  taken  by  Russians,  ii.  461 

—  Climate  of.  ii.  440 

—  Ersaris  of,  ii.  444 

—  Ethnology  of.  ii.  444 

—  Expeditions  in,  ii.  461 

—  Fauna  of,  ii.  441 

—  Flora  of,  ii.  440 

—  Frontier  of,  ii.  435 

—  Fruit-trees  in,  ii.  440 

—  Goklans  of,  ii.  445 

—  Heri  Rud  river,  ii.  453 

—  Irrigation  of,  ii.  439 

—  Lack  of  water  in.  ii,  438 

—  Lessar,  M.,  in,  ii.  472 

Revision  of  chapters  by,  ii.  435 

—  Lomakin,  Gen. ,  Defeats  of.  ii.  464 

—  Markozoff,  Col..  Failures  of,  ii.  462 

—  Merv  oasis  in,  ii.  454 

—  Meteorology  of,  ii.  440 

—  Mountains  of,  ii.  437 

—  Naziroft",  Lieut.,  in,  ii.  472 

—  Oases  of,  ii.  449 

—  O'Donovan,  Mr.,  in,  ii.  467 

—  Opposition  to  Russians  in,  ii.  461 

—  Rivers  of,  ii.  439 

—  Russian  forts  in.  ii.  461 

invasion  of,  ii.  461 

maps  of,  ii.  435 

—  Salors  of,  ii.  445 

—  Saryks  of,  ii.  445 

—  Skobeleff's  campaign  in,  ii.  464 

—  Slavery  in,  ii.  481 

—  Stephen,  Mr.  Condie,  in,  ii.  440 

—  Surface  of,  ii.  436 

—  Tejend  oasis,  ii.  453 

—  Tekkes  of,  ii.  444 

—  Travellers  in,  ii.  457 

on  the  threshold  of,  ii.  465 

—  Unknown  country  in,  ii.  455 

—  Vegetation  of,  440 

—  Winter  in,  ii.  440 

—  Yomuds  of,  ii.  444 
Turkoman  bandits,  ii.  337 

—  boats  on  the  Atrak,  ii.  439 
LTpper  Oxus,  ii.  207 

—  Doctoring  a,  ii.  374 

—  farms,  ii.  226 

—  horses,  Value  of,  ii.  352 

—  opposition  to  Russian  invasion,  ii.  461 

—  region,  ii.  337 


447 
ii.  444 


Turkoman  shop  at  Ak-tepe,  ii.  335 

—  Steppe,  Desiccation  of,  ii.  405 

—  tent,  Rest  in,  ii.  369 

—  tents  at  Krasnovodsk.  ii.  496 

—  tribes,  Distribution  of,  ii.  444 
Divisions  of,  ii.  444 

—  women,  ii,  448 
Turkomans,  Amulets  of  the,  ii 

j  —  Benoist-Mechin,  Baron,  on 
'  —  Bravery  of,  ii.  444 

—  Carpets  of,  ii.  447 
I  —  Characteristics  of,  ii.  444 
i  —  Chess-playing  among,  ii.  444 
;  —  Classes  of,  ii.  445 

—  Dress  of,  ii.  447 

—  Felts  of.  ii.  447 

—  Food  of.  ii.  446 
:  —  Grodekoff  on  the,  ii.  444 
!  —  Habitations  of,  ii.  445 
I  —  Idleness  of,  ii.  444 

—  Jewellery  of,  ii,  447,  497 

—  Manufactures  of,  ii,  478 

—  Number  of,  ii.  444 

—  Occupation  of,  ii,  447 


of  Gazavat, 


119 


—  Origin  of.  ii.  443 

—  Ornaments  of,  ii.  447 

—  Petrusevitch  on,  ii.  444 

—  Physiolog}^  of,  ii.  444 

—  Russian  chastisement  of,  ii.  332 

—  Slave-trade  of,  ii.  481 

—  Tents  of.  ii.  445 

—  Truthfulness  of,  ii.  444 

'*  Turning  in  "  to  camel  cradles,  ii.  375 

—  out  of  bed  in  the  desert,  ii.  432 

—  policeman  in  the  desert,  ii.  396 
Turquoise  in  Ferghana,  497 

"  Twickenham  Ferry  "  in  Bokhara,  ii.  91 
I 

j  UCHUM,  Bokhariot  defeat  at,  625 
Uigur  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  68 

\  Ujfalvy,  M.,  at  Sergiopol,  145 

on  Kirghese  mothers,  360 

Samarkand  antiquities,  564 

Ulianin,  V,  N.,  on  Turkistan  Crustacea, 

ii,  548 
Ulug  Beg,  College  of,  ii.  ^2 

Medresse  of.  585 

Observatory  of,  564,  585 

i Tomb  of.  569 

L^nfaithfulness  of  Asiatic  wives,  ii.  354 
"Unfurnished   apartments"    at   Kakir. 

I  ii.  61 

I  Uniforms  of  Turkistan  tioops,  602 

!  Unnatural  practices  in  Bokhara,  ii.  158 
Ura  Tiube.  Buildings  of,  553 
Divisions  of.  553 

i  —    -  Inhabitants  of,  553 

; Long  stage-journey  to,  552 


730 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Ura  Tiube,  Russian  occupation  of,  623 

Sacred  places  of.  553 

Scriptures  for,  443 

Statistics  of,  553 

Traditions  of.  553 

Urgenj,  Cossack  raids  on.  ii.  274 
Urunitsi.  Massacre  near.  203 
Urun-daria  at  Dekche.  ii.  393 
Ushak-bent,  Lakes  of,  ii.  390 
Ushakoff,  M.,  at  Khokand,  518 
Ust-Kamenogorsk,  Corn  stores  in,  316 

Trading-place  of.  131 

Ust  Urt,  Clifts  of  the,  ii.  392 

Mounting  the,  ii.  410 

Ustik,  Journey  to,  ii.  205 

—  Toksaba  of,  ii.  205 
Usury  among  Kirghese,  316 

—  at  Khokand,  ii.  100 
Uyezds  of  Akmolinsk.  50 
Uzbeg  Khans  of  Kharezm,  ii.  274 

—  languages  and  kindred  dialects,  ii.  292 

—  literature,  ii.  292 

—  notions  of  a  future  life.  ii.  220 

—  occupation  of  Merv,  ii.  456 

—  rulers  of  Bokhara,  ii.  71 

—  servants  hired  by  Author,  ii.  3 

—  society  at  Manak,  ii.  323 

—  town  of  Kipchak,  ii.  241 
Uzbegs  in  Khivan  khanate,  ii.  270 
Uzun  Kuyu.  Gazelle  captured  at,  ii.  413 
Well  of,  ii.  410 

Vaccination  in  Semipolatinsk,  117 
Valikhanoff  at  Kashgar,  ii.  471 

crossing  the  Thian  Shan,  296 
Vambery  at  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  341 

-  Description  of  Emir  by,  ii.  24 
Vardan  Zigi,  Silk  culture  at,  ii.  144 
Vaulin,  Col.,  Hospitality  of,  552 
Vegetation  at  Bokhara,  ii.  165 

near  Samarkand,  ii.  8 

—  of  Ferghana,  497 
Kuldja,  257 

—  —  Kurama,  478 

Merv  oasis,  ii.  476 

the  Steppe,  45 

Turkistan,  374,  478.  487 

Turkmenia,  li.  440 

on  banks  of  Amu,  ii.  223 
Vehicles  in  Khiva,  ii.  316 

—  of  the  Durigans,  210 
Venison  in  the  desert,  ii.  382 
Veniukoff,  M.,  on  Kirghese  religion,  343 

Survey  of  Issik-Kul  country,  297 

Vermes  of  Turkistan,  ii.  615 
Vertebrata  of  Kuldja,  247 

Viands  of  Kunia  Urgenj,  ii.  364 

Victoria  lake.  ii.  193 

Victorie.s  of  Jinghiz  Khan,  ii.  69 


ViERNY,  Agriculture  of,  278 

—  Aliken's  hotel  at,  27 1 

—  Archbishop,  Visit  to,  280 
Treasures  of,  280 

—  Bazaar  at.  278 

—  Beekeeping  in,  185 

—  Book  distribution  at,  279,  670 

—  Cattle  market  at,  276 

—  Chinese  curiosities  in,  275 

—  Climate  of,  271 

—  Creeds  in,  280 

—  Departure  of  Author  from,  282,  352 

—  Droshky  drive  in,  272 

—  Eating-houses  at,  278 

—  Education  at,  279 

—  Fruit  at,  277 

—  Hotel  at,  27s 

—  Houses  in,  272 

—  Industries  of.  278 

—  Kalmuk  school  in,  170 

—  Library  at,  279 

—  Magistrate  of,  Visit  to,  274 

—  Mai-ket,  Prices  in,  277 

—  Melons  at,  277 

—  Mercantile  introductions,  276 

—  Occupations  in,  274 

—  Police-master,  Visit  of,  276 

—  Population  of,  274 

—  Prison  at,  666 
Gardening  in,  668 

Nationalities  of  prisoners,  666 

—  Provisions,  Cheapness  of,  668 

—  Races,  Diversity  of,  274 

—  Religions  of,  280 

—  Schools  at,  279 

—  Statistics  of,  274 

—  Streets  of,  273 

—  Thriving  condition  of,  272 

—  Town  of,  272 

—  Trade  at,  278 

—  Uninviting  quarters  in,  271 

—  Visiting  in,  272 

—  and  Aulie-Ata,  Stations  between,  353 
Villages  in  Turkistan.  Number  of,  399 

—  near  Altyn-Immel,  187 

—  on  the  Upper  Oxus,  ii.  202 
Vishnu  pictures  at  Khokand,  ii.  100 
Vodka  distilleries  in  Turkistan,  607 
Volcanoes  (supposed)  in  Thian  Shan.  156 
Volga,  Mennonites  of  the,  ii.  350 
Voting  by  ballot  among  Kirghese,  349 

Wa(;es  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  235 

—  in  Tashkend,  461 
Wairabad,  Minerals  near,  ii.  141 
Walls  in  Central  Asia.  ii.  124 

—  of  Aulie-Ata,  ii.  124 

Bokhara,  ii.  124 

Etchmiadzin,  ii.  124 


GENERAL  INDEX. 


n^ 


Walls  of  Khiva,  ii.  305 

Khokand,  524 

Suidun,  259 

Tashkend.  423 

Wandering  Tashkend  ians.  357 

Wanderings  of  the  Kirghese,  319 

War  expenses  of  Khan  of  Khiva,  ii.271 

—  with  Khokandians,  298 
Watch-towers  of  the  Turkomans,  ii.  452 
Water  distillation,  Krasnovodsk,  ii.  495 

—  in  Turkmenia.  Lack  of.  ii.  438 

—  of  Bokhara,  ii.  149 
Weapons  of  the  Kirghese.  313 
Weariness  of  desert  travelling,  ii.  423 
Weather  at  Petro-Alexandrovsk,  ii.  233 
Weavers  of  Samarkand,  606 
Weaving  in  Bokhara,  ii.  144 
Wedding  ceremonies   in    Central  Asia, 

ii-  353 

—  ceremony  of  the  Kirghese,  326 

—  festivities  among  the  Kirghese,  327 
Weights  and  Measures,  Bokhara,  ii.  36 

of  Central  Asia,  682,  ii.  285 

Well  of  Demerdjan,  ii.  429 

Seikiz  Khan,  ii.  421 

Uzun  Kuyu,  ii.  410 

Wells  at  Ak-bugut,  ii.  391 

—  of  Igda,  ii.  407 

Karategin,  ii.  379 

Kazakhli,  ii.  416 

Kum-sebshem,  ii.  417,  419 

Sary  Kamish,  ii.  394 

Suili,  ii.  431 

White  asses  at  Bokhara,  ii.  163 
Wild  Animals  of  Khiva,  ii.  269 

—  boar  at  Porsu,  ii.  426 

—  hens  in  the  desert,  ii.  422 
Wine-cellars  in  Turkistan,  607 
Winter  in  Tukmenia,  ii.  440 

—  palace  at  Khiva,  ii.  306 
of  Khan,  ii.  281 

—  Preparing  for,  ii.  233 

Wives  of  Emir  of  Bokhara,  ii.  156,  355 

the  Kirghese,  340 

Wolf-hunting  by  Kirghese,  ii.  211 

—  scare  on  the  Amu,  ii.  217 
Wolff,  Dr.,  at  Merv,  ii.  457 
Bravery  of,  ii.  77 

Perils  of,  in  Bokhara,  ii.  77 

Return  of,  to  England,  ii.  77 

Wolves  among  sheep  at  Kabakhli,  ii.  210 

Women  of  Turkmenia,  ii.  448 

Wood,  Lieut.,  explorer  of  Oxus,  ii.  193 

Work,  Carlyle  on,  4 

Worms  of  Turkistan,  ii.  615 

Woven  products  of  Samarkand.  606 

Yakoob  as  interpreter,  ii.  3. 
Yamyshef  lake,  Ru.ssian  fortress  at,  127 


Yelenktosh,  College  of,  ii.  72 
Yemstchik,  Accident  to,  363 
Yermak,  Conquests  of,  121,  402 

—  Death  of,  122 

Yomuds  of  the  Khivan  Khanate,  ii.  337 

Turkmenia,  ii.  444 

'  Yuldus  sheep,  jVL  Alpheraky  on,  247 

Zaisan  neighbourhood.  Geology  of,  91 
!  —  —  Mineral  springs  in,  92 
I Public  corn  stores  in,  316 

—  lake,  89 

! Chinese  junks  on.  131 

Fauna  of  banks,  91 

Fish  in,  90 

Fisheries  on,  91 

Zangs  among  the  Kalmuks,  215 

—  Duties  of,  217 
Zarafshan  oasis.  End  of,  ii.  164 

—  province.  533 

—  —  Aborigines  of,  541 

Afghans  of,  544 

Agriculture  of,  608 

Arabs  of,  544 

Area  of,  42 

—  —  Cattle  in,  545 

—  —  Crops  of,  545,  608 

—  -  Definition  of,  534 

Dimensions  of,  533 

Divisions  of,  537 

Education  in,  600 

Epidemics  in,  538 

Ethnology  of.  541 

Ferns  of,  609 

Flora  of,  557 

Galtchas  of,  541 

Gipsies  of,  543 

Hissar  range,  535 

Inhabitants  of,  544 

Irrigation  of,  536 

Iskander-Kul  lake,  535 

Kohistan  district,  537 

Leprosy  in.  538 

—  -  Miankal  island,  535 

Mountains  of,  533 

Plants  of  557 

■ Population  of,  42,  544 

Public-houses  in,  607 

Roads  of,  545 

Sheep  in,  545 

Soil  of,  608 

Statistics  of,  544 

Sycamore  forests  in,  608 

Tajiks  of,  541 

Towns  of,  398.  545 

j  —  —  Trees  of,  608 

i Turkistan  range,  534 

—  river,  534 

. Affluents  of,  535 


12i^ 


RUSSIAN  CENTRAL  ASIA. 


Zarafshan  river,  Bridges  of,  535 

Canals  of,  535 

End  of,  ii.  169 

Fish  of,  ii.  510 

Fording  of,  559 

Source  of.  534 

Zenana  work,  Need  of,  ii.  356 


Zerbulak,  Bokhariot  rout  at,  625 

Zindan  prison  at  Bokhara,  ii.  153 

Zmukshir,  Fortress  of,  ii.  332 

—  vSkobeleff  at,  ii.  332 

Zones,  Climatic,  of  Turkistan,  375 

Zoology  of  Turkistan,  415 

Fedchenko,  M.,  on,  ii.  506 


THE    END. 


^^ 


9c 


\> 


^ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


