:5 

«ati 

f 

)^ 

^sws^H 

M 

il 

^ 

1 

^SH^H 

, 

ll 

■R<! 

m.^^m 


>     ^ 


DR.    R.   L.    WALKER, 


>^     v^^     \'       '^    • 


rv^-'X  ^^\ 


Vv.X    ^^ 


^ 


\.^ 


^x 


^^v  ^ 


^^T^  ^^N 


.-^^e  \c^\V 


■^^,  V^  x. 


'^  "  ,  l^ 


A I  --^^ 


nv-^>:^. 


^r 


v; 

\\ 

\ 

■     ^^\^      ^ 

vX  V 

'   N 

^^ 

v^^ 

•^^ 

^  M 


V'^>»' 


v- 


^^ 


.\ 


vVv^S\\ 


N  v:^\ 


-V^ 


^ 


^^^^ 


X 


%    ^X 


\ 


\ 


.>sS.. 


Xs^ 


.>^^d 


"S*c^ 


V  >XyV 


cx' 


'¥ 


J 


V 


THROUGH    THE    HIGHLANDS 
OF    SIBERIA 


i 


THE    SACRED    GATE   OP'    THE    KREMLIN,    MO^iCOW, 
FROM    THE    INTERIOR 


THROUGH    THE    HIGHLANDS 


OF 


SIBERIA 


MAJOR    H.   G.   C.   SWAYNE,   R.E. 

F.R.G.S.,  F.Z.S. 

AUTHOR   OK    "seventeen   TRIPS   TO   SOMALILAND" 


WITH  60   ILLUSTRATIONS 
AND  MAP 


LONDON 

ROWLAND   WARD,   limited 

1 66,   PICCADILLY 
1904 

All  rights  rescn'id 


6^ 


LIBRARY 
.  UNIVERSITY  OF  CATJFORNIA 

'^  SANTA  BARBARA 


'^  Do  you  know  the  zuorld^s  wJiitc  roof -tree — do  you  knotu  that  windy  rift 

Where  the  baffling  7nountain-eddies  chop  a?id  change  ? 
Do  yon  know  the  long  day's  patic/!ce,  belly -down  on  frozen  drifts 

While  the  head  of  heads  is  feeding  out  of  range  ? 
It  is  tlieir  that  I  am  goings  where  the  boulders  and  the  snow  lie, 

With  a  trusty,  nimble  tracker  that  I  knozi'. 
I  liable  sworn  an  oath,  to  keep  it  on  the  Horns  of  Ovis  Poll, 

And  the  Red  Gods  call  me  out  and  I  must  go.'^ 

RuDYARD  Kipling. 


PREFACE 

THE  picture  of  brown  volcanic  rocks,  blue  sea, 
and  yellow  sand,  which  is  before  me  at  the 
moment  of  writing,  makes  a  crisp  contrast  with  that 
of  three  months  ago,  when  my  pony's  feet  brushed 
through  steppe  flowers,  and  the  horizon  was  bounded 
by  snowy  peaks  in  the  heart  of  a  continent.  This 
is  one  of  the  advantaoes  of  beinof  born  in  the  nine- 
teenth  century.  That  most  conscientious  and  greatest 
of  travellers,  Marco  Polo,  beside  whom  we  of  to-day 
are  mere  Brighton  trippers,  must,  by  the  time  he 
reached  Central  Asia,  have  carried  in  his  mind  only 
an  imperfect  recollection  of  the  lights  and  music,  and 
gondola  prows,  and  dancing  water  of  the  Queen  of 
Cities. 

A  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  get  away  to  a  bit  of  wild 
nature,  away  from  the  sameness  and  sometimes  vul- 
garity of  our  modern  civilisation,  to  the  long  green 
slopes  which  lead  to  virgin  snow-peaks,  in  a  high 
borderland  possessing  such  a  rugged  form  and  such 
a  winter  climate  that  it  will  ever  be  independent  of 
man  ;  where,  in  summer,  flowers  that  will  never  be 
picked  for  the  market,  following  the  tasteful  arrange- 
ment of  perfect  Nature,  bloom  in  greater  variety  and 
wealth  of  colour  than  anywhere  else  in  the  world. 
The  pleasantness  of  it  all,  and  the  fact  that  the  leisure 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


was  earned,  must  be  my  excuse  for  going  so  far  to 
follow  the  poetry  of  sport. 

To  see  scenery  and  get  trophies  and  do  photographs 
is  to  follow  a  primitive  instinct.  We  do  not  change 
oLir  natures  much  in  spite  of  a  veneer  of  culture,  and 
it  is  only  the  story  of  the  cave-dwellers  and  the 
scratchings  on  the  reindeer  bone,  told  over  again 
under  easier  conditions  with  the  rifle  and  the  camera. 

Ras  Tarshyne,  Aden, 
1th  November,   1903. 


Introductory 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    I 


In  Petersburg 


CHAPTER   II 


U 


Moscow 


CHAPTER    III 


To  Siberia 


CHAPTER   IV 


40 


On  the  Obi  River 


CHAPTER  V 


•      63 


CHAPTER   VI 
The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


.      83 


CHAPTER   VII 

The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


106 


CHAPTER   VIII 


First  Success 


CHAPTER    IX 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


157 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


CHAPTER  X 

Homeward 


APPENDIX:   On  Fitting  out  for  Mongolia    .  .        .    235 


INDEX  .  ,  .  .  ...    257 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

{ChieJJy  from  photographs  by  the  Author) 

Sacred  Gate  of  the  Kremlin,  Moscow,  from  the  Interior. 

Fishing  Boats  at  Reval 

Church  on  the  Hill,  Reval 

A  Russian  Cab-driver 

Telega,  or  Russian  Country  Cart 

Troikas,  or  Three-horsed  Carts 

The  Kremlin  Wall  from  across  the  River 

The  Priest  at  Kosh-Agatch 

Bell  Tower  in  the  Kremlin 

The  Kremlin  from  the  River 

Russian  Settlers  at  Kosh-Agatch 

Russian  Settlers 

A  Typical  Russian  Settler's  House,  and  Kalmuk  Driver 

Russian  Settler 

Russian  Children  at  Kosh-Agatch 

Kalmuk  Ponies 

Firewood  Station  on  the  Banks  of  the  Obi 

Crowd  at  the  Gangway,  Obi  River 

Timber  Rafts  on  the  Obi  River 

On  the  Upper  Chuya 

Our  Tarantass,  near  Tenginsky  Lake 

Ferry  on  the  Katun 

From  our  Halting-place,  Tenginsky  Lake 

The  Main  Street  of  Ongudai 

Felt  "  Yurta"  used  by  Kirghiz  and  Kalmuks 

Kalmuk  Hut  and  Snow  Mountains,  Kurai 

A  Vaccinator  going  to  Mongolia 

Peasant  Builders  at  Kurai 

Cook-house  to  Posting  Stage,  Kouaktenar 

Kalmuk  Hunter,  Powar 

A  Kalmuk  Driver 

xiii 


i'AOE 

Frontispiece 
15 
17 
21 

23 
25 
31 

35 
■hi 
43 
47 
51 
55 
57 
61 

65 
73 
77 
84 
83 
87 
91 
95 
97 
98 
99 

lOI 

103 
107 
II I 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Kalmuk  Driver  and  Pony 

Our  Kalmuk  Cook,  Yembai,  in  Camp  at  Tarkuta 

Siberian  Argali  {Oz'i's  amDioii) 

Mongol  Shepherd 

Ibex  Ground,  Mongolia     . 

Typical  Ibex  Ground,  Mongolia 

Kalmuks  and  Pony 

Kalmuk  Boy,  and  a  Kalmuk  Cowboy 

Our  Camp  in  Lake  Valley,  Mongolia 

Hunter  Powar  and  Trophies 

Siberian  Wapiti  {Ccfvus  canadeiisis  asiaiiciis) 

Derelict  Ovis  amnion  Skull  photographed,  as   it  was   found, 

Ravine 

Hills,  at  the  base  of  which  150  Skulls  were  found.  Lake  \'alle 
Skeleton  of  Ovis  mnmon^  killed  by  Wolves,  as  it  lay 
In  the  Tarkuta  Pass 
Kirghiz  Camel 
A  Kirghiz 

Wild  Flowers  on  the  Siberian  Altai 
On  the  Chuya    . 

Alpine  Pastoral  Scene,  near  the  Chuya 
On  the  Chuya 

Rocks  fallen  from  Denuded  Cliffs,  Aigulak 
In  the  Forest,  Kouaktenar 
River  Terrace,  Chuya 
Matai,  a  Russianised  Kalmuk 

The  Upper  Chuya,  near  Aigulak  (looking  down-stream) 
Terraces  on  the  Chuya,  near  its  junction  with  the  Katun 
On  the  Chuya,  near  the  junction  with  the  Katun 
':^\hmd.\\^o&  {Capi-eoliis  pygargits) 
Bridge  of  Boats  at  Nijni-Novgorod 

Plan  of  Stalks    ..... 
Map    ...... 


PAGR 

137 
139 

149 

163 
173 

185 
186 
187 
189 
191 
192 
193 
195 
199 
201 
205 
209 
213 

217 

2  21 

225 
229 
233 

.  114 

At  end 


THROUGH   THE    HIGHLANDS 

OF 

SIBERIA 


CHAPTER    I 
INTRODUCTORY 

TWENTY  years  ago,  at  Aden,  there  hung,  decorat- 
ing the  whitewashed  walls  of  a  friend's  bungalow, 
some  fine  skulls  of  the  Tibetan  wild  sheep  {Ovis 
amnion  Jiodgsoni). 

This  friend  was  then  the  champion  rifle-shot  of 
India  ;  and  about  that  time  I  was  greatly  interested 
by  reading  of  the  habits  and  powers  of  this  most 
wary  animal. 

In  the  mess  library  was  to  be  found  General  Kin- 
loch's  book  on  the  large  game  of  Kashmir  and  Tibet, 
in  which  this  great  Tibetan  argali  is  fully  described. 
It  was  considered,  in   India,  in  those  days  of  highly 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

curved  trajectories  and  short  ranges,  that  to  have 
bagged  this  sheep  was  to  have  gained  the  "blue 
ribbon  "  of  practical   rifle-shooting. 

The  haunts  and  habits  of  the  true  Ovis  aiuDiou,  or 
Siberian  an>"ali,  are  much  like  those  of  Ovis  aiiinion 
hodgsoni.  There  are  the  same  rounded  hills ;  the 
same  keen,  cold  wind  ;  the  constant  and  unexpected 
shifting  of  quarters  of  the  flock,  maddening  to  the 
sportsman,  and  spoiling  many  a  careful  stalk ;  the 
wonderful  cleverness  of  the  rams  in  choosing  positions 
which  afford  a  clear  view  of  miles  of  ground  ;  these 
conditions  are  all  repeated  in  the  case  of  the  Siberian 
arorali. 

These  sheep  show  a  good  practical  knowledge  of 
tactics.  There  is  an  instinct,  another  sense  unknown 
to  man,  possessed  by  wild  game  ;  and  were  I  on  a 
committee  for  choosing  a  site  for  a  defensible  post,  I 
should  be  proud  to  have  half  the  gift  for  utilising  folds 
of  the  hills  and  looking  into  dead  ground,  that  is 
vouchsafed  by  Nature  to  an  old  Ovis  ammon  ram ! 

The  rams  have  a  trick  of  lying  up  for  a  few  hours 
during  the  day  close  to  a  commanding  hill-top,  but 
not  actually  on  the  summit,  which  would  expose  them 
too  much  to  the  bitter  wind  and  advertise  their 
presence  for  miles.  They  prefer  to  lie  below  the 
brow,  their  colour  harmonising  with  the  ground,  look- 

2 


Introductory 

ing  ever  restlessly  to  front  and  flanks  over  a  perfect 
glacis  of  short  grass,  every  saddle  and  spur  and  de- 
pression commanded  by  their  wonderfully  accurate  and 
lone  sio-ht ;  while  as  to  the  risin"-  hill  behind  them, 
beyond  which  they  cannot  see,  they  manage  to  have 
the  wind  blowing  over  it  down  on  to  their  backs,  and 
their  keen  sense  of  smell  secures  them  in  that  quarter. 
Their  tactics  are  like  those  of  a  general  who,  with  his 
men  in  khaki  below  the  skyline,  posts  a  picquet  on  the 
hill  behind  him  to  guard  the  unseen  ground  ;  but  their 
sense  of  smell  stands  for  the  eyes  of  the  sentries. 
Their  arrangements  are  generally  perfect  when 
resting.  But  when  they  begin  to  graze  away  to 
another  position,  the  ground  they  have  to  pass  over 
may  give  them  away ;  and  herein  lies  the  hunter's 
opportunity. 

The  persecution  by  wolves,  from  immemorial  ages, 
has  made  the  wild  sheep  the  clever  tactician  he  is,  for 
he  no  doubt  requires  a  start  of  a  mile  or  more  from 
this  kind  of  enemy. 

Since  the  time  of  first  making  acquaintance  with 
sheep -trophies,  the  fact  of  having  had  pioneering 
duties  in  Somaliland,  and  the  short  periods  of  leisure 
in  a  continuous  Eastern  service,  have  given  me  oppor- 
tunities now  and  then  of  following  game  ;  but  during 
all  these  years   I  had  looked  upon  the   Ovis  avimon, 

3 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

living  in  the  Chang-  Chenmo  valley  of  Tibet,  as 
beyond  the  stretch  of  my  tether.  A  journey  in  1896 
after  ibex  in  Ladak  fell  far  short  of  amvion  ground, 
and  wild  sheep  in  those  regions  must  be  ever  becoming 
scarcer  and  more  difficult. 

When,  however,  the  Badminton  volumes  appeared, 
Mr.  Littledale's  expeditions  after  Marco  Polo's  sheep, 
and  later  Major  Cumberland's  book,  Spor't  on  the 
Pamirs  and  Turkestan  Steppes,  began  to  attract 
attention  to  the  fine  wild-sheep  grounds  of  Central 
Asia. 

A  perusal  of  Mr.  Rowland  Ward's  Records  of  Big 
Game  and  the  photographs,  therein  shown,  of  the 
Siberian  argali,   further  interested  me. 

The  new  year  of  1902  found  me,  after  another  spell 
of  over  five  years  of  service  in  the  plains  of  India,  in 
failing  health,  with  a  year's  furlough  to  my  credit,  and 
lookinor  out  for  a  summer  climate  more  bracino-  than 
that  of  England.  Just  then  the  perusal  of  an  article 
in  Outing  magazine,  describing  sport  in  Southern 
Siberia,   decided  me  to  go  there. 

Prince  Demidoff's  After  U^ild  Sheep  in  the  Altai 
told  me  all  there  was  to  be  known  about  the  Siberian 
argali,  which  carries  far  finer  horns  than  those  of 
the  Tibetan  race  ;  and  which  is  quite  equal,  in  my 
opinion,  to  the   Ovis  poli  as  a  trophy.      Mr.   Phraser's 

4 


Introductory 

The  Real  Siberia  gave  me  important  information  with 
regard  to  the  Siberian  Railway. 

It  seemed  probable  that  three  weeks  on  the  ground 
would  give  me  four  or  five  trophies,  which  were  all 
that  were  required.  I  knew  no  Russian  and  was  a 
stranger  to  Russia;  so  before  starting,  took  some 
lessons,  which  later  proved  invaluable  in  my  broken 
intercourse  with  the  Kalmuk  followers  in  camp,  who 
themselves  knew  a  few  Russian  phrases  and  words. 
Much  less  French  is  spoken  now,  I  should  say,  than 
German. 

Two  or  three  months  before  the  start,  Mr.  H.  W. 
Seton  Karr,  an  old  friend,  and  an  experienced 
sportsman  and  traveller,  agreed  to  join  me.  He 
is  the  author  of  several  books  of  travel,  and  is 
well  known  as  a  collector  of  valuable  prehistoric 
implements. 

I  was  fortunate  in  getting  a  private  introduction  to 
Mr.  J.  O.  Cattley,  a  gentleman  of  long  Siberian 
experience,  and  the  head  of  the  only  British  firm  in 
Novo  Nicholaewsk  (Ob  station),  our  point  of  de- 
parture from  the  Siberian  Railway.  This  introduction 
proved  of  the  greatest  service  to  me,  as  Mr.  Cattley 
allowed  his  sons,  who  were  anxious  to  travel,  to 
come  with  us  and  ^ive  us  the  benefit  of  their  local 
experience. 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

In  the  course  of  my  inquiries  it  transpired  that 
wapiti  stags  {Cei-vus  cmiadcnsis  asiaticus)  are  no 
lono^er  shot  on  the  Russian  side,  there  bein^r  a 
Government  prohibition,  designed,  no  doubt,  to  save 
the  few  which  the  destructive  trade  in  horns  with 
China  has  left  surviving.  On  the  Mongolian  side  the 
maral,  as  it  is  called  by  the  natives,  is  rare,  and  though 
we  saw  bleached  horns,  there  were  no  signs  of  the  living 
animal  in  the  passes  we  crossed.  They  come  sometimes 
in  winter  to  the  Tarkuta  Pass  ;  and  there  we  found 
the  skeleton  of  a  fine  old  stasf  with  his  horns  sawn 
off,  killed  last  winter.  He  had  been  caught  alive  in 
the  snow  for  a  maralnik,  or  enclosed  park,  where  the 
animals  are  kept  tame,  and  the  horns  are  annually 
sawn  off  while  in  the  velvet.  This  stao-  had  fallen 
ill  and  died  at  once  under  the  captivity,  and  therefore 
his  horns  had  been  sawn  off  and  the  carcase  left  in 
the  pass.  The  Chinese  say  that  if  the  Russians 
knew  how  to  make  the  prized  drug  from  the  maral 
horns,  there  would  be  no  more  sellinij  of  them  to  the 
Chinese,  as  the  Russians  would  m.ake  the  medicine 
themselves. 

The  Siberian  roebuck  is  ijettinCT  rather  rare  in  the 
forests  on  the  Russian  side,  and  we  did  not  expect  to 
have  time  to  oo  after  this  covert-lovino-  o-ame.  As  it 
turned  out,  in  our  huntino-o-round  on  the  Mongolian 

6 


Introductory 

side  there  was  no  vestige  of  a  tree  or  bush,  so  there 
were  no  roebuck. 

The  ibex  were  said  to  carry  moderate  horns  ; 
Demidoff's  ibex  trophies  measuring,  so  far  as  my 
memory  serves  me,  about  thirty-eight  inches.  These, 
we  afterwards  found,  exist  everywhere,  both  on  the 
Siberian  and  Mongolian  side,  wherever  the  rounded 
wild-sheep  hills  break  into  steep  rocks  suitable  to 
ibex.  They  are  plentiful,  in  places,  close  to  the 
Chuisky  Tract,  especially  near  Kouaktenar.  The 
longest  horns  seen  looked,  on  the  living  animal,  as 
if  they  would  tape  to  forty-two  inches.  These  ibex 
seem  to  carry  nothing  like  the  splendid  horns  of  the 
Turkestan  specimens. 

The  trip,  therefore,  was  to  have  as  its  objective  the 
sheep  only  ;  nor  did  we  expect  to  get  anything  else, 
and  we  hoped  to  be  back  in  London  within  three 
months  of  leavino-  Mill  wall  Dock.  In  the  event, 
my  own  absence  ran  into  three  months  and  one 
day. 

An  account  of  my  preliminary  difficulties  may  be 
instructive  to  Anglo- Indians. 

On  a  short  preliminary  "  privilege  leave "  of  two 
months,  in  May,  1902,  I  began  to  collect  information  ; 
and  should  mention  that  Messrs.  Thomas  Cook  and 
Son,    though   they   have   no   tourist  agency  office   in 

7 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Russia,  were  able  to  give  me  some  valuable  help. 
August  found  me  back  in  India  applying  to  the 
Government  of  India  in  the  Foreign  Department  for 
passports  for  Russia,  Russia  in  Asia,  and  Chinese 
Mongolia,  to  go  there  in  June,  July,  and  August, 
1903.  A  hundred  things  might  have  interfered  to 
prevent  my  journey,  but  at  last,  in  December,  1902, 
I  was  home  on  a  year's  furlough,  three  months  of 
which  were  to  be  devoted  to  Siberia. 

To  show  the  chances  against  my  long-planned  trip, 
an  opportunity  came  in  the  last  fortnight  of  going 
out  with  the  columns  operating  in  Somaliland ;  but 
this  the  indifferent  state  of  my  health  did  not  permit 
my  doing. 

I  have  been  asked  whether  this  would  be  a  good 
trip  for  a  lady  to  take. 

My  wife  decided  to  accompany  me  to  Moscow,  but 
no  further ;  and  my  experience  has  since  confirmed 
the  wisdom  of  this,  for  the  accommodation  in  the 
peasants'  houses,  which  are  the  changing  stations,  is 
very  rough,  and  the  muddy  yards  in  these  villages  are 
not  suitable  for  camping. 

During  the  three  weeks  spent  in  Mongolia  with  a 
pack-pony  caravan,  we  might  have  camped  on  the 
hills  in  civilised  fashion  just  as  easily  as  we  have 
already  done  in  the  Central  Provinces  of  India  ;  but 


Introductory 

the  expense  and  delay  which  would  have  been  in- 
volved in  brinofino-  up  full-sized  Cabul  tents  all  the 
way  from  Bisk  by  tarantass  would  have  been  too 
much  for  my  slender  resources.  As  the  route  exists 
at  present,  the  journey  can  only  be  done  under  condi- 
tions which  few  ladies  would  care  to  face.  We  both 
deeply  regretted  this,  for  the  grand  scenery  and  dis- 
plays of  wild  flowers,  unsurpassed  probably  in  the 
world,  would  have  been  a  keen  pleasure  to  my  wife, 
or  to  any  lady.  The  country,  moreover,  is  perfectly 
safe. 

Major  Cumberland  seems  to  have  been  the  first 
pioneer,  at  least  among"  British  sportsmen,  in  this 
huntinof  -  around  ;  but  now  "an  EnMishman  ooino- 
after  kotchkor  "  is  looked  upon  by  the  peasant  settler 
as  an  accepted  natural  phenomenon  ;  and  the  lining 
of  his  pockets  is  beginning  to  tingle.  Few  Russians, 
it  is  said,  come  here  to  shoot. 

In  this  journey  I  have  only  followed  in  the  foot- 
steps of  Major  Cumberland,  Messrs.  Littledale  and 
Van  der  Byl  (who  were  both  kind  enough  to  give 
me  information),  and  a  few  successors  ;  but  I  look  on 
my  modest  travels,  undertaken  with  scanty  resources, 
as  a  distant  extension  of  Himalayan  shooting;  and 
therefore  how  to  get  there,  and  how  much  it  costs, 
seem  likely  to  be  of  interest  to  Anglo-Indians. 

C  Q 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Where  I  have  expressed  any  opinions,  political  or 
otherwise,  I  have  done  so  in  a  humble  spirit,  intend- 
ing" them  to  be  taken  merely  as  first  impressions, 
somewhat  qualified  by  over  twenty  years  of  service 
in  the  East. 

With  regard  to  the  shooting,  the  Kalmuks  have 
begun  to  go  after  the  wild  sheep  ;  and  it  is  much 
better  that  reasonable  white  men,  who  are  genuine 
sportsmen,  should  have  a  chance  of  seeking  health 
and  recreation  in  these  beautiful  regions,  than  that 
the  game  should  be  exterminated  by  the  natives, 
who  shoot  for  meat,  act  as  purveyors  of  wounded 
game  to  the  wolves,  and  leave  the  grand  heads  to  rot 
on  the  ground. 

An  agent  of  Mr.  Hagenbeck,  we  heard,  was  trying 
to  capture  them  alive  ;  and  one  cannot  help  wishing 
him  every  success,  for  this  stately  animal  should  prove 
a  great  attraction  when  he  can  be  sent  to  Europe. 
There  was  formerly  a  big  ram  at  Regent's  Park 
Zoological  Gardens,  so  a  keeper  told  me,  but  whether 
he  belonged  to  the  true  Ovis  amnion  I  do  not  know. 

The  oftener  real  sportsmen  are  permitted  to  visit 
Siberia,  the  better  it  will  be  for  the  game  ;  it  means 
ventilation  of  the  matter,  and  probable  restrictions  by 
the  Russian  Government  on  the  operations  of  the 
Kalmuks,    who    enter    the    sheep  -  ground    from    the 


Introductory- 
Russian  side.  The  ground  can  probably  never  be  a 
proper  reserve,  in  the  African  sense,  for  it  is  almost 
too  late  to  begin  in  Siberia ;  and  as  for  the  Mongolian 
side,  the  Chinese  Government  is  not  likely  to  find  it 
worth  while  to  police  such  a  remote  spot,  of  little 
value,  and  covered  with  snow,  as  it  is,  for  nine  months 
of  the  year. 

So  while  the  game  is  still  plentiful,  I  give  my 
experience,  from  an  Anglo-Indian  point  of  view,  for 
the  benefit  of  others.  I  am  convinced  that  there  are 
many  men,  even  in  India,  with  sufficient  means,  and 
occasional  periods  of  well-earned  leisure,  not  only 
to  take  them  to  sheep  ground,  but  also  to  enable 
them  to  dip  farther  into  Northern  Mongolia,  where 
there  are  unknown  hunting-grounds. 

Besides  the  peculiar  interest  of  sport,  there  is 
alpine  scenery  of  the  very  best  to  be  found  on  such 
a  journey. 

The  "  Chuisky  Tract "  was  completed  for  wheeled 
traffic  just  as  I  returned  from  Siberia.  This  is  the 
tarantass  road  from  Ongudai,  in  the  Altai  Mountains, 
to  Kosh-Agatch,  the  last  Russian  post.  It  taps  a 
considerable  trade  in  Chinese  brick-tea,  wool,  and 
other  commodities,  and  enables  officials  to  get  to 
the  Mongolian  frontier.  It  will  make  sport  in  Mon- 
Q-olia  easier  ;   for  whenever,   later,   it  shall  have  been 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

constituted  a  regular  post-road,  with  a  proper  tariff  of 
prices  for  non-ofhcials  and  an  adequate  supply  of 
vehicles  at  the  stages,  it  will  have  brought  the  frontier 
of  Chinese  Mongolia  within  ten  or  eleven  days  of  the 
Siberian  Railway  at  the  Ob,  or  well  within  three 
weeks  of  London. 

The  beautiful  Altai  district  itself,  through  which 
the  road  to  the  frontier  runs — a  road  the  private 
property  of  the  Czar  and  administered  by  officers  of 
the  Imperial  Cabinet — is  beginning  to  attract  Russian 
visitors  in  search  of  health  and  pleasure,  who  come 
from  the  larger  Siberian  towns  to  this  Asiatic  Switzer- 
land, and  who  find  the  Caucasus  and  the  ordinary 
health  resorts  of  Russia  impossible  owing  to  distance. 
They  can  be  found  picnicking  and  roughing  it  in 
peasants'  houses  in  Altaiskoe  and  other  villages  not 
too  far  from  Bisk.  All  Russians  speak  enthusiastically 
of  the  Altai. 

So  Siberia  advances  ;  and  Southern  Siberia,  at 
least,  has  rather  become  the  home  of  the  peasant 
settler  and  his  children,  living  among  farmyard  noises, 
than  the  convict-haunted  waste  which  we  used  to  hear 
about.  Everywhere  along  the  line  are  wooden  boom 
towns,  and  building  operations  going  on.  We  need 
not  even  pity  the  Siberiak  in  the  winter  ;  for  then, 
I  am  told,  is  the  lively  time,  when  the  perfect  snow- 


Introductory 

covered  tracks  jingle  with  sleigh-bells,  and  enormous 
distances  are  covered  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  and 
much  business  done. 

I  never  had  occasion  to  inspect  a  jail,  and  only  saw 
as  many  gangs  of  prisoners  at  railway  stations  as 
those  one  is  accustomed  to  meet,  under  police  escort, 
at  railway  stations  in  India. 


13 


CHAPTER   II 
IN   PETERSBURG 

ON  the  voyage  from  London  to  Petersburg, 
which  lasts  five  clays,  the  chief  points  of  interest 
are  the  Kiel  Canal,  and  later  on,  Reval,  an  old- 
fashioned  seaport  town,  with  clean  streets  and  a  fine 
church  with  golden  cupolas,  built  upon  a  hill. 

The  muddy  wharf  and  custom-house  at  Petersburg 
in  early  June  were  a  bad  introduction  to  Russia.  We 
— my  wife  and  I — landed  late  from  the  steamer  Una, 
and  the  custom-house  officer  kept  most  of  my  baggage 
back,  telling  me  to  come  and  get  it  released  next  day. 

We  drove  for  an  hour  in  an  omnibus  over  cobble- 
stones and  mud,  by  canals  and  dock  basins,  in  a 
regular  English  drizzle,  till  we  reached  the  better  part 
of  the  city,  when  the  hideous  noise  of  stone  pave- 
ments left  us,  and  we  were  rolling  over  strips  of 
asphalte  to  the  Hotel  de  France. 

It  will  be  difficult  for  me  to  forget  the  6th  June, 
spent  in  the  custom-house.  From  early  morn  till  late 
evening  my  baggage  was  handled,  weighed,  opened, 

14 


Petersburg 

and  carted  about  the  docks  from  one  shed  to  another. 
There  were  a  number  of  officials  to  see,  with  endless 


f-css^^sig 


-^  I 


CHURCH   ON   THE    HILL,    REVAL 


formalities ;  and  many  hours  to  spend  sitting  on 
benches  in  the  passages.  At  about  three  an  English- 
man going  past  looked  on  me  with  a  pitying  eye  and 

D  17 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

said,  "  You'll  find  these  people  don't  know  the  value 
of  time." 

It  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  on  this  subject  further 
than  to  say,  that  although  my  guns  and  ammunition 
and  camera  were  exempted  from  duty  owing  to  my 
trip  being  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of  sport,  yet 
the  worn  Indian  tents,  worth  fifteen  pounds,  and  a 
three-guinea  saddle,  fifteen  years  old,  were  picked  out 
for  levy  of  duty  ;  the  charge  being  forty  roubles,  or 
over  four  pounds,  for  the  saddle,  and  about  fifteen 
pounds  for  the  tents,  which  scaled  about  three  hundred- 
weight, and  were  charged  by  weight.  English  tinned 
stores  got  off  well,  as  I  paid  four  pounds  on  thirteen 
pounds'  worth  of  fresh  stores  bought  in  London. 

They  gave  me  to  understand  that  if  the  tents  and 
saddle  were  brought  back  from  Siberia  intact,  it  would 
be  possible  to  recover  the  money  ;  but  afterwards,  on 
inquiring  from  residents,  it  turned  out  that  it  would 
have  required  a  stay  of  five  days  in  Petersburg  on 
the  return  journey,  costing,  with  an  interpreter  and 
hotel  expenses,  nine  pounds.  Further,  the  return 
freight  from  Siberia  would  expand  this  and  bring  the 
cost  of  recovery  above  the  sum  to  be  recovered.  I 
therefore  declined  to  repeat  my  custom-house  experi- 
ence on  coming  home,  and  threw  away  most  of  the 
tents  and  the  saddle  in  Siberia. 


Petersburg 

Once  free  of  the  custom-house,  we  got  on  better. 
A  finer  or  more  lively  street  than  the  long-  and  straight 
Nevsky  Prospekt  (the  Regent  Street  of  Petersburg) 
I  have  not  seen  anywhere.  There  was  a  brightness 
and  variety,  and  an  absence  of  formality  we  do  not  see 
at  home.  The  city  was  full,  as  the  festivities  in  honour 
of  Peter  the  Great  had  taken  place  only  a  week 
before. 

The  wide  street  shows  off  the  cabs  and  private 
carriages  and  the  beautiful  Russian  horses,  with  their 
small,  shapely,  Arab-like  heads,  to  the  best  advantage. 
The  horses  trot  at  full  speed  in  a  business-like  way, 
and  are  without  vice.  The  hiofh  and  massive  wooden 
hoop,  rising  over  the  head  of  the  shaft-horse  and 
joining  the  shafts  together,  thereby  reducing  vibration, 
is  hunof  with  tinkling  bells  which  have  a  cheerful 
sound.  A  very  fat  Isvoshchick  sits  behind  with  a  hat 
which  has  not  changed  since  the  low  curly-brimmed 
silk  top  hat  of  a  hundred  years  ago — to  be  seen  now 
in  old  curiosity  shops  in  England  ;  and  there  is  some- 
thing in  its  shape  which  seems  to  mark  it  as  the 
missing  link  between  our  modern  "topper"  and  the 
white  flat-topped  Russian  military  cap. 

This  coachman  carries  on  his  large  fat  shoulders 
and  stomach  a  mass  of  wadding,  under  a  neat  dark- 
blue  or  green  frock-coat  of  smooth  livery  cloth.      The 

19 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


nian  seems  a  ball  of  waddino- ;  and  he  looks  so  burly 
that  you  are  surprised  at  the  falsetto  voice  and  the 
little  bubbling"  sound  which  issues  from  his  lips  when 
he  wants  the  horse  to  stop,  and  is  instantly  obeyed 
by  the  sensible  beast. 

In  the  Nevsky,  officers  in  neat,  very  long,  light-grey 
overcoats  parade  the  streets  a  good  deal,  sauntering 
slowly  up  and  down,  or  stand  in  groups  talking.  This 
light  grey  must  be  far  more  visible  than  khaki  on  the 
veldt,  but  it  must  be  good  on  snow.  The  large  number 
of  uniforms  seen  among  civilians  is  extraordinary  ;  for 
instance,  professors  of  the  Tomsk,  I  am  told,  wear 
a  uniform  ;  telegraph  officials  have  uniforms  and 
swords  ;  and  later  on,  on  the  Obi  River,  were  to  be 
seen  what  appeared  to  be  an  admiral  and  a  com- 
mander pacing  the  bridge-deck  of  our  steamer.  The 
sea-roll  was  conspicuously  absent,  but  the  uniform  was 
there,  and  it  seemed  quite  accurate  in  every  particular. 
On  inquiry  it  transpired  they  were  a  judge  on  circuit 
and  a  sub-judge ! 

While  speaking  of  telegraph  offices,  it  is  as  well  for 
the  stranger  to  note  that  here  and  in  all  other  public 
offices  there  is  a  portrait  of  the  Czar,  as  well  as  an 
"ikona,"  or  sacred  picture,  and  it  is  the  law  of  the 
land  that  hats  come  off  on  entering  the  room.  The 
practice  is  also  usual  in  shops.     As  you  drive  under 


Petersburg 

the  sacred  gate  into  the  KremHn,  the  walled  citadel 
of  Moscow,  a  neglect  to  uncover,  even  through 
iiinorance  or  carelessness,  will  oive  rise  to  trouble  if 


A    RUSSIAN    CAB-DRIVER 


there  is  anyone  near.  In  hotels,  and  even  the  roughest 
peasants'  houses,  there  is  always  the  ikon,  so  the  hat 
is  taken  off  on  entering  the  hall,  and  is  kept  off 
in   a  hotel   dinincr-room.      Reli^'ious   observances   are 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


constantly  before  the  eyes  of  the  visitor  to  Russia. 
People  cross  themselves  as  they  sit  clown  to  eat ;  and 
as  they  stand  at  a  railway  carriage  saying  good-bye 
to  their  friends,  they  cross  themselves  as  the  train 
begins  to  move  ;  in  the  public  streets  they  cross  them- 
selves passing  certain  spots,  where,  if  you  look,  you 
will  find  an  ikon. 

The  Russians,  like  the  British,  seem  to  be  the  result 
of  a  mixture  of  various  races.  If  there  is  anything  in 
the  theory  that  the  European  stock  came  originally 
from  Asia,  the  western  Europeans  must  have  left 
signs  of  their  language  in  the  country  they  passed 
through.  Here  in  Russia  one  perhaps  finds  the  rough 
factory  of  the  European  race,  and  all  the  chips  and 
shavino-s  from  tribes.  There  are  Russians  with  Kirghiz 
faces,  Russians  with  German  faces,  and  yet  others 
with  Turkish  faces.  I  saw  two  commissioned  officers 
in  the  Nevsky  talking  in  a  fashionable  group  who  had 
distinctly  Indian  faces.  They  were  probably  from 
Turkestan.  The  Russians  have  words  which  one 
recognises  at  once,  such  as  kolod,  cold  ;  gus,  a  goose  ; 
chai,  tea;  asel,  donkey;  sabun,  soap;  adamant,  diamond. 

To  going  a  long  round  of  public  buildings  under 
the  guidance  of  an  interpreter  I  have  a  particular 
objection. 

In    so    many    public   buildings  and   monuments   in 


Petersburg 

Europe,  and  notably  in  our  own  country,  there  is  a 
singular  uniformity  of  design.  There  are  those  massive 
box-like  structures  with  fluted  pillars  and  steps,  with 
straight  lines  dear  to  the  photographer  in  a  small  way, 
hieh  straight  columns,  and  chain-festooned  iron  rail- 


TELEGA,    OR    RUSSIAN    COUNTRY    CART 


ings.  I  may  be  wanting-  in  the  architectural  sense, 
but  only  a  few  public  structures  of  great  individuality 
appeal  to  me,  such  as  Westminster  Abbey,  the  Taj 
and  Fort  at  Agra,  the  Shway-Dagon  Pagoda,  the 
enclosure  wall  at  Mandalay,  and  the  wall  of  the 
Kremlin.     These    appeal    to    everyone,   and   perhaps 

23 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

more  strong-ly  to  those  who  have  no  general  taste  for 
municipal  bricks  and  mortar.  But  we  saw  the  \-arious 
buildino's  from  the  outside,  and  cut  short  the  un- 
fortunate  guide  many  times.  We  were  looking  at  the 
general  effects  of  colour  in  this  beautiful  city  of  wide 
spaces. 

Talking  of  the  Taj,  one  hears  a  good  deal  about 
a  thing  of  beauty  which  is  above  all  description  ;  but 
it  was  left  to  a  Frenchman,  whom  we  once  overheard 
talking  in  the  verandah  of  the  hotel  at  Agra,  to  say 
the  right  thing.  "What  a  woman,"  he  said,  "  to  have 
inspired  such  a  devotion  !  " 

We  went  into  one  very  large  church  with  high 
marble  pillars  on  a  Sunday  when  service  v/as  going 
on. 

There  was  a  large  crowd,  and  the  people  in  the 
portico  were  marshalled  by  officials  who  controlled 
the  exits. 

We  joined  one  of  these  processions,  and  found  our- 
selves inside  the  nave,  in  a  vast,  densely  packed 
crowd,  all  standing,  without  chairs.  The  congregation 
seemed  to  be  made  up  chiefly  of  peasants,  labourers, 
and  artisans.  The  demeanour  of  the  people  was 
serious,  and  all  were  constantly  making  the  sign  of 
the  cross  and  passing  up  tapers.  There  was  a  place 
for  the  issue  of  tapers  at  the  back  of  the  nave,  and 

24 


Petersburg 

these  were  continually  being  passed  forward  by  hand 
by  the  worshippers  to  the  chancel  where  the  priests 
officiated  in  their  robes.  A  man  or  woman  in  the 
congregation  would  tap  the  shoulders  of  the  person  in 


TROIKAS,   OR   THREE-HORSED   CARTS 

front  with  the  taper  and  it  was  at  once  passed  on. 
The  crowd  gave  one  the  impression  of  great  devotion 
and  earnestness. 

On  Sunday  afternoon  we  also  visited  the  Natural 
History  Museum  at  the  quay  on  the  Vassili  Ostrov, 
one  of  the  islands  overlookincr  the  Neva. 

o 
E  25 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


This  museum  contained  a  very  fine  collection.  The 
^lass  cases  illustrating  protective  colouring  in  animals 
and  birds  were  excellent,  and  so  were  the  cases  of 
water-birds,  with  water  represented  by  transparent 
glass,  there  being  dry  weeds  and  beaches  of  dry 
pebbles  above  the  glass  surface,  and  brown  varnished 
pebbles  to  imitate  wet  ones  below.  These  were 
beautifully  realistic. 

There  seemed  to  be  more  and  larger  cases  of  this 
kind  than  we  have  in  South  Kensington,  but  the 
African  antelopes  were  less  numerous  than  ours.  The 
specimens  seemed  to  have  more  room  in  the  building 
than  ours,  and  what  they  had  was  therefore  shown  to 
better  advantage.  On  the  whole,  the  collection  did 
not  seem  anything  like  so  large  as  our  own. 

On  the  river,  and  on  the  extensive  system  of  canals 
in  Petersburo-,  there  are  summer  services  of  small 
passenger  steamers  like  those  of  the  Seine  at  Paris, 
and  there  is  the  same  sunlioht  and  a  Venetian  briorht- 
ness  of  colour  about  the  houses  overlooking  the  water. 

While  we  were  in  Petersburg  there  were  illuminations 
which  reminded  me  of  a  Raja's  garden  party — thou- 
sands of  little  lamps.  I  often  found  myself  looking  at 
something  which  reminded  me  of  the  East ;  the  high 
wooden  hoop  over  the  horses'  heads,  for  instance, 
recalled  the  form  of  draught  of  the  ekkas  in  Bengal, 

26 


Petersburg 

where  the  horse  pushes  as  much  as  he  pulls,  with 
shafts  rising  at  a  steep  angle. 

This  is  a  crisp,  bright  city,  full  of  life  and  colour 
and  great  spaces.  It  is  up-to-date  and  cosmopolitan 
in  everything  except  in  the  street  pavings,  which, 
save  where  longitudinal  strips  of  asphalte  have  been 
introduced,  are  an  uneven  waste  of  rugged  cobble- 
stones, more  like  the  moraine  of  a  glacier  than  our 
western  idea  of  a  twentieth-century  street.  This  kind 
of  surface,  I  am  told,  is  necessary,  from  the  fact  that 
during  five  long  months  or  so,  the  snow,  over  which 
the  sleighs  are  driven,  lies  half  a  yard  deep  on  the 
street.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  speak  for  the  roar, 
when  either  walking  or  drivingr. 

The  droshkies  plying  for  hire  are  good  and  well 
horsed ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  cheapest  things  in 
Russia.  You  can  take  a  grood  lono;  drive  for  five- 
pence  or  tenpence.  There  are  some  picturesque 
drives  round  the  islands  in  the  long  June  evenings, 
when  the  sun  sets  late.  It  sets,  moreover,  for  only  a 
very  short  time. 

If  the  new-comer  were  to  judge  by  the  appearance 
of  the  streets  from  a  distance,  he  would  call  the  life 
there  a  gay  scene  ;  but  the  faces  of  the  people  convey 
an  idea  of  sadness  or  stolidity  ;  you  seldom  see  people 
laughing  heartily,  as  do  even   our   own    poor.     The 

27 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

faces  of  the  ladies  and  children  struck  me  as  pale,  like 
those  of  our  English  ladies  and  children  when  kept 
too  long-  in  the  plains  of  India  ;  perhaps  for  the  same 
reason — too  much  shutting  up  of  houses. 

The  Russians  shut  out  the  cold  as  we  shut  out  the 
heat  ;  and  they  carry  their  winter  habit  through  the 
short  summer.  Whenever  you  see  a  man  in  a  hotel 
or  railway  carriage  opening  a  window,  ten  to  one  it  is 
an  Anglo-Saxon. 

Fair  hair  seems  almost  universal  among  the  peasant 
children  ;  sometimes  it  is  so  devoid  of  colour  as  to  be 
nearly  white  ;  often  it  is  attractive,  but  one  misses 
the  fine  deep  red  complexion  of  the  Swiss  or  English 
country  children. 

The  Russian  peasants  and  the  peasant  settlers  in 
Siberia  have  very  large  families,  the  members  of  which 
are  mostly  much  alike,  well  formed  and  strong  in  spite 
of  their  want  of  colour.  The  children  are  there,  in 
undeniable  numbers,  playing  about  at  every  railway 
station  ;  and  it  argues  well  for  the  future  of  this 
country  of  great  distances  and  undeveloped  territories. 


28 


CHAPTER   III 
MOSCOW 

WE  boarded  the  express  train  for  Moscow  on 
the  evening-  of  the  iith  June.  The  train 
service,  both  here  and  further  east,  has  been  well 
described  in  recent  accounts  of  travel.  Everything 
was  as  smart  and  up-to-date  as  it  could  possibly  be. 
The  carriages  were  on  the  corridor  system,  with 
lavatories,  electric  light  and  bells,  a  smoking  and 
dining  saloon.  It  seemed,  more  modern  than  the 
mail  train  to  Brindisi,  which,  however,  I  have  not 
tried  for  some  six  or  seven  years. 

The  late  setting  and  early  rising  of  the  sun  enabled 
us  to  see  much  of  the  country  on  this  night  journey 
through  a  land  quite  strange  to  us.  Looking  out  of 
the  corridor  windows,  the  general  face  of  the  country 
at  the  track  side  was  not  unlike  our  old  familiar 
Indian  landscape — a  level  land  of  scrubby  tree-growth 
and  here  and  there  open  cultivated  spaces.  It  was 
like  the  Central  Provinces  after  the  rains.  Near  the 
line  there  were  the  same  '*  borrow-pits  "  full  of  water; 
the  same  general  absence  of  fences,  except  the  posts 

29 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

and  rails  along  the  railway  boundary,  where  are  also 
scrubby  bushes  and  young  saplings. 

The  birch  as  seen  from  a  distance,  though  the  leaf, 
of  course,  is  quite  small,  grows  not  unlike  the  scrubby 
teaks  and  other  trees  in  the  Central  Provinces  forests  ; 
there  are  the  same  light  yellowish  greens  ;  and  at  the 
time  of  my  return,  three  months  later,  the  dead  leaves 
were  dull  yellow  like  the  dead  teak  leaves,  the  birch 
forests  at  this  later  time  being  dashed  with  brown  and 
yellow  autumnal  tints. 

In  the  early  morning,  damp  mists  lay  over  stunted 
forest  and  meadow  and  hamlet  just  as  they  do  in 
India. 

At  half-past  nine  on  12th  June,  we  ran  into  the 
station  at  Moscow ;  and  sending  our  luggage  by 
omnibus,  were  soon  walking  to  the  Hotel  de  Berlin 
with  the  interpreter  who  came  to  meet  us.  We 
noticed  at  once  the  same  rugged  cobble-stones  we  had 
encountered  at  Petersburg  ;  but  they  were  far  worse. 
Moscow  at  once  strikes  one  as  old-fashioned.  There 
are  narrow  streets,  and  it  is  totally  unlike  Petersburg. 
It  is  more  beautiful,  for  it  has  more  oriental  colouring, 
and  it  possesses  the  peerless  Kremlin,  round  which 
the  best  part  of  the  town  and  the  good  shops  are 
concentrated.  The  shops  being  all  together  and  the 
streets  narrower,  the  distances  are  much  less  than  at 

30 


r 

■ 

ii- 

^BhR^F  ' 

f          " 

Moscow 

Petersburg:;-,  and  one's  shopping  can  be  done  within  a 
walk.       Especially    interesting    is    the    New    Bazaar, 


lUK    I'RlEsr    AT    kwsH-AGAU    a 


containing  an    arcade  of  good    shops    under    a    high 
glass   roof;  it  must  be  a  favourite  promenade  in  the 
winter.        It    was    here    we    bought     Russian    lace, 
F  33 


Through  the  Highlands  of   Siberia 


embroideries,  and  the  handsome  blue  and  i^old  inlaid 
spoons.  The  bronzes  are  very  dear  and  very 
temptino^,  especially  some  work  which  my  guide  told 
me  was  the  work  of  a  Russian  artist  now  dead. 
There  was  a  beautifully  executed  figure  of  a  Cossack 
lying  down,  firing  over  the  body  of  his  horse  ;  and 
another  of  a  troika  sleigh,  three  horses  galloping 
wildly  with  a  man  holding  a  woman  steady  in  the 
sleiofh,  the  hand  clutchincr  the  side  of  the  sleioh. 

The  action  in  the  piece  is  eloquent  of  high  speed 
and  makes  one  want  to  be  driving  furiously  too. 

But  the  massive  Kremlin  sacred  gate  and  enclosure 
wall,  squarely  built,  deeply  crenellated,  and  towered 
at  intervals,  appealed  to  me  as  much  as  anything  in 
Moscow.  There  was  something  Mongolian  in  its 
character  ;  perhaps  it  was  because  I  remembered  the 
general  trace  and  idea  of  the  Mandalay  wall.  The 
absolute  difference  in  material  does  not  matter,  and 
the  resemblance  is  hard  to  explain.  There  was  some- 
thing fine  and  bold  in  its  architecture,  and  the  rich 
tertiary  green  of  the  copper-roofed  towers  appealed 
very  strongly  to  the  artistic  sense.  It  seemed  to 
belong  to  a  different  age  and  nation  from  the  many 
buildings  standing  inside. 

My  eyes  and  imagination  were  so  occupied  with 
this  wall  that  I  would  not  listen  to  the  guide  ;  but  I 

34 


Moscow 

have  a  sort  of  recollection  that  he  said  the   Russians 
built   it   after   a   Tartar   design.      At  any  rate,   to  my 


i;i:i.I,     lOWKK    IN     IIIE    KREMLIN 

fancy,  the  hand  of  the  Far  East  is  in  it,  and  I  did  not 
care  about  statistics. 

We   saw   the    Kremlin   and   all    its   buildings   from 

35 


Through  the  Highlands  of   Siberia 

inside  and  outside  ;  and  took  an  evenini^  walk  to  get  a 
view  of  it  froni  across  the  river,  reflected  in  the  water. 

We  were  led  a  climb  up  a  very  high  tower,  with 
large  and  deep-sounding  bells  on  several  floors.  There 
was  a  colossal  bell  below,  as  big  as  the  giant  Burmese 
specimens,  with  a  piece  broken  out  of  the  side  ;  but 
the  guide  said  it  was  only  made  for  show.  He  told  us 
of  a  bell  which  fell,  or  broke,  but  we  were  looking  at 
the  copper-greens  of  the  roofs  and  missed  the  point 
of  the  story.  The  Empress  Katharine  seems  to  be 
remembered  in  Moscow  as  Peter  the  Great  is  in 
Petersburg,  and  the  guide  showed  us  very  large 
guns  and  very  large  bells  cast  under  her  orders. 
Later,  at  Nijni  Novgorod  Fair,  a  most  interesting 
foundry,  or  at  any  rate  a  dock,  near  the  river  was 
shown  me,  where  large  church-bells,  newly  made, 
were  being  exhibited. 

The  artistic  work  on  these  bells  appeared  to  me 
beautiful  in  desicrn  and  execution.  If  one  remembers 
Burma,  it  looks  as  if  this  taste  in  Russia  for  great 
bells  has  an  Asiatic  origin. 

Once  at  the  top  of  the  tower,  we  could  see  the  whole 
great  city  of  copper-greens  and  reds  and  browns 
and  bright  gold  on  hundreds  of  minarets  and  cupolas, 
spread  densely  round  us  under  the  most  brilliant  of 
blue  skies.     There   was  a  beautiful  taj-like  structure 

36 


Moscow 

without  minarets  standing  out  overlooking  the  river  a 
short  distance  to  the  west. 

The  river  passed  close  below  the  foot  of  the  massive 
Kremlin  enclosure  walls  ;  and  in  the  distance  also  to 


mimiimmmm^*  » ii.^|i;,i,..Mn|||^'ii|i,^i.  —  ■i-H''"^ 


THE    KREMLIN    KROM    THE    RIVER 


the  west  could  be  seen  a  long,  low  ridge  covered  with 
dark  woods,  from  which,  our  guide  told  us,  Napoleon 
first  saw  Moscow. 

They    show    you   a    lot    of   things   connected   with 
Napoleon  ;  and  what  seemed  to  me  if  anything  more 

37 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

impressive  than  the  Kremlin  wall  was  the  long  row 
of  guns  taken  from  Napoleon  (600  my  guide  said, 
counting-  those  outside  and  inside  the  Kremlin  itself). 
These  were  field  -  guns,  siege  -  guns,  mortars,  and 
howitzers,  or  at  any  rate  short  guns  for  high-angle 
fire. 

To  anyone  who  has  been  taught  military  arithmetic 
and  knows  what  forces  in  horse,  foot,  artillery,  and 
wheeled  transport  are  represented  by  a  given  number 
of  guns,  the  sight  of  this  terrible  wreck,  in  concrete 
and  tangible  form,  of  La  Grande  Armee  comes  quite 
as  a  revelation.  One  sees  a  percentage  of  hits  bitten 
deep  into  the  metal  of  many  of  the  muzzles,  and  one 
realises  not  only  the  waste  of  metal,  but  the  other 
materials  that  were  wasted  :  the  leather,  the  fiesh  and 
blood,  and  also  the  amount  of  death  and  suffering  that 
must  have  been  endured  before  these  guns,  the  flower 
of  the  artillery  of  Europe,  collected  by  Napoleon 
from  all  the  continental  nations,  were  given  up.  One 
pictures  in  the  mind's  eye  the  vast  wheeled  transport, 
military  and  civilian,  from  every  country,  and  thus 
realises  the  extraordinary  power  of  the  man  who 
could  collect  it  all,  and  the  nature  of  the  international 
service  done  by  these  patriotic  Russians  in  checking 
him  at  the  zenith  of  his  career. 

Englishmen    are    apt    to    say    that    "Jack    Frost" 

38 


Moscow 

wrecked  Napoleon  ;  but  if  you  are  standing  in  the 
Kremlin  with  the  ^uns  before  you,  you  see  that  we 
have  very  much  to  admire,  and  to  imitate  if  we  can, 
in  the  wonderful  preparedness  and  singleness  of  pur- 
pose, the  foreknowledge  and  grasp  of  higher  strategy 
in  taking  advantage  of  the  natural  conditions  and 
seasons,  displayed  by  the  Russians.  And  if  you  see 
these  guns  you  understand  how  bravely  their  troops 
must  have  fouo^ht.  You  begin  to  see  the  stubborn- 
ness  which  later  in  their  history  made  the  losses  at 
Plevna  possible. 


39 


CHAPTER   IV 

TO    SIBERIA 

"\7[  /"E    drove    up    to    the    fine    structure    of    white 

•  *  masonry,  with  a  large  open  space  in  front, 
which  is  the  Moscow  terniinus  of  the  Siberian  Rail- 
way, on  the  evening  of  June  i  ith. 

Seton  Karr  and  I  were  now  to  be  travellinof  com- 
panions.  My  wife  had  returned  to  Petersburg,  as 
|)re\'iously  arranged,  by  a  train  which  left  Moscow  an 
hour  before  our  own,  so  that  we  were  able  to  give  her 
some  help  in  starting. 

I  had  been  at  some  pains  to  ascertain  the  date  of  the 
departure  of  our  train,  which  was  the  Grand  Inter- 
national, at  the  sleeping-car  office  in  Cockspur  Street, 
before  leaving  London.  WHien  once  in  Russia  it  is 
difficult  to  find  out  from  the  railway  authorities  whether 
you  are  going  by  the  Russian  train  or  by  the  Inter- 
national. There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  difference 
now,  as  the  Russian  trains  are  said  to  have  mucli 
improved,  and  the  attendance  on  both  is  good. 

The  only  advantage  of  going  first-class  was  that  by 
paying  three  pounds  for  an  extra  berth  I  got  a  two- 

40 


To  Siberia 

berthed  cabin  to  myself,  and  was  able  to  find  room  for 
more  small  bao-o-ao-e,  and  the  savino-  in  registration 
recouped  me.     You  cannot  do  this  in  the  second-class. 

But  for  this,  it  would  be  quite  possible  to  take  less 
bao-oraoe  and  to  q-q  second.  The  first  and  second- 
class  passengers  have  equally  the  use  of  the  smoking" 
and  dining  saloons,  and  mix  there  ;  and  I  did  not  hear 
that  the  second-class  passengers  were  at  all  uncom- 
fortable. 

The  speed  has  probably  much  increased  since  Mr. 
Fraser  wrote  T/ie  Real  Sibei'ia.  In  fact,  the  whole 
journey  to  the  Ob  in  Mid-Siberia,  so  far  as  concerned 
the  railway,  seemed  to  be  a  very  ordinary  one.  There 
were  good  long  stoppages  at  the  stations,  which  en- 
abled us  to  get  some  exercise  by  strolling  up  and 
down  the  platform. 

There  is  always  plenty  of  life  and  interest  at  these 
stations  in  summer.  They  are  well  laid  out  and  clean. 
As  in  India,  in  the  evenings,  on  Sunday  especially  I 
think,  the  families  of  the  minor  railway  officials  and 
peasant  settlers  dress  up  in  their  best  and  come  down 
to  promenade  the  platform  and  see  the  Siberian  train 
arrive  and  go. 

In  the  station  yards  and  green  meadows  round  are 
cows,  geese,  turkeys,  and  farmyard  noises  ;  and  crowds 
of  fair-haired  children  come  to  the  carriages  with  bare 
G  41 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

feet,  briiii^ino-  melons  and  fruit,  eofS's  and  bottles  of 
milk,  and  large  bunches  of  wild  tlovvers  for  sale.  A 
few  police  and  station  officials  strut  about  in  uniforms 
and  swords. 

The  Russians  seem  kind  to  their  children,  and  allow 
them  to  participate  freely  in  this  pleasure  of  lounging- 
about  on  the  platform.  There  are  swings  in  the 
station  fields  for  the  children,  who  play  about  the 
line,  and  sell  flowers  to  passengers,  and  seem  to  do 
what  they  like. 

The  passengers  included  an  Englishman  who  had 
been  making  an  experimental  trip,  going  back  to 
Shanghai  after  a  short  holiday  in  England,  and  with 
him  we  foregathered.  All  the  passengers,  many  of 
whom  are  ladies,  take  part  in  the  promenade  on  the 
platform  at  the  stopping  places,  the  bargaining  with 
the  peasants'  children,  and  watch  the  queer  Tartars  and 
Kirghiz  who  are  to  be  seen  at  some  of  the  stations. 

We  saw  three  distinctly  pretty  Kirghiz  women, 
evidently  well-to-do,  at  one  station,  dressed  in  furs  and 
silks,  laughing  and  posing  in  a  group  before  a  Russian 
amateur  photographer. 

But  the  effect  was  utterly  spoilt  by  three  smart 
Parisian  parasols. 

Down  either  side  of  the  dining-saloon  are  rows  of 
little    tables,    which    are   continued    throuirh    into   the 

42 


To  Siberia 

smoking-room  ;  and  most  of  these  tables  are  occupied 
by  people  playing  cards,  or  eternally  sipping  glasses  of 


RUSSIAN    SETTLERS    AT    KOSH-AC.ATCH 


Russian  tea  flavoured  with  sugar  and  lemon,  which  is 
very  good. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  take  private  supplies  of  tea, 
or  any  food,  on  to  these  trains.      There  are  coffee  and 

43 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

rolls  and  butter  in  the  early  morning",  lunch  at  about 
one.  and  dinner  at  about  six  ;  and  glasses  of  tea,  or 
what  you  like,  at  any  time.  The  charges  seem  reason- 
able, and  the  food  is  very  good. 

It  was  difficult  in  these  civilised  surroundings  to 
realise  that  one  was  in  the  centre  of  Asia. 

The  view  from  the  saloon  windows  may  be  con- 
sidered monotonous  by  some  people,  but  to  those  who 
admire  trees  and  wide  spaces  of  country,  there  is  a 
certain  charm  in  it  all. 

On  the  first  day  out  from  Moscow  we  passed  forests 
of  stately  green  birch  trees,  with  stems  a  brilliant 
mottled  white  and  grey  ;  green  grass  glades  with  purple 
wild  fiowers  ;  open  ground  with  masses  of  yellow  and 
white  flowers  ;  and  towards  evening  we  entered  mixed 
forests  of  birch  and  fir.  Later  there  were  clumps  all 
fir,  and  then  a  continuous  forest  of  conifers. 

At  six  o'clock  next  morning  I  opened  the  blind  and 
saw  a  wide  golden  prairie  with  the  sun,  already  over 
two  hours  high,  blazing"  across  it  into  the  carriage. 
Framed  in  the  cheerful  picture  was  a  large  drove  of 
horses  trekking,  in  the  charge  of  mounted  drovers,  and 
a  small  town  with  golden  cupolas,  standing  like  an  island 
in  a  dip  in  the  plain  ;  then  large  herds  of  cattle  and 
ponies.  This  was  before  we  reached  Samara.  Six 
hours  after  leaving  that  place  we  were  in  rolling  prairie 

44 


To  Siberia 

rising  to  low  hills  two  or  three  miles  away,  showing 
light  red  where  the  soil  and  rocks  had  been  exposed, 
and  light  green  everywhere  else,  except  where  beauti- 
ful wreaths  of  violet,  exquisite  in  colour,  swept  across 
the  valley  sides  like  veils  of  mist.  The  nearer  fore- 
ground showed  these  to  be  the  effect  of  a  meadow 
flower  springing  up  in  the  fields  in  dashes  of  deep  rose 
or  crimson  lake. 

One  passenger,  who  knew,  thought  this  like  the 
American  prairies,  the  distances  were  so  great. 
Shallow  natural  nullahs  cut  the  ground  every- 
where, as  in  India.  Much  of  it  looked  like  India 
in  the  rains.  Some  of  the  churches  and  public 
buildings  are  taj-like,  with  small  bubble  cupolas, 
heavily  gilt. 

Some  thin  spires,  also  gilt,  have  something  in  their 
desiorn  which  reminds  one  of  the  Burmese  Puno'i- 
Kioungs;  no  doubt  various  Mussulman  and  Mon- 
golian forms  being  represented  in  Russian  architec- 
ture. There  were  no  spires  to  be  seen  like  those  of 
France  and  Enoland. 

Some  of  the  villages  in  these  open  downs  have  a 
temporary  look,  like  the  Indian  famine  camps  which 
some  of  us  know  so  well.  There  are  the  same 
wooden  walls  and  thatched  roofs,  the  same  long, 
yellow-grey  clusters  of  houses   on  valley   sides,  with 

45 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

here  and  there  a  "  pucca  "  frame  roof,  painted  a  quiet 
red  or  green. 

For  twenty,  or  even,  perhaps,  fifty  miles,  one  could 
see  fold  beyond  fold  of  ground,  the  nearest  bright 
green  or  gay  with  veldt  flowers,  the  furthest  distance 
shading  into  dim  blue-grey.  Not  a  tree  was  in  sight, 
save  where,  near  the  horizon,  an  indigo  line  spread 
itself  out  into  the  sea  of  orrass,  marking"  some  forest 
of  birch  or  dark  fir  which  encroached  on  the  plain. 
We  had  a  bright  Indian  sun  overhead. 

There  were  crows  upon  every  paling,  very,  like  our 
Indian  crows.  The  do^js  one  saw  about  the  stations 
were  something  like  collies,  well  cared  for  and  very 
intelligent  ;  and  though  fierce  -  looking,  there  was 
always  the  friendly  movement  of  the  last  three  inches 
of  the  tail. 

At  two  p.m.  on  the  i  2th  there  was  open  steppe,  and 
a  drove  of  two  hundred  half-wild  ponies  appeared, 
trotting  along  the  sky-line  of  a  hill,  chasing,  biting, 
and  kickino-  one  another,  the  frino-es  of  the  mob 
galloping,  and  being  rounded  up  by  mounted  men. 

A  few  miles  further  there  was  a  town  of  some  five 
hundred  log-huts  and  a  church,  a  dozen  better  build- 
ings, and  many  spacious  stockyards. 

Everywhere,  travelling  on  mere  cart-tracks  (the 
only  roads),  was  to  be  seen  the  light  one-horse  telega, 

46 


To  Siberia 

or  country  cart,  made  of  wooden  staves  and  shaped 
like  a  punt  or  a  strawberry  basket.  It  rests,  without 
regular  springs,  on  a  long,  rectangular  framework, 
supported  by  four  low,  strong  wheels,  which  are  wide 
apart,  the  front  wheels  being  the  lowest.  The  shafts, 
being  attached  low  down,  rise  to  the  horse's  shoulders 
at  an  angle,  and  are  connected  over  his  head  by  the 


^  ii 


TWO   RUSSIAN   SETTLERS 


hio"h  arch  of  the  "douoah."     These  carts  will  stand 

o  o 

anything,  and  are  perfectly  adapted  to  their  purpose. 
We  went  many  hundreds  of  miles  with  our  baggage 
in  them  and  never  had  the  slightest  breakdown. 

Before  sunset  on  the  13th  the  train  stopped  at  a 
little  prairie  station,  where  we  saw  many  Tartar  types 
mixed  up  with  Russian  ones.  Always  there  were 
thousands  of  ponies  on  the  plain. 

The  peasants'  dress  gave  a  general   impression  of 

47 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

red  and  black  ;  vvomcMi  had  red  hoods  over  the  head, 
and  a  sort  of  blouse,  a  coloured  apron,  and  a  black 
gown.  W^e  saw  them  weeding-  with  lar^e  wooden 
spades  and  high  baskets. 

Many  peasants  seemed  to  find  it  more  comfortable 
to  wear  their  red  or  white  shirts  with  the  tails  stream- 
ing" in  the  wind,  after  the  manner  of  the  Anglicised 
Aryan,  which  we  took  as  a  sign  that  we  were  going 
east.  The  black  leather  knee-boot,  well  wrinkled 
above  the  ankles,  the  canvas-like  bandage  and  grass 
shoe,  or  the  felt  snow-boot,  worn  even  in  summer, 
were  the  prevailing  foot-gear  of  the  Russian  or 
Russianised  Tartar  peasants.  A  large  number  wore 
fur  caps,  even  in  summer.  There  are  several  kinds 
of  Asiatics  in  the  Russian  Empire;  one  chiefly  hears 
of  Tartars,  Kirohiz,  Kalmuks,  and  Monools  ;  but  our 
future  journey  away  from  the  railway  was  to  be 
chiefiy  concerned  with  the  last  three.  The  word 
Tartar  seems  to  cover  a  good  deal  ;  we  saw  a  circle 
of  men,  cooking  on  the  ground,  looking  and  dressed 
for  all  the  world  like  Punjabi  Mohammedans,  who 
were  described  as  Tartars. 

As  night  fell  on  the  13th  we  entered  foot-hills 
and  forest,  the  beQ^innino-  of  the  rise  over  the  Ural 
Mountains,  on  the  further  side  of  which  was  Siberia. 
So  far  we  had  been  in  Russia  itself. 


To  Siberia 

Here  we  stopped  at  a  station,  alongside  another 
Siberian  train  running  west.  There  were  two  or 
three  EngHsh  and  some  Americans.  We  exchanged 
visits  and  compared  trains.  Theirs  was  a  Russian 
train  and  ours  an  international  one.  Ours  seemed 
slightly  the  better  of  the  two. 

As  the  sun  rose  on  14th  June  we  were  still  in  the 
Ural  Mountains,  and  still  imperceptibly  climbing  in 
grand  forest.  There  were,  so  far  as  one  could  judge, 
spruce  firs,  birch,  a  fine,  ornamental  kind  of  cedar, 
Norway  pine,  and  a  tree  looking  like  the  Himalayan 
deodar,  all  stately  in  growth  and  casting  long,  early 
morning  shadows  on  the  green  glades  of  short  alpine 
grass.  In  suitable  spots  there  were  also  poplars, 
alder  bushes,  and  aspens.    Butterflies  seemed  plentiful. 

All  the  country  was  wild  save  that  at  long  intervals 
were  frame  villages  of  about  thirty  huts.  These  were 
large  chalet-like  structures  built  of  sawn  planks.  We 
passed  some  small  lakes  flanked  by  forest-covered 
ridores  and  havino-  here  and  there  villaoes  built  on 
their  margins.  My  travelling  companion  said  it  was 
all  very  like  Norway. 

We  reached  Chelyabinsk  on  the  14th,  an  important 

railway    station   judging    by    the   number    of   people, 

mostly   Russians  and  well  dressed,  who  crowded  on 

to   the   platform.      There   is   the   usual   country   town 

H  49 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


behind  the  station,  and  the  usual  mixture  of  Russian 
and  Asiatic  races. 

On  the  Siberian  side,  that  is,  east  of  Chelyabinsk, 
the  country  is  one  great  plain,  cultivation,  pasture, 
and  dense  birch  forest  about  fifty  feet  high  alternating 
in  patches.  It  looked  to  me  very  like  the  Central 
Provinces  of  India  (say  east  of  Jubbulpur)  after  the 
rains,  especially  in  the  uncertain  evening  light,  when 
we  had  the  sun  shining  low  astern  of  the  train. 

The  birch  grows  with  feathery  tops,  looking  like 
the  long  rows  of  Indian  bamboo  clumps  ;  colours  are 
much  the  same,  and  the  resemblance  is  heightened  by 
the  fiat  green  fields  and  the  railway  "  borrow-pits  "  in 
the  foreground.  It  was  also,  in  the  evening  light  and 
cool  air,  not  unlike  a  railway  journey  across  the 
country  we  had  so  lately  left — England.  The  black 
soil  looked  rich  ;  it  was  evidently  a  country  capable  of 
paying  its  way.  It  was  difficult  to  believe  that  one 
was  in  Asia,  the  train  slid  so  smoothly  between  green 
cultivated  country,  the  deep  English  blue-green  which 
is  quite  unlike  the  French  green,  and  always  the 
feathery  birch  clumps  in  silhouette  against  the  sky. 
One  felt  oneself  to  be  in  as  comfortable  and  civilised 
surroundings  as  if  merely  crossing  the  south  of 
England.  The  country  was  tame,  homely,  and  familiar- 
lookinof.      The  snow,  it  is  said,  lies  five  or  six  months 

50 


To  Siberia 

of  the  year  here.  Yet  the  land  supports  plenty  of 
life,  bright  young  life — for  there  are  lots  of  children 
about — and  the  people  look  far  happier,  though  under 
an  Imperial  form  of  government,  than  some  English 


A    TVl'lLAL    RUSSIAN    SETlLERs    HOUsIi,    AND    KALML'K    DRIVER 


one   can   name,    who   can    have   no   work   to  do   and 
patrol  the  streets  of  London  with  collecting-boxes. 

Many  of  the  women  and  children  go  barefoot  in 
the  hot  summer  weather,  but  in  winter  their  log- 
houses,  well  built  and  stuffed  between  the  perfectly 
jointed  logs  with  dried  moss  or  felt,  are  warm  ;  the 
windows  provided  with  good  shutters  ;  and  a  heater 

51 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


for  the  principal  rooms.  Fuel  is  cheap,  o-rowing  in 
quantities  round  the  settlements.  There  are  stuff 
settees  to  sleep  upon,  and  coarse  carpets,  like  our 
Indian  durrees,  on  the  floor. 

The  summer,  when  it  comes,  does  so  with  a  rush. 
Durino-  the  last  day  or  two  we  had  had  it  al)Out 
eighty-two  degrees  in  the  shade,  and  I  wore  my 
Indian  clothes. 

During  the  night,  which  we  had  spent  on  the  slopes 
of  the  Urals,  it  had  been  cooler  ;  it  was,  indeed,  a 
perfect  climate,  not  colder  than  midsummer  nights  in 
England.  I  slept  with  one  blanket  and  the  window 
wide  open. 

The  peasant  population  at  the  stations  seemed 
strong  and  contented  ;  there  were  healthy  women  and 
fine,  upright,  broad-shouldered  men,  tanned  by  the 
sun,  and  their  appearance  upset  much  that  I  had 
heard  of  the  Russian  peasant.  Many,  I  believe,  of 
the  emigrants  who  are  unfit  return  to  Russia,  but 
those  who  stay  on  in  Siberia  seem  to  go  some  rungs 
up  the  social  ladder.  In  the  course  of  my  subsequent 
cart  journey  I  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  the  slow- 
moving,  slow-thinking  Russian  peasant,  and  formed 
the  opinion  that  he  is  a  man  with  an  intelligence  which 
requires  development,  but  with  considerable  latent 
force  of  character.     No  one  will  question  his  physique. 


To  Siberia 

On  15th  June  at  eight  a.m.  we  were  in  another  scene 
— open  prairie  again,  very  flat,  a  sea  of  short  grass. 
This  was  the  first  cloudy  morning,  quite  an  English 
sky.  On  the  previous  night  mosquitoes  had  been 
bad  for  the  first  time. 

We  stopped  at  Tomsk,  the  well-known  Siberian 
town,  which  is  of  considerable  size,  and  stands  on  the 
borders  of  a  small  lake.  It  is  not  very  near  the  line, 
and  the  distant  view  was  not  at  all  impressive. 

Then  we  went  on  through  the  same  kind  of  country, 
indeed,  it  continued  right  through  to  Ob  station,  where 
we  were  to  leave  the  railway  for  our  journey  south. 

Throucjhout  Siberia  so  far  as  we  had  o'one,  from 
the  Urals  to  the  Ob,  we  had  seen,  if  we  omit  the  tree 
clumps,  one  unbroken  stretch  of  green  turf  and  culti- 
vation over  a  rich  black  soil,  just  like  any  English 
fields,  and  quite  different  from  what  I  had  expected. 

In  Siberia  the  birch  had  been  practically  the  only 
kind  of  tree  ;  it  is  very  hardy,  and  will  stand  very 
great  cold.  In  Kashmir  straggling  specimens  live  at 
the  top  of  the  timber-line,  well  above  the  pines. 

If  I  have  given  too  radiant  a  picture  of  a  land 
which  is  under  snow  for  so  many  months  in  the  year, 
perhaps  it  is  partly  because  I  only  saw  it  in  summer, 
and  partly  through  having  spent  so  much  of  my 
service   in   sun-scorched   regions,    that   the   calm   and 

53 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


homeliness  of  Siberia  appealed  to  me  ;  an  English- 
man who  had  stayed  at  home  always  might  not  notice 
so  much  resemblance. 

The  feeling  is  strongest  as  you  slide  through  the 
gloaming,  when  there  is  a  cloudy  sky.  The  cows  go 
deep  in  rich  grass,  leaving  their  footprints  in  soft, 
black  earth.  Cart-tracks  deep  in  mud  cross  weedy 
brooks. 

In  a  field  at  the  back  of  one  station  yard  we  saw 
the  ladies  of  a  family,  probably  of  a  well-to-do  farmer, 
walking  out  in  their  best  clothes  in  the  evening, 
parasols  in  hand,  to  look  at  the  farm  stock,  just  as 
they  might  do  in  an  English  village.  This  was 
hundreds  of  miles  from  Russia  proper. 

At  the  stations  are  great  piles  of  firewood,  and  also 
of  sleepers.  I  am  told  they  burn  wood,  coal,  and  oil 
respectively  on  various  sections  of  the  line.  Not  till 
the  last  day  of  the  rail  journey  did  we  get  rain — -an 
English  drizzle  only — as  we  were  passing  over  fields 
of  rich  soil  with  grain  waving  in  the  wind. 

Of  the  agricultural  machines  we  saw  being  used, 
both  here  and  on  the  route  to  Mongolia,  I  am  in- 
formed that  none  were  of  British  manufacture.  They 
were  American  mowers,  reapers,  binders,  and  rakes. 
Steam  is  not  used,  but  horse  traction,  which  is  cheap, 
a  horse   costing  from  ^4  to  ^5.      I  am  told  a  great 

54 


To  Siberia 

need  of  the  agricultural  districts  is  a  cheap  threshing 
machine. 

The  effect  upon  the  Russians  of  all  this  settling-up 
of  Siberia  will  be  a  stimulating  one,  just  as  our  colonies 


RUSSIAN   SETTLER 


have  stimulated  us.  These  people  are  fighting  the 
good  fight  with  nature,  instead  of  idling  in  the  towns 
of  their  mother-country  complaining  that  they  are 
being  beaten  by  nature. 

55 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Russia  plunq-ed  into  the  business  of  this  Siberian 
Raihvay  in  no  half-hearted  fashion  ;  she  will  reap  the 
benefit  a  hundredfold  one  day,  and  she  deserves  all 
the  luck  she  can  get  from  it.  It  is,  like  the  Suez 
Canal,  constructed  by  a  nation  capable  of  carrying 
out  bio-  ideas  for  the  credit  of  the  flag  without 
looking  too  much  to  immediate  profit,  and  it  is  a 
service  to  civilisation. 

When  one  comes  fresh  from  our  big  cities  one 
realises  how  much  better  off  these  people  are  ;  one 
sees  throughout  this  wide  country  people  who  are  all 
fighting  in  the  same  way,  with  their  brains  and  hands, 
against  what  was  lately  virgin  soil  ;  and  one  realises 
what  a  sound  paying  investment  this  must  be, 
for  if  it  were  not,  all  these  families  would  be  starv- 
ing ;  and  anyone  who  travels  in  Southern  Siberia 
can  see  with  half  an  eye  that  they  are  doing  nothing 
of  the  kind. 

Here  in  Siberia  one  realises  better  what  must  be 
the  value  of  the  "landless  man  to  manless  land"  work 
which  has  been  begun  by  the  Salvationists  in  America, 
and  of  the  "back  to  the  land"  agitation  in  England  ; 
and  one  welcomes  any  policy  (even  if  it  contemplates 
taxed  food)  which  holds  out  a  fair  promise  of  starting 
a  centrifugal  movement  from  the  towns,  and  which 
can  send  the  best  people,  not  only  "  back  to  the  land  " 

56 


To  Siberia 

in  E no-land,  but  also  out  to  the  colonial  lands  of  the 
British  Empire. 

These  Russian  peasant  settlers  are  going  to  be  a 
great  people  some  day.  It  is  a  country  of  spaces 
and  elbow-room,  cultivatable,  and  having  pasture  for 


RUSSIAN    CHILDREN'    AT    KOSH-AGATCH 


millions  of  horses  and  cattle.  The  Russian  settlers 
who  stay  in  Siberia  do  not  look  unintelligent.  What 
they  seem  to  lack  may  be  cured  later  on  in  their 
children  by  competition,  for  though  hard-working  in 
certain  ways,  they  are  dilatory  and  unbusinesslike, 
and  have  not  the  slightest  conception  of  the  value 
I  57 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


of    time    as    Englishmen,    Frenchmen,    or    Germans 
know  it. 

This  will  all  correct  itself  as  Central  Asia  fills  up 
with  white  men.  Anyone  who  looks  at  the  crowds  of 
children,  not  only  along  the  length  of  the  railway,  but 
across  from  there  down  to  the  Altai  and  in  a  few  out- 
lying settlements  near  the  Mongolian  frontier,  can  see 
that  Russia  will  in  the  future  hold  all  the  main  part  of 
continental  Asia  with  a  much  firmer  grip  than  she 
does  now\ 

It  is  not  of  the  slightest  use  for  other  countries  to 
try  and  resist  this  slow  but  sure  development  in  the 
appointed  latitudes  ;  but  as  you  go  south  anywhere  in 
Asia,  you  must  come  to  a  zone  where  facilities  of 
communication  from  the  sea  will  be  greater  than  those 
from  the  north  ;  and  India,  Burma,  and  the  southern 
parts  of  China  are  within  the  sphere  of  the  Powers 
which  hold  the  sea,  quite  irrespective  of  any  question 
of  race.  If  the  Spaniards  held  Siberia  and  Turkestan, 
and  the  French  held  India,  there  would  be  the  same 
political  question. 

It  is  my  belief  that  when  steam  came  to  the  aid  of 
sea  power,  the  fate  of  India  was  settled  for  good.  In 
old  days  India  was  repeatedly  conquered  by  Powers 
whose  influence  advanced  overland  from  the  north. 
Those  were  times  when  expeditions  through  mountain 

58 


To  Siberia 

passes  were  easy.  The  "sniper"  could  not  have 
flourished  to  the  extent  to  which  he  does  now  ;  he 
would  have  had  to  come  down  into  the  valley  and 
use  close-quarter  weapons.  India  had  no  reinforce- 
ments to  look  to  from  the  sea. 

Invasions  and  advances  of  spheres  of  influence  in 
the  future  will  be  an  affair  of  railways.  The  Indian 
frontier  railway  system  is  nearly  complete,  and  cannot 
go  much  further.  Russia  has  most  of  hers  to  make, 
and  that  means  the  necessity  of  quiet,  peaceful 
development,  not  only  of  railways,  but  of  populations 
alono-  them. 

There  is  also  an  element  of  continued  peace  in  the 
lonof  time  it  will  take  for  Russia  to  finish  the  orreat 
work  she  is  now  doing  in  the  whole  northern  area. 
She  is  not  ready  to  dispute  spheres  with  the  sea  yet ; 
and,  as  time  goes  on,  every  improvement  in  arms 
makes  frontiers,  all  the  world  over,  more  defensible, 
and  throws  India  more  absolutely  into  the  maritime 
sphere.  Every  addition  to  the  size  and  number  of 
engines  of  destruction  makes  the  transport  question 
more  difficult  ;  and  invasion  of  another  country 
nowadays,  except  by  rail,  is  almost  doomed  to  failure. 
The  more  bulky  the  transport  necessary  in  war  be- 
comes, the  more  defensible  value  we  shall  get  out  of 
our  arid  Indian  frontier. 

59 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Yet  Russia  is  so  single  of  purpose,  appears  so  free 
from  party  politics,  so  enterprising  and  persistent  in 
Asia,  that  in  the  distant  future  a  time  may  come  when 
she  may  wish  to  practically  test  the  question  in  Middle 
Asia,  as  she  is  already  doing  in  the  Far  East,  of  how 
far  the  sea  sphere  extends  inland. 

And  the  niore  distant  that  time  may  be,  the  more 
powerful  will  Russia  certainly  become.  If  she  can 
then  train  advantao-es  over  us,  it  will  be  to  her  honour  ; 
and  no  one  will  pity  us,  for  anyone  who  takes  the 
trouble  to  think  at  all  can  see  an  improved  Russia  in 
the    future.      The    men   who   hold   those   agricultural 

o 

spaces  will  advance,  whatever  the  form  of  govern- 
ment. 

This  rivalry  between  the  continent  and  the  sea, 
being  purely  geographical,  need  not  stand  in  the  way 
of  esteem  between  two  peoples.  The  British  and 
Russians  should  have  much  in  common,  for  they  are 
both  busily  colonising. 

But  under-estimating  our  rival  in  Asia  would  only 
lead  to  trouble,  the  sure  way  to  peace  being  a  sturdy 
foresight,  a  fixed  policy,  and  an  appreciative  know- 
ledcfe  of  our  neio-hbour's  strenoth.      So  much  trouble 

o  o  o 

has  always  come,  in  history,  to  those  nations  which 
have  under-estimated  their  rivals. 

Her  strength,  at  any  rate  her  coming  strength,  is 

60 


To  Siberia 

plain  to  the  eye.  It  lies  in  the  great  spaces  and 
agricultural  population  not  crystallised  into  cities,  and 
having  the  wheat  growing  about  them  ;  a  good  birth- 
rate and  that  religious  unity  which  has  always  in 
history  been  such  a  valuable  asset  to  commanders  of 
all  creeds  ;  and  now  that  soldiers  have  to  be  mobile, 


KALMUK    PONIES 


cheap  horses.  There  are  good  horses  and  ponies 
everywhere  in  Russia.  In  Siberia  we  never  saw  any- 
one making  a  journey  on  foot ;  even  the  women  and 
children  ride,  when  they  go  short  distances. 

An  instructive  article  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  last 
December,  by  a  well-informed  writer,  said  that  Russia 
keeps  a  war-chest  of  a   hundred  millions  sterling  in 

6i 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


o-old,  and  that  it  is  constantly  augmenting  ;  also,  that 
with  a  total  land  force  whose  only  rival  is  that  of 
Germany,  she  can  put  200,000  mounted  infantry  into 
the  field  ;  for  alone  of  all  the  Powers  of  Europe,  the 
Russians  have  recognised  the  great  utility  of  mounted 
infantry. 


62 


CHAPTER  V 
ON   THE   OBI   RIVER 

ON  1 6th  June,  after  passing  over  the  famous  iron 
bridge,  we  arrived  at  Ob  station  and  the  town 
of  Novo-Nicholaewsk,  our  point  of  departure  for  the 
Altai  district.  Here  we  found  Mr.  Cattley  and  his 
sons  waiting  for  us,  and  we  were  soon  walking  over 
to  his  house  and  accepting  his  hospitality. 

It  was  almost  impossible  to  find  out  at  what  time 
the  steamer  Rossia,  which  was  to  take  us  up  the  Obi 
River,  would  arrive  at  Novo-Nicholaewsk.  Indeed, 
the  traveller  in  Siberia  is  at  once  struck  by  the  diffi- 
culty experienced  in  getting  any  accurate  information. 

Another  difficult  thing  is  to  get  the  ordinary  Russian 
or  Siberian  to  hurry.  If  you  press  him  too  much,  you 
run  the  risk  of  giving  offence. 

If  you  ask  for  information,  you  nearly  always  receive 
the  reply  "  ne  znaiyu  "  (I  don't  know),  or  if  you  ask 
when  anything-  will  be  ready,  it  is  "  sichass  "  (directly). 

Another  trait  and  I  have  done.  You  arrange,  the 
night  before  a  journey,  with  a  driver,   for  horses  and 

63 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


carts  at  dawn,  olvint^"  most  careful  instructions  ;  and 
next  niornini4-  at  the  appointed  time  he  comes  to  you 
for  fresh  orders,  and  you  find  he  has  sent  his  horses 
out  to  graze  and  can  let  you  have  them  with  difficulty 
by  noon.  He  really  brinos  them  by  two  o'clock  ;  or, 
if  it  is  later,  he  says  he  cannot  start  till  next  morning, 
as  the  road  is  difficult,  etc.  How  familiar  this  sort  of 
thing  is  to  Anglo-Indians!  I  used  to  think  the  Hindu 
dilatory,  now  I  no  longer  think  him  so  bad. 

Novo-Nicholaewsk  can  be  described  in  a  few  words. 
It  is  a  "mushroom"  town  of  sawn  planks  and  logs, 
with  open  spaces  about  a  hundred  feet  wide,  grey 
alluvial  clay  taking  the  place  of  roads.  Standing,  as 
it  does,  within  a  short  walk  of  Ob  station  on  the  rail- 
way, and  of  the  banks  of  the  Obi,  one  of  the  finest 
waterways  in  Asia,  it  has  a  great  future  before  it. 
Already  fortunes  have  been  made.  There  are  not 
many  murders  ;  it  is,  I  believe,  far  behind  Tomsk  and 
Irkutsk  in  this  respect,  and  a  very  few  years  will  see 
it  a  thoroughly  up-to-date  town.  Eight  years  ago,  it 
is  said,  one  could  have  bought  the  land  on  which  the 
town  stands  for  a  few  roubles. 

A  specific  instance  of  its  mushroom  growth  will  be 
worth  quoting.  There  is  a  man  in  Novo-Nicholaewsk 
who  pays  the  Government  a  rouble  per  year  rent  for 
his  ground,   measuring    about  an   acre ;    and  he   lets 

64 


On  the  Obi  River 


quite  a  small  piece  of  it,  about  a  tenth,  for  seventy-five 
roubles  a  year. 

Novo-Nicholaewsk,  in  common  with  other  places  on 
the  line,  exports  Siberian  butter  to  Denmark  and  to 
England. 

At  last,  on  the  evening-  of  June   iSth,  our  steamer 


^  -I    \  ■   .,-  ^    5  !'l 


*" 


FIREWOOD    STATION    ON    THE    BANKS   OF   THE   OHI 


arrived,  and  we  (Seton  Karr,  the  two  Cattleys,  and  I) 
walked  for  a  mile  along  dusty  paths,  through  scrub 
forest,  to  the  landing-stage,  which  is  near  the  famous 
railway  bridge  over  the  Obi.  We  then  went  on  board 
and  took  possession  of  two  cabins. 

There  was  a  small  dining-saloon,   where   excellent 
meals    were    to   be    had ;    but   it   was   hot    and  close, 

K  65 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


because,  in  accordance  with  the  usual  custom,  all  the 
windows  were  kept  closed. 

Whenever  it  was  empty  I  used  to  quietly  air  it  by 
opening  them. 

I  cannot  understand  the  Russians  of  the  lower 
middle  class  in  this  respect.  The  peasants  seem 
hardy  enough  ;  but  the  small  tradesmen  and  petty 
officials,  the  sort  of  travellers  one  meets,  keep  rooms 
shut  up  even  in  summer ;  and  when  starting  on  a 
drive  in  the  morning  at  a  post-house,  they  stand  in  the 
yard  shivering,  muffled  up  in  neckcloths  and  with 
thick  overcoats  on,  when  an  ordinary  Englishman 
feels  comfortable  in  a  tweed  suit,  and  would  not  dream 
of  an  overcoat.  We  have  such  a  variable  climate  in 
England  that  we  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to 
trouble  about  the  weather,  except  in  our  conversation. 
They  seemed  to  think  us  eccentric  for  wishing  to  go 
shooting  in  the  rain. 

The  lavatory  arrangements  on  board  were  poor, 
even  in  the  first-class.  There  M'as  only  a  wretched 
contrivance  for  washing  the  hands,  which  must  be  seen 
to  be  appreciated  ;  and  the  most  charitable  explanation 
that  suggests  itself  is  that  in  a  very  cold  climate  the 
water  for  washing  has  to  be  melted,  and  so  a  watch 
has  to  be  kept  on  its  consumption. 

Our  steamer  was  full  of  peasants  passing  between 

66 


On  the  Obi  River 


small  stations  on  the  river,  and  small  shopkeepers  and 
minor  officials  going  up  to  Barnaul  or  Bisk.  All 
classes  mixed  upon  the  deck.  Those  who  paid  first 
and  second  oot  cabins. 

The  Russian  peasant  settlers  of  Siberia  are  very 
independent  in  their  ways,  and  appear  to  be  the  most 
democratic,  not  to  say  casual,  people  in  their  manners 
to  strangers.  One  word  for  a  peasant,  I  believe,  is 
Kristianin  ;  and  certainly  they  keep  up  the  equality  of 
the  early  Christians.  Before  they  have  been  intro- 
duced to  you,  they  will  handle  your  property  in  the 
most  inquisitive  way,  and  before  they  have  been  talk- 
ing to  you  five  minutes  they  will  be  asking  you  how 
much  you  paid  for  your  clothes  or  your  gun,  where 
you  have  come  from  and  where  you  are  going  to, 
what  is  your  nationality  and  what  are  your  plans.  If 
you  are  sitting  at  meals  in  the  saloon  talking  to  your 
friends,  they  will  idly  stand  about  and  watch  you 
eating,  will  listen  to  the  conversation  and  break  into 
it  just  when  they  choose,  without  the  slightest  reason 
or  apology  for  the  intrusion.  They  will  draw  aside 
the  curtain  and  peep  into  your  cabin  as  they  pass 
along  the  deck,  from  mere  curiosity  and  not  from  any 
intention  to  offend.  If  you  resented  it  they  would  be 
surprised.  But  on  the  whole  they  are  a  good-natured 
and  orderly  lot  of  people. 

67 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


There  is  a  good  deal  of  hand-shaking  in  Russia. 
I  saw  a  sailor,  who  was  hauling  at  a  rope,  bow  politely 
and  shake  hands  with  a  comrade  who  had  come  to 
help  him. 

Some  of  the  poorer  peasants  were  heavy-featured 
men  with  ;i  thick  mop  of  hair  chopped  off  at  the  back 
of  the  neck  into  the  shape  of  half  a  mushroom,  as  if 
by  the  horizontal  cut  of  an  axe.  They  have  light 
hair  and  fine  blue  eyes  ;  there  is  plenty  of  bone  and 
muscle  about  them  ;  they  are  quiet-looking  men  and 
give  way  civilly  as  you  pass.  Some  of  the  Russians 
are  about  the  finest-looking  white  men  I  have  seen. 

In  the  third-class  there  were  little  framework  bunks 
ranged  catacomb-wise  ;  all  round  the  main  deck,  men 
and  women  sleeping  in  their  clothes  or  partly  so  ;  the 
half-dressed,  careworn-looking  women  of  the  poorer 
class  were  struggling  with  untidy  bundles  and  with 
numerous  children,  trying  to  attend  to  all  their  wants. 
The  men  sleep  in  their  coats  and  top-boots.  Among 
the  poorer  classes  I  am  describing,  a  shake,  and  the 
running  through  the  hair  of  a  comb  drawn  from  the 
w^aistcoat  pocket,  seem  the  correct  toilet ;  and  you 
often  see  the  humbler  Russians  using  the  comb  as 
they  enter  a  room. 

The  Russians  seem  to  be  even  more  restless  a 
people  than  the  Anglo-Saxons  ;  you  see  them  walking 

68 


On  the  Obi  River 


about  indoors,  in  rooms,  passages,  corridors  of  trains, 
and  steamers  ;  doing  nothing,  but  ready  to  take  part 
in  anything  that  is  of  the  slightest  interest. 

Before  going  further,  it  should  be  explained  that 
there  is  no  attenipt  to  describe  Russian  society,  of 
which  I  saw  very  little  ;  1  took  no  private  introduc- 
tions into  Russia  or  Siberia  except  one  to  my  English 
friends,  because  such  introductions,  however  pleasant, 
would  have  been  a  hindrance,  obliging  unnecessary 
halts  by  the  way  ;  so  that  nearly  all  my  experience  of 
Russians,  except  at  Bisk  and  Novo-Nicholaewsk,  was 
among  the  peasant  class  in  public  conveyances  and 
post-houses. 

Getting  up  early  on  19th  June  we  were  given  some 
good  coffee  and  rolls  in  the  little  saloon  ;  and  then, 
anxious  to  see  the  Obi  River,  I  went  out  into  the 
bows. 

There  was  a  fine  volume  of  water  with  a  good 
current,  and  I  realised  that  we  were  on  one  of  the 
great  waterways  of  the  world. 

The  enorines  of  our  boat  were  forcino-  us  south 
against  the  whole  will  of  the  river,  which  comes  down 
full  at  this  season  from  the  Altai  highlands,  the 
Southern  Siberian  Switzerland.  The  brown  muddy 
water,  fat  with  alluvial  soil,  fiows  with  determination, 
a  swift,  smooth  sheet,  reflecting  the  sky  like  polished 

69 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

copper.  The  river  appeared  to  be  the  embodiment  of 
silent  power,  as  if  it  meant  to  sweep  our  shell  of  a 
steamer  a  few  thousand  miles  down  to  the  north  ;  it 
seemed  to  be  opposing  our  journey  to  our  wished-for 
goal. 

On  either  side  are  wide  green  cultivated  pastures, 
rising  to  distant  low  hills  ;  and  these  pastures  are 
dotted  over  with  herds  of  cows,  sheep,  and  horses. 

A  town  to  the  left,  all  brown  chalets,  with  pic- 
turesque pent  roofs,  lying  at  a  flat  angle,  with  deep 
eaves,  appeared  on  the  eastern  shore,  overlooking  a 
steep  scarp  scoured  out  by  the  current  at  a  curve  ;  an 
island,  covered  with  low  forest,  lay  in  front  of  us  ;  and 
in  the  far  blue-grey  distance  upstream  a  long  line  of 
higher  forest  seemed  to  bar  our  path,  where  the  river 
made  a  bend. 

The  air  was  pure  and  exhilarating,  an  air  of  English 
summer,  not  cold,  but  just  cool  enough  ;  and  the  vivid 
green,  short-grassed  prairie,  showing  infinite  spaces 
on  either  side,  was  so  evidently  left  to  nature  that  one 
had  in  its  appearance  a  guarantee  of  pure  air. 

We  had  at  this  time  a  cloudy  English  sky  and  a 
smart  shower  of  rain. 

There  are  piles  of  firewood  seven  feet  high  at  the 
landing-stages,  made  of  logs  like  half-round  sleepers, 
stacked  in  thousands. 

70 


On  the  Obi  River 


We  stopped  at  Ardenski  to  take  in  firewood,  and 
the  people  left  the  ship  for  half  an  hour's  stroll  on  the 
shore.  It  was  exactly  like  a  bit  of  English  river 
scenery.  Willows  overhung  the  water's  edge ;  the 
bright  green  meadows  were  flat  and  marshy  ;  there 
were  cows  and  a  bior  barn  in  the  foreofround  ;  and 
dark  woods  filled  in  the  distance.  It  w^as  hot  English 
summer  weather,  by  noon,  indeed,  almost  uncomfort- 
ably hot ;  and  I  made  myself  conspicuous  among  the 
Russians,  who  wore  fur  caps  and  felt  hats,  by  walking 
about  in  a  Cawnpore  pith  hat,  a  kind  which  they  had 
never  seen  before.  If  you  are  an  Anglo-Indian,  and 
have  learnt  to  respect  the  sun,  take  one  ;  for  you  may 
get  real  Indian  heat,  Scotch  mist,  or  snow  at  any 
time  on  the  Mongolian  frontier. 

At  5.30  p.m.  on  this  day,  June  19th  (which  was  the 
Russian  June  6th),  a  mist  of  rain,  with  thunder  and 
lightning,  came  down  the  river  from  the  Altai  and 
turned  the  marginal  forests  to  a  grey-green.  The 
trees  here  were  of  medium  height  and  left  to  erow 
wild,  and  looked  very  beautiful  and  park-like. 

River  scenery,  when  left  to  itself,  is  nearly  always 
beautiful,  whether  you  are  here  or  in  Burma,  on  the 
African  Tana  or  the  Indian  Nerbudda  ;  you  get  the 
same  sort  of  views  of  sandy  shoals  or  scarped  curves, 
and  overhanging  forest  reflected  in  gleaming  water. 

71 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

Of  its  winter  aspect,  of  the  world  of  snow,  I  can  say- 
nothing-  ;  but  I  imagine  the  country  would  not  lose  in 
interest  even  then. 

As  we  went  to  the  bank  about  this  time  for  wood, 
clouds  of  large  mosquitoes  charged  on  to  the  steamer 
and  fastened  on  us  all.  We  had  to  shut  our  cabin 
windows. 

We  passed  timber  rafts  guided  by  four  men  each, 
drifting"  down  the  middle  of  the  river,  on  their  way  to 
saw-mills  at  Novo-Nicholaewsk.  They  had  been  cut 
on  the  Obi  banks  higher  up. 

Bersk,  which  we  had  passed  on  the  right  bank, 
standing  on  an  affluent  of  the  Obi  of  the  same  name, 
is  a  great  place  for  the  collection  of  timber,  which 
g"oes  to  the  Imperial  Cabinet  saw-mills  at  Novo- 
Nicholaewsk. 

These  saw-mills  are,  I  understand,  the  private 
property  of  the  Czar. 

On  the  night  of  19th  June  I  went  on  deck  and 
found  the  river  shining  like  a  silver  salver,  with  a 
yellow  sky  broken  by  very  dark  grey  clouds.  The 
olive-green  forest  lay  behind  ;  later,  as  it  grew  darker, 
a  black  line  of  bank  and  forest,  with  the  moon  shining 
over  it,  reflected  in  the  water. 

On  June  20th  the  afternoon  was  spent  by  me  on 
deck  looking  through   my   large  telescope  at   horses 

72 


On  the  Obi  River 


orazinor  on  the  distant  hills.  There  were  white  orulls 
on  a  low  mud  island  filling  up  the  foreground.  The 
boat  tied  up  at  Barnaul  at  about  midnight,  and  as  our 
steamer  for  Bisk  had  not  yet  come,  we  went  to  bed. 

On  the  2 1st  we  got  up  at  eight  a.m.  and  shifted  our 
baofSfaSfe  into  the  other  steamer,  now  lyincr  alonsfside 
ours  ;  then  the  elder  Cattley  and  I  went  into  the  town 
of  Barnaul  to  call  upon  the  officer  of  the  Imperial 
Cabinet  for  the  Altai  district,  which  is  the  priv^ate 
property  of  the  Czar.  General  Koublietsky  Patookh, 
who  filled  this  post,  was  not  quite  ready  to  see  us 
when  we  arrived,  and  we  were  shown  into  a  large 
reception-room,  which  must  make  an  ideal  ballroom. 
There  was  a  row  of  drawing-room  chairs  drawn  up 
along  the  wall,  reflected  in  a  well-polished  parquet 
floor  ;  and  opposite,  ranged  in  large  pots  near  the 
windows,  were  magnificent  palms  and  evergreens. 
On  the  walls  were  three  full-length  portraits  of  the 
present  Czar  and  his  two  predecessors. 

The  General  received  us  in  his  more  comfortable 
study,  where  we  showed  him  our  intended  route  on 
the  map.  He  gave  us  a  note  to  an  Ispravnik  of  police 
who  was  making  the  road  up  the  Chuya  River,  now  in 
course  of  construction. 

After  this  visit  we  drove  through  the  town  and 
up  to  a  hill,  which  we  ascended  by  steps,  where  there 

75 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


was  a  well-kept  cemetery  ;  and  from  here  we  were 
able  to  get  a  good  view  of  Barnaul. 

It  is  a  very  large  town,  well  laid  out,  and  already 
well  established,  with  many  shops,  and  will  be  a  fine 
city  some  day.  At  present  it  smells  of  shavings  in 
every  street,  and  there  are  wooden  side-walks,  and 
it  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  "boomed"  town. 

A  funeral  came  up  while  we  were  on  the  hill,  three 
women  wailing  loudly  in  front,  followed  by  four  men 
carrying  a  coffin-lid,  then  the  bearers,  and  the  corpse, 
carried  waist-high  by  means  of  straps  passed  over 
their  shoulders. 

We  came  back  to  the  boat,  and  pushed  off  from  the 
wharf  at  two.  It  was  a  smaller  steamer,  and  rather 
overcrowded. 

We  called  at  six  p.m.  at  a  little  Hooded  island  for 
wood.  Floating  on  a  pool  were  hundreds  of  small 
rafts  of  timber,  just  as  they  had  been  borne  down  by 
a  stream,  in  round  loes  some  ten  feet  lono-  and  a  foot 
thick.  The  logs  are  detached  singly  from  these  rafts, 
run  up  on  to  the  bank  on  skids,  and  sawn  into  yard 
lengths  ;  then  these  lengths  are  split  up  longitudinally 
and  stacked  in  the  great  stacks  you  see  on  the  bank, 
measuring  each  some  twenty  yards  square. 

There  were  two  men  at  a  time  carrying,  on  pairs  of 
stretched  poles,  loads  of  this  firewood  on  to  the  ship, 

76 


On  the  Obi  River 


across  a  gangway,  just  as  an  ocean  steamer  takes  in 
coals. 

This  was  a  very  pretty  spot.  Wooded  islands  rose 
everywhere  out  of  the  river,  which  seemed  high  with 
snow-water  ;  and  there  were  pleasing  distant  views 
of  forest  through  the  water  passages.  A  very  tame 
wagtail,  looking  for  shavings  for  its  nest,  ran  about 
close  to  our  feet. 

As  the  sun  set  we  were  steaminor  ahead  between 
wildernesses  of  low,  forest-covered  islands  and  glassy 
water  lanes,  with  the  pine-scented  river  air  fanning 
our  bows. 

There  is  no  pasture  here — it  is  all  low,  flooded 
forest  of  green-grey,  feathery,  water-loving  growths, 
rising  to  a  uniform  height  of  about  twenty  feet. 

The  trees  here  must  live  under  curious  natural 
conditions,  getting  a  good  deal  of  water  in  summer 
and  snow  in  winter.  We  came  to  a  lonor  line  of 
plateau,  showing  a  surface  of  green,  rolling  pasture, 
under  the  precipitous  earth  sides  of  which  the  remains 
of  snow-slips  were  still  lying  in  the  gullies.  Though 
we  were  already  in  the  Altai  district  there  was  no 
appearance  of  mountains  yet.  All  the  journey  through 
Russia  and  Siberia,  except  where  our  train  crossed 
the  Urals,  had  been  over  flat  country. 

We  were  passing  the  plateau,  with  cliffs  a  hundred 

79 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

feet  high,  scored  by  gullies,  where  the  hummocks  of 
snow,  ten  feet  deep,  still  lay  dark  and  dirty,  and 
scarcely  distinguishable  from  the  dark  colour  of  the 
gully  sides,  covered  with  dust  round  the  edges,  and 
mottled  with  dust  on  the  surfaces,  and  fringed  by 
naked  earth,  where  the  carpet  of  green  grass  had  not 
yet  grown  up  to  replace  the  shrinking  snow.  We 
passed  a  wooden  town,  with  ponies  grazing  over  the 
emerald  pasture  round  it,  and  in  its  outskirts  were 
square  stock-yards  like  those  we  had  seen  in  Russia ; 
and  there  was  a  church  on  a  hill.  In  every  gully 
overlooking  the  river,  to  within  thirty  feet  of  the 
water's  edge,  was  a  deep  hummock  of  dirty  snow, 
though  we  had  had  Indian  heat  all  day,  and  the 
nights  had  brought  only  the  English  summer  cool- 
ness. This  shows  what  extremes  of  climate  prevail 
here,  and  with  what  a  rush  the  summer  comes  on. 

The  sun  set  at  about  nine  p.m.,  the  sky  having 
orown  an  oranoe  and  rose,  reflected  in  the  dancino- 
water  ;  the  plateau  line  became  blacker  and  blacker  ; 
cattle  were  crawling  along  the  skyline  of  the  plateau, 
with  the  attendant  upright  figures  of  their  cow^herds — 
the  prairie  villages  we  had  lately  passed  all  had  stock- 
yards, and  cattle  had  been  visible  everywhere. 

Between  the  clay  cliffs  of  the  plateau  and  the  steamer 
there  was  a  low  marshy  island,  dotted  with  pollarded 

80 


On  the  Obi  River 


water-loving,  grey-leaved  trees,  with  short,  thick 
trunks  like  those  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames  at 
Oxford. 

On  Monday,  22nd  June,  we  were  still  making  for 
Bisk,  the  river  getting  perceptibly  narrower.  There 
were  some  distant  mountains  visible  on  this  morning, 
with  snow  on  them.  Everywhere  were  pastures  and 
herds  of  ponies.  It  is  said  the  Altai  district  contains 
some  of  the  finest  pastures  in  the  world. 

Soon  after  noon  we  were  steaming  between  pines  ; 
not  high,  but  pine  forest  everywhere  ;  and  distant  blue 
mountains,  snow-capped  and  snow-streaked,  began  to 
be  plainly  visible  everywhere  to  the  south. 

At  eight  p.m.  we  reached  Bisk,  and  getting  our 
baggage  into  two  peasants'  carts,  we  walked  beside 
them  up  a  street  with  wooden  side-walks  and  wooden 
houses  smelling  of  shavings.  We  were  comfortably 
installed  in  two  rough  double-storied  inns  built  of 
logs.  The  one  in  which  the  elder  Cattley  and  I  took 
refuge  was  called  the  "  Gastinitza  Feodorova,"  the  pro- 
prietor of  which  was  a  pleasant  and  civil  man,  who 
gave  us  his  personal  attention  and  put  himself  out  for 
us  a  great  deal.  Moreover,  he  had  a  good  back  yard 
and  lock-up  store  for  baggage  and  hunting  trophies. 
He  told  us  Major  Cumberland  had  put  up  here  in  clays 
gone  by. 

M  81 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

Bisk,  though  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  is  as  much 
Russian  as  a  town  in  Russia  proper,  and  except  for  the 
primitive  roads,  is  quite  civiHsed.  There  are  several 
Russian  merchants  and  well-to-do  residents,  a  club, 
and  more  than  one  bank.  There  are  some  fine  stone 
houses,  notably  the  Russo-Chinese  Bank.  The  chief 
trade  is  in  Siberian  butter. 

Cattley  took  me  in  the  evening  to  see  the  Bisk  Club, 
where  the  band  was  playing  in  the  club  garden,  and 
the  bandmaster,  a  nice  fellow,  a  major,  and  one  of  the 
most  courteous  of  men,  played  "  Home,  Sweet  Home  " 
to  us.  We  met  with  a  oood  deal  of  l-;indness  from 
private  friends  of  Cattley 's  at  Bisk, 

I  shall  never  forget  the  walk  home  from  the  club 
after  dark,  on  a  wet  night,  on  the  wooden  side-walks 
of  a  modern  Siberian  "  boom  town."  The  planks 
were  unlit,  and  scarcely  distinguishable  from  the  street, 
which  was  one  deep,  black  quagmire  with  pools  and 
holes  full  of  water.  There  were  hills  and  valleys  and 
pot-holes  of  mud  ;  while  savage  dogs  barked  furiously 
from  the  houses.  We  reached  the  little  wooden  hotel 
without  mishap — ready  for  an  early  start  next  day. 


82 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  ALTAI  HIGHLANDS  AND  CHUISKY  TRACT 

T  T  was  not  till  five  p.m.  on  June  24th  that  we  got 
-L  off  from  Bisk  in  a  large  tarantass  with  three 
horses,  and  two  telegas,  or  carts,  with  a  pair  each. 
The  baggage  goes  in  these  wooden  carts,  but  the 
usual  conveyance  for  passengers  is  either  a  telyeshka 
or  a  tarantass.  The  former  is  made  of  strong,  black 
wicker-w^ork,  and,  like  the  teleo'a,  it  has  somethino-  the 
shape  of  a  double-ended  punt.  It  rests  similarly  on  a 
framework  with  four  small  wheels  wide  apart.  This 
basket  carriage  being  open,  is  quite  exposed  to  rain 
and  splashing  mud  ;  also  a  seat  has  to  be  improvised 
of  tents  or  pillows  ;  so  unless  the  weather  is  likely  to 
be  tolerably  fine  it  is  better  to  take  a  tarantass. 

This  is  like  the  telyeshka,  but  there  is  generally  a 
seat  for  two  people  to  sit  upon,  and  the  wicker-work 
at  the  back  is  continued  up  over  the  seat  to  form  a 
fixed  hood.  The  whole  basket  is  also,  if  I  remember 
rightly,  covered  with  thin  black  leather  or  oilcloth. 
In  the  superior  kind  of  tarantass  the  hood  is  an 
ordinary  carriage  one,  made  to  raise  or  lower. 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Most  tarantasses  require  a  pair,  or  even  three  horses 
(called  a  troika).  The  centre  horse  is  between  the 
shafts    and   wallops    under  the    "  dougah "    hoop  con- 


ON    THE    UITER    CHUYA 


necting  them,  while  the  outside  horses  gallop  simply 
attached  by  traces. 

The  simpler  "  telyeshka  "  form  of  carriage,   having 
no  seat,  can  be  used  for  baggage. 

84 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


After  going  at  a  gallop  for  twenty  versts*  through 
park-like  forest  alternating  with  cultivation,  we  reached 
the  ferry  over  the  Ob  at  six  p.m.,  just  too  late  to  cross, 
as  the  raft  was  to  be  seen  in  midstream  going  away 
from  us. 


z^«>u^-ij 


OUR    TARANTASS,    NEAR   TENGINSKY    LAKli 


The  scene  here  was  lively,  as  there  were  many  carts 
and  tarantasses  waiting  to  be  taken  over. 

We  sat  on  the  sand  and  made  tea,  foregathering  with 
a  Russian  traveller,  the  possessor  of  a  samovar  and  of 
some  German  sentences. 

*  A  verst  is  1,167  yards,  or  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile. 
85 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


The  peasants  were  patiently  making  the  best  of  it 
under  their  carts,  Hke  gypsies,  the  chiklren  running 
about  with  their  white  feet  bare.  We  were  told  that 
such  was  the  congested  state  of  the  country  traffic,  and 
slowness  of  this  ferry,  that  fifty  people  and  as  many 
carts  had  been  waiting  here  for  three  days. 

The  ferry  never  came  back  that  night,  though  our 
Russian  friend  emptied  his  revolver  into  the  air  as 
a  signal  that  we  were  getting  impatient.  It  seems 
the  custom  to  go  "  heeled "  in  parts  of  Siberia 
where  there  are  long  lonely  night  journeys,  though 
the  weapon  is  not  obtrusively  shown.  Certainly  we 
saw  nothing  to  justify  the  practice  on  this  journey; 
and  I  should  say  the  ordinary  peasants  of  the  Altai, 
who  are  country  people  pure  and  simple,  are  a  most 
respectable  class,  and  there  would  be  few,  if  any, 
criminals  amono-  them.  In  the  mininof  districts  it 
mioht  be  different. 

We  spent  a  most  miserable  night  in  the  rain.  There 
was  no  shelter  except  in  the  tarantass,  which  was  too 
short  to  enable  us  to  lie  in  it  at  full  length.  The  tents 
were  carefully  roped  up  under  waterproof  covers  in 
the  carts,  and  it  was  too  dark  to  look  for  tent-pegs  and 
pitch  them  ;  besides,  we  expected  to  be  taken  over  at 
any  moment.  Cattley  managed  to  get  a  little  sleep, 
but  being  taller  and  unable  to  fit  into  the  tarantass,  I 

86 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 

put  on  my  waterproof  and  walked  about  on  the  sandy 
shore  most  of  the  night. 

On  25th  June  we  crossed,  at  six  a.m.  The  reason 
given  for  the  delay  was  that  the  boatman  on  duty  had 
been  drunk.      The  fair-haired  giant  who  actually  took 


FERRY   ON    THE    KATUN 


us  over,  whom  we  called  the  "Viking,"  was  certainly 
not  drunk.  The  ferry  was  really  a  raft  platform  on 
two  boats,  and  provided  with  paddles  moved  literally 
by  horse-power. 

There  are  four  horses  harnessed  to  the  four  poles  of 
a  horizontal  capstan,  which  by  a  primitive  arrangement 

87 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

of  cog-wheels  drives  the  paddle.  There  is  also  a  man 
witli  a  steering-oar  at  the  other  end  of  the  raft.  It  is 
very  slow  and  terribly  hard  work  for  the  ponies  ;  a 
couple  of  men  flick  them  continually  with  whips  to 
make  them  go  round.  The  circular  track  is  necessarily 
a  very  small  one.  and  consisting  merely  of  old  deck 
planks,  it  becomes  as  slippery  as  glass.  The  ponies 
cannot  enjoy  the  labour,  as  they  are  almost  skeletons, 
and  their  speaking  eyes  tell  of  the  last  stage  of  ex- 
haustion. It  is  only  on  these  pony-boats  that  I  have 
seen  ponies  overworked  or  ill-used  in  Russia  ;  for 
Russians  seem  generally   kind  to  their  animals. 

As  we  neared  the  other  side,  we  were  working  up 
against  the  current  close  inshore,  the  ponies  being  in 
the  bows  upstream,  and  the  "Viking"  with  his  big 
oar  in  the  stern  downstream.  1  was  standing  next 
him.  Suddenly  there  was  a  shout,  and  the  "Viking" 
threw  himself  flat  on  the  dirty  deck,  and  dangled  his 
hands  in  the  water  in  the  well  between  the  two  pon- 
toons. Half  guessing  what  was  up,  I  exactly  imitated 
him,  and  threw  myself  flat,  and  a  man  drifted  down- 
stream into  our  arms.  We  grabbed  him  by  his  wet 
shirt  and  landed  him  like  a  fish  on  the  deck.  This 
was  a  man  who  had  fallen  in  while  whipping  the  ponies 
round. 

W^e  drove  on   from  the  ferry  over  country  exactly 

88 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


like  the  Central  Provinces  of  India  after  the  rains. 
The  soil  was  what  we  in  India  call  "black  cotton" 
soil;  and  on  the  evening  of  25th  June  we  reached 
Altaiskoe,  ninety  versts  from  Bisk.  There  were 
picturesque  chalets  overlooking-  a  street  full  of  black 
liquid  mud  ;  in  fact,  I  called  it  a  "black  mud  Venice." 
There  are  a  few  shops.  Altaiskoe  is  under  snow  in 
winter  and  mud  in  summer,  and  I  should  want  a  good 
deal  of  business  to  induce  me  to  live  there.  It  is  a 
pity  there  is  so  much  mud  underfoot  in  the  short 
summer,  for  when  we  were  there  we  had  a  blue 
Indian  sky,  and  the  site  of  the  town  is  within  a  most 
beautiful  circle  of  pine-clad  mountains,  the  beginning 
of  the  beautiful  Altai  highlands  ;  the  scenery  of  which 
Russians  in  Siberia,  who  know  it,  are  never  tired  of 
extolling — and  rightly  so.  This  Switzerland  in  Asia 
will  be  better  known  as  time  goes  on,  and  it  deserves 
a  far  wider  fame  than  it  has  yet  attained. 

The  houses  are  built  of  logs  with  large  eaved  roofs 
— they  looked  exactly  like  the  houses  Anglo-Indians 
erect  in  Kashmir.  We  got  fowls  and  eggs  everywhere 
on  this  route,  and  in  the  morning  we  were  roused  by 
the  cocks  crowing  in  a  very  homely  way.  There  is  a 
good  deal  of  cultivation,  Hax  and  hemp  being  grown 
in  this  part  of  the  country.  We  put  up  in  a  peasant's 
house  which  acted  as  a  staging-house. 

N  89 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

On  the  26th  June  we  drove  from  Altaiskoe  to 
Chergi,  forty-five  versts.  The  alpine  scenery  was 
very  fine.  We  noticed  many  beautiful  wild  flowers, 
among"  them  purple  iris,  buttercups,  cowslips,  several 
wild  peas,  a  kind  of  orange  marsh-marigold,  and  blue 
and  white  forget-me-nots  in  sheets.  I  should  say  here 
that  my  knowledge  of  botany  is  in  no  way  equal 
to  the  task  of  scientifically  describing  what  I  saw. 
Professor  Sapozhnikoff  is  a  good  authority  on  this 
subject.  We  had  tea  at  Chergi  and  went  on  with 
fresh  horses,  Chergi  is  getting  quite  a  fashionable 
stopping-place  for  the  Altai.  There  was  at  least  one 
respectable  family  staying  here,  and  several  travellers 
passing  through. 

From  Cheroi  we  drove  on  the  same  evening  and 
through  the  night  for  another  thirty-five  versts  to 
Shebalina,  where  we  arrived  at  five  a.m.  on  the  27th 
at  the  house  of  the  merchant  doing  business  in  maral 
horns,  who  is  mentioned  by  Demidoff.  We  stayed  at 
his  house  all  day,  and  in  the  afternoon  we  strolled  out 
and  saw  him  sawing  off  the  horns  of  his  tame  stags, 
while  still  in  the  velvet.  We  also  saw  his  deer  park. 
We  were  disappointed  about  tarantasses  that  morning, 
but  got  away  from  Shebalina  quite  late  in  the  evening 
of  the  27th. 

After  dark,  as  we  were  galloping  past  a  forest,  we 

90 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


heard  wolves.  We  drove  all  night  through  moun- 
tains, and  next  morning  found  ourselves  in  beautiful 
scenery  before  Peschan.  We  were  in  pine-forest,  with 
glorious  wild  flowers  everywhere,  but  the  road  over 
cotton-soil  was  very  muddy,  and  corduroyed  by  timber 
logs  in  places.  It  was  very  jolting  work,  and  we  were 
splashed  and  spattered  when  occasionally  we  plunged 
into  deep  mud-holes.  We  passed  Peschan,  thirty-five 
versts  from  Shebalina,  and  another  ten  versts  brought 
us  to  the  Tenginsky  Lake. 

As  we  entered  the  basin  in  which  Tenginsky  Lake 
lies  we  came  on  most  remarkable  scenery. 

We  had  been  driving  uphill  for  some  time  through 
park-like  glades  carpeted  with  sheets  of  colour — 
blue  foro^et-me-nots,  and  orano-e  and  lemon-coloured 
blossoms,  three  kinds  of  wild  pansies,  and  several 
other  sorts  of  wild  flowers — and  we  had  just  got  to 
the  top  of  the  high  pass  between  pine-clad  hills,  and 
were  descending  the  steep  southern  slope  of  the  divide, 
when  we  stopped  our  troika,  constrained  thereto  by 
the  magnificent  view  which  lay  before  us.  Unfortu- 
nately, though  I  got  out  my  camera,  the  development 
of  the  distant  view,  owing  to  a  faulty  exposure,  failed, 
and  I  was  only  able  to  keep  as  a  memento  a  picture  of 
our  troikas  resting  on  the  steep  slope. 

In   the   foreground   the   track,    which   is  little  more 

93 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

than  a  wide  cattle-track  marked  by  wheels,  and 
deep  with  black  mud,  fell  away  to  a  vast  level 
valley  surrounded  by  an  amphitheatre  of  hills.  On 
either  side  of  the  track  were  rocks  surmounted  by 
pines. 

Below,  deep  down  in  the  middle  distance,  lay  a 
well- grassed  valley,  flat  and  smooth  as  a  cathedral 
lawn,  flower-flecked  and  forming  a  wide  avenue  be- 
tween two  walls  of  stately  cedars,  which  threw  their 
long  shadows  across  the  level  grass.  Beyond,  in  the 
dim  blue  haze  of  a  gloriously  fine  day,  some  four 
miles  of  open  green  plain  shelved  gently  to  a  lake, 
roughly  circular  in  form.  Over  the  quiet  green  slopes 
of  this  plain,  which  fell  imperceptibly  to  the  lake  from 
the  dark  cedar-clad  mountains,  there  swept,  near  the 
margin  of  the  lake,  mile-long  sheets  of  sky-blue  forget- 
me-nots,  and  nearer  the  foot  of  the  hills,  masses  of 
blazing  yellow  buttercups. 

Where  the  plain  sloped  up  to  the  edges  of  the 
forest,  stately  cedars  grew  in  isolated  clumps,  invading 
the  open  ground. 

There  were  straight-backed  Russian  cattle— black, 
white,  red,  or  piebald — grazing  in  very  large  herds, 
and  some  Kalmuk  horses  with  their  masters,  true 
children  of  the  steppe,  galloping  wildly  round  them. 
Near  the  lake  a  few  Kalmuk  huts,  shaped  like  North 

94 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


American   Indian  tents,   and   some  stock-yards   com- 
pleted the  picture. 

When  we  got  to  the  lal^e,  Cattley  and  1  had  lunch 
under  the  pines,   and  took  some  photographs  ;    and, 


^^^•prikTO 


iiL    ..lAiiN    ..  lixia^l    oi     o;>(,UL>Al 


startino-  arain  at  four,  we  arrived  late  in  the  evenino- 
of  the  28th  at  Ongudai,  after  doing  ninety-two  versts 
from  Shebalina.  Here  we  found  Seton  Karr  and  the 
younger  Cattley. 

We  left  Ongudai  at  noon  on    June   29th,  passing 

95 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


our  two  companions  after  a  few  hours.  I  had  selected 
wheels,  while  Seton  Karr  had  bari^ained  for  a  pony 
caravan.  I  had  three  troikas,  and  after  going  over  a 
very  high  and  difficult  pass,  with  a  fine  view  of  snow 
mountains  from  the  top,  we  reached  Kirkuchi,  a  little 
posting-house  on  a  plain,  which  was  walled  in  by 
steep  pine-clad  mountains  and  naked  cliffs.  The 
distance  from  Ongudai  was  thirty-five  versts.  The 
house  was  the  usual  pattern  of  posting-house,  built  of 
round  timber  and  roofed  with  two  layers  of  wooden 
planks.  This  house  was  prettily  situated,  overlooking 
the  abrupt  gorge  of  the  Katun  River. 

We  spent  the  evening  with  the  peasant  who  keeps 
this  house  trying  to  fish  in  a  small  torrent,  which  fell 
into  the  Katun  at  the  edge  of  the  plain,  but  we 
caught  nothing.  There  were  some  good  pools,  and 
our  host  had  caught  several  fish.  I  believe  they  were 
grayling. 

We  pitched  the  tent  and  slept  here  till  3.30  a.m.  on 
30th  June,  but  we  did  not  get  off  till  5.30  a.m.  Even 
then  we  could  only  get  two  small  telyeshkas  and  a 
pack-pony,  which  we  sent  in  advance. 

We  marched  thirty-seven  versts  with  another  high 
pass  to  the  Katun  ferry,  which  we  crossed,  and  rested 
at  another  posting-stage,  called  Ust-Iniya. 

The  same  dav,  with  chano^ed  horses,  we  continued 

96 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


our  journey  for  thirty-five  versts  to  lyedra,  a  small 
post-house  on  the  Chuya.  We  crossed  a  plain  on 
the  true  right  bank  of  the  Katun,  and  entered  for  the 
first   time  the  gorge  of  the  Chuya,  far  famed  for  its 


FELT   "YURTA"    used   BY    KIRGHIZ  AND   KALMUKS 

splendid  alpine  scenery.  We  drove  through  this  all 
the  evening  in  a  thunderstorm,  and  arrived  in  the 
dark  at  lyedra,  a  station  built  close  to  the  margin  of 
the  river. 

This  was  kept  by  Kalmuks.      The  Kirkuchi  station 
had  been  the  last  Russian  one,  the  Ust-Iniya  station 
o  97 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

having  been  also  kept  by  Kalmuks.  And  now  our 
journey  as  far  as  the  MongoHan  frontier  was  to  be 
entirely  through  the  Kalmuk  country,  These  Kalmuks 
call  themselves  Altaietz,  or  people  of  the  Altai.     The 


^x 


KALMUK   HUT  AND   SNOW   MOUNTAINS,    KURAI 


only  habitations  on  the  Chuya,  besides  the  posting- 
houses,  are  occasional  groups  of  true  Kalmuk  huts, 
extinguisher-shaped,  like  American  Indian  tents,  and 
roofed  with  bark,  or  by  felt  "  yurtas,"  which  are  used 
by  the  richer  Kalmuks,  though  I  believe  they  are  pro- 
perly the    Kirghiz   type   of  dwelling.      Some   of   the 

98 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 

wooden  huts  are  shaped  Hke  the  felt  yurtas,  with  a 
perpendicular  wall. 

On  I  St  July  we  left  lyedra  and  marched  to  Aigulak, 


A   VACCINATOR   GOING   TO   MONGOLIA 


a  morning  march  of  about  thirty-five  versts.  We 
passed  through  the  same  alpine  country,  generally 
skirting  the  river,  and  crossing  handsome  river-terraces 

99 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


of  smooth  alpine  pasture  between  fine  mountains,  the 
slopes  of  the  latter  reminding  me  of  the  Sindh  Valley 
of  Kashmir,  There  were  patches  of  wheat  cultivation 
near  the  Kalmuk  settlements.  The  hills  here  were 
much  decomposed  by  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold, 
and  were  evidently  being  rapidly  demolished  by 
denudation.  In  the  valleys  below  were  scattered 
rocks  which  had  fallen  from  above. 

At  Aigulak  we  had  to  change  to  pack-pony 
transport,  as  there  were  no  more  carts  to  be  had. 
We  marched  on  the  same  evening  to  Chibit,  twenty- 
two  versts,  making  the  acquaintance  on  the  way  of 
the  Russian  Ispravnik  of  Police,  who  was  engaged  in 
looking  after  the  work  on  the  new  Chuya  road,  called 
the  "  Chuisky  Tract."  This  road,  commencing  at 
Ongudai,  completes  the  wheeled  communication  be- 
tween Bisk  and  Kosh-Aoatch,  brinoino-  the  Siberian 
railway  many  days  nearer  to  the  Mongolian  frontier. 
It  is  made  chiefly,  I  believe,  for  the  use  of  officials 
and  for  the  encourao-ement  of  the  Chinese  trade  in 
brick-tea,  wool,  and  other  commodities. 

The  Ispravnik  was  living  in  a  large  camp  of  clean 
felt  "  yurtas,"  with  a  police  escort  and  a  large  staff  of 
Russians  and  Kalmuks,  travelling  comfortably  in 
much  the  same  style  in  which  a  deputy  commissioner 
travels  in  India.     We  stayed  at  the  Ispravnik's  camp 

lOO 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


an  hour,  waiting  for  the  train  to  clear,  and  then  we 
galloped  on  after  our  pack-ponies  and  reached  Chibit 
late.  We  had  some  trouble  in  crossing  a  stream  at 
Chibit,  as  it  rained  all  the  eveninof. 


PEASANT   BUILDERS  AT   KURAI 


On  2nd  July  I  allowed  the  caravan  to  go  on  and 
stayed  to  hunt  in  the  forest  for  roebuck,  which  were 
said  to  be  plentiful  here,  but  did  not  succeed  in  eettine 


LIBRAHY 

^TNTVERSTTY  01^  CMTFORMIA 
SANTA  BARBARA 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


a  head  of  this  little  buck.  Then,  galloping  on  with 
my  tent-boy,  Matai,  a  Russianised  Kalmuk  whom  we 
had  picked  up  at  lyedra,  I  reached  Kurai  with  the 
caravan,  after  going  thirty-five  versts.  All  the  scenes 
we  had  passed  through  had  been  splendid.  A  few 
versts  before  reaching  Kurai  we  surmounted  a  very 
high  pass,  where  we  had  an  excellent  view  of  a 
snowy  range  in  front  of  us,  overlooking  the  Kurai 
plain. 

This  Kurai  was  a  comfortable  spot,  as  the  posting- 
house  was  quite  new  and  unoccupied,  the  Kalmuk 
who  was  responsible  for  getting  horses  living  with  his 
family  in  a  Kalmuk  hut  close  by.  This  place  and 
Kouaktenar  were  the  two  prettiest  halting-places  on 
the  whole  route.  At  Kurai  we  had  a  mag^nificent 
view,  especially  to  the  west,  of  snow  mountains  and 
glaciers,  the  finest  mass  being  the  Dyosh-tugol  peak 
of  the  Biel-Kanak  Range  ;  while  on  one  side  of  the 
house  there  was  fine  forest,  and  on  the  other  was  an 
open  steppe  stretching  away  for  some  fifteen  versts  or 
more.  We  stayed  here  till  noon  on  3rd  July,  re- 
organising our  kit  and  taking  photographs ;  we  then 
marched,  going  over  the  plain  in  blazing  heat  to 
Kouaktenar,  twenty-five  versts. 

The  hut  at  Kouaktenar  is  well  situated  among  pine 
forests    and    overhanging    precipices    corniced    with 


The  Altai  Highlands  and  Chuisky  Tract 


snow — typical  ibex-ground  ;  and  we  were  shown  by  a 
Kalmuk  hunter  the  38-inch  horns  of  an  ibex  which 
he  had  shot  here.  He  said  ibex  were  plentiful, 
and  he  would  be  able  to  take  us  out  next  day  if  we 
would  wait  here,  but  he  said  he  thought  they  did  not 
oTow  lono-er  than  the  head  he  had  shown  us.  This 
did  not  seem  good  enough,  so  on  4th  July  we  marched 
on  to  Kosh-Agatch,  thirty-five  versts.  We  had  a 
great  deal  of  trouble  in  getting  across  the  Chuya  River 
at  this  place,  making  a  detour  of  some  miles,  and  even 
then  the  pack-ponies  got  in  so  far  that  much  of  our 
kit  became  wet.  It  will  not  be  very  long,  probably, 
before  they  have  a  bridge  here. 

We  were  now  within  forty  miles  of  the  home  of  the 
wild  rams  I  had  come  so  far  to  hunt. 


CHAPTER   VII 

THE    HAPPY   VALLEY   AND    MONGOLIA 

OUR  pony  caravan,  which  we  had  come  so  far  to 
organise,  stood  round  us  on  the  morning  of  July 
9th  outside  Kosh-Agatch  on  the  open  gravel  of  the 
steppe.  Seton  Karr,  being  unwell,  hired  a  country 
cart  for  the  first  march. 

The  Kosh-Agatch  steppe  is  some  fifty  miles  long 
by  twenty-five  wide,  its  length  running  east  and  west. 
It  lies  some  5,000  feet  above  the  sea. 

It  is  fairly  level  and  looks  like  an  old  lake-bed, 
beinor-  nothing  but  barren  sfravel,  save  where  sluoo-ish 
streams  twist  undecidedly  over  it  and  raise  a  growth 
of  small  bushes  and  grass.  It  is  a  cheerless  plain, 
swept  by  cold  winds ;  and  around  are  mountains 
streaked  and  capped  with  snow. 

If  the  Lake  of  Geneva  could  be  drained,  its  dry  bed 
in  winter  would  look  very  much  like  the  Kosh-Agatch 
plain  does  in  summer. 

Behind  us,  the  small  sugar-loaf  spire  of  the  Kosh- 
Agatch  village  church  showed  as  a  white  spot  against 
the    background    of    stony    mountains.       Before    us, 

106 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

twenty-five  miles  away,  across  the  plain  and  walling 
it  in,  rose  another  mass  of  peaks,  the  threshold  of 
Chinese  Monorolia, 

Immediately  in  front  of  us,  a  wide  gap  for  which 
we  were  making  marked  where  the  Chagan-Burgaza 
stream  entered  the  plain,  and  on  our  right  front,  six 
miles  further  to  the  west,  another  gap  marked  the 
Tarkuta, 


KALMUK    HUNTER,    POWAR 


Far  in  the  distance,  at  the  head  of  these  waters, 
where  they  took  their  source  in  the  high  snow-capped 
dividing  ridge  of  the  frontier,  and  scarcely  distinguish- 
able in  a  murk  of  black  clouds  just  breaking  into  rain, 
lay  low,  rounded  summits.  These  we  knew  to  be  the 
home  of  the  wild  sheep. 

Keeping  our  ponies  at  a  jog-trot,  at  the  rate  of 
about  five  miles  an  hour,  we  crossed  the  plain,  passing- 
some  small  lakes,  bordered  by  a  litde  scanty  vegeta- 
tion and  inhabited  by  Brahminy  ducks.      Later  a  few 


107 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


specks  proved  to  be  yeren  antelopes,  but  too  shy  to 
be  stalked  in  this  bare  country,  never  letting"  us  come 
nearer  than  five  hundred  yards.  It  was  a  cheerless 
march.  The  weather  had  been  threatening  us  with 
rolling  black  clouds  all  day,  and  as  we  entered  the 
Chagan-Ikirgaza  gap  the  rain  came  down.  W^e 
crossed  the  stream  to  the  proper  left  bank,  where 
some  Kalmuk  yurtas  stood  upon  ground  little  raised 
above  the  swamp-bordered  channel,  and  finally  we 
camped  uncomfortably  at  dusk  a  mile  further  up, 
where  a  shoulder  of  the  convero-intj  foot-hills  of  the 
gap,  coming  down  to  the  river,  left  a  narrow  margin 
of  dry  ground.  The  slopes  of  these  hills,  except 
where  they  broke  into  rocky  detritus,  were  clothed 
with  good  grass,  and  would  under  ordinary  conditions 
be  likely  ground  for  sheep,  tame  or  wild.  Indeed,  we 
found  them  dotted  over  during  the  daytime  with  the 
Kalmuk  flocks  and  large  droves  of  ponies.  Here,  for 
the  first  time,  we  came  on  a  pair  of  the  ever-interesting 
horns  of  wild  sheep,  lying  rotting  in  a  disused  channel 
which  had  been  scoured  out  by  the  flood  water. 

Next  day,  the  loth,  Seton  Karr  being  still  ill  and 
not  quite  fit  to  travel,  we  halted. 

The  conformation  of  the  hills  here  favouring  rifle 
practice,  and  as  we  were  still  too  far  from  the  wild- 
sheep  ground  for  there  to  be  any  risk  of  disturbing 

1 08 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


them,  I  put  up  a  target,  made  of  laths  and  calico,  and 
fired  at  it  all  day. 

On  I  ith  July  we  were  again  on  the  march.  Beside 
myself,  there  were  Seton  Karr  and  the  two  Cattleys, 
Matai,  a  Russianised  Kalmuk,  who  was  my  tent-boy, 
my  Kalmuk  cook,  two  hunters,  six  pony  drivers,  and 
eight  pack-ponies.  We  had  also  hired  twelve  riding- 
ponies  and  the  hunters  had  their  own,  so  we  were  all 
mounted.  We  carried  no  fodder  for  the  ponies,  which 
are  simply  turned  out  to  graze. 

We  followed  the  proper  right  bank,  on  a  pony- 
track  running  along  the  narrow  margin  where  the  hill- 
slopes  fell  steeply  to  the  stream. 

As  we  advanced,  we  found  in  an  old  Kalmuk  camp 
more  remains  of  wild-sheep  heads;  and  we  came  for 
the  first  time  on  wild  rhubarb,  growing  luxuriantly, 
with  a  thick,  red  stem,  as  it  grows  in  gardens  at 
home. 

After  going  ten  versts,  I  left  the  caravan,  taking 
two  Kalmuks,  and  we  put  our  ponies  to  the  steep  hill- 
sides to  the  west. 

Further  and  further  w^e  climbed  into  the  heart  of 
the  mountains,  stopping  often  to  spy  through  the 
glasses.  We  skirted  below  the  steep  cliffs  on  the 
Russian  or  north  side  of  the  frontier  ridge,  crossing 
the  lower  snows.     At  last,  a  heavy  storm  of  rain  and 

109 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


sleet  coming-  on,  and  there  being  no  natural  shelter, 
we  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  a  green  saddle  between 
two  valleys,  which  was  swampy  with  reindeer  moss, 
and  covered  ourselves  as  well  as  we  could  with  our 
cloaks. 

As  the  weather  began  to  clear,  we  were  just  getting 
up  to  start  for  the  point  of  the  river-bed  which  had 
been  agreed  upon  for  the  camp,  when  one  of  the 
Kalmuks  pointed  to  the  other  edge  of  our  saddle,  and 
there,  loominof  lavQ-e  in  the  mist,  were  our  first  lot 
of  wild  sheep,  some  two  hundred  yards  away,  gallop- 
ing hard,  for  they  had  just  seen  us. 

They  turned  out  to  be  only  ewes  and  young  ones  ; 
all  "  arkar,"  in  fact,  but  none  the  less  interesting.  So 
we  took  a  rapid  spy  at  them  with  the  glasses  as  they 
stood  for  a  moment  before  diving  into  the  valley. 

They  looked  taller  and  more  active  than  any  tame 
sheep,  and  of  a  dark  or  pale  yellow-grey  colour, 
according  to  the  manner  in  which  the  light  fell  upon 
them.     They  looked  very  game  animals. 

We  o-ot  back  at  nightfall  into  the  river-bed,  at  a 
point  ten  miles  above  the  place  wdiere  we  had  left  it ; 
and  after  having  made  some  casts  up  and  down  the 
river  to  look  for  traces  of  the  caravan,  we  found  it 
encamped  a  mile  above  us,  under  the  hills,  near  the 
left  bank  of  the  river,  and  a  mile  below  its  junction 

no 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


with   Its  large   tributary,  the  Bain-Chagan,   from  the 
south. 

This    Bain-Chagan  is  the   "Happy  Valley"   men- 


A    KALMUK    DRIVER 


tioned  by  Demidoff,  where  so  many  wild  sheep  were 
found  in  1897. 

On  July  1 2th  I  went  out  early.      Seton   Karr  was 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


still  feelini;-  unwell,  but  intended  to  have  a  try  after 
the  sheep  on  the  hills  near  camp. 

I  went  with  Powar,  my  hunter,  up  the  main  stream, 
the  Chagan-Buroaza,  which  at  the  junction,  as  one 
ascends  it,  makes  a  sharp  turn  to  the  west. 

There  were  alternate  valleys  and  rounded  bluffs 
comin"-  down  to  the  river-bed  on  the  left  bank,  and 
we  advanced  along  the  sides  of  the  hills  on  the  right 
bank  and  on  the  opposite  side  to  these  bluffs,  spying 
them  carefully  on  our  way. 

During  the  day  we  saw  in  this  way  no  less  than 
five  lots  of  "arkar,"  ewes  and  young  rams;  and 
towards  evening  we  climbed  up  on  to  a  very  high 
plateau,  at  the  back  of  the  bluffs  and  overlooking 
them. 

This  plateau  was  covered  with  fallen  rocks  and 
splinters,  loosely  thrown  together,  with  deep  holes 
and  chasms  showing  through  the  surface  rubbish. 
Grass,  moss,  lichen,  and  flowers  covered  these  here 
and  there  with  a  partial  growth ;  and  there  were 
several  boggy  spots.  It  was  a  very  bad  place  for 
ponies,  and  here  in  this  desolate  spot  I  found  some 
fine  skulls  of  Ovis  amnion ;  but  we  saw  no  live  rams, 
which  seemed  to  have  left  the  neighbourhood. 

As  we  reached  the  other  side  of  the  plateau,  away 
from  the  river,  we  found  that  it  fell  away  to  a  deep 

112 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

tributary  valley,  and  we  were  looking  down  over  snow 
cornices  and  sheer  precipices. 

It  seemed  to  be  typical  ibex-ground,  like  that  in 
Kashmir  and  Ladak. 

After  searching  the  cliffs  with  our  glasses  for  some 
time  in  the  hope  of  finding  ibex,  we  gave  up  the  hunt 
and  returned  to  camp. 

When  I  arrived,  Seton  Karr  had  not  yet  come  in  ; 
but  the  Cattleys  were  there,  and  they  said  he  had 
been  away  since  the  morning. 

When  it  was  nearly  dark  his  hunter  turned  up, 
urging  his  pony  down  a  steep  incline  towards  camp, 
and  to  his  saddle  were  tied  several  massive  rams' 
heads.  There  were  two  or  three  derelict  skulls  picked 
out  of  the  river,  and  one  fine  shot  head — the  first 
trophy  of  our  trip.  Then  Seton  Karr  came  in,  very 
tired  and  done  up. 

At  dinner  he  told  us  that  in  the  morning  he  had 
come  on  several  rams  in  the  hills  near  camp,  and 
leavino-  both  his  Kalmuks  behind  under  cover,  he  had 
himself  watched  the  flock  all  day,  getting  very  cold 
and  very  stiff  with  the  constrained  position.  Then, 
going  partly  in  the  open,  he  had  crawled  within  shot 
of  the  herd,  and  had  secured  the  ram  which  had  been 
brought  in  ;  and  I  think  it  was  on  this  stalk  that  he 
wounded  another. 

Q  113 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


This  was  a  well-deserved  trophy,  and  a  good  one, 
measuring  very  well. 

Next  day  I  went  to  the  junction  of  the  two  rivers, 
then  over  a  grassy  ridge,  and  down  into  the  Bain- 
Chagan,  where  some  cliffs  fell  abruptly  to  this  river. 
I  had  Prince  Demidoff's  book,  and  identified  this 
as  his  "Happy  Valley"  by  the  photograph  therein 
published. 

We  kept  up  the  river  under  the  bluffs  on  its  left 
bank,  that  is,  we  kept  to  our  own  right,  and  we 
stopped  to  spy  carefully  at  each  rise  ;  and  reaching  a 
higher  swell  in  the  ground  than  usual,  Powar  and  I 
left  our  two  ponies  (at  Fig.  I.)  with  their  bridles  on 
their  necks,  and  climbed  up  on  foot.  Half  a  mile 
behind,  also  under  cover  (at  i),  were  the  two  extra 
men  and  ponies,  which  in  my  earlier  hunts  I  was 
accustomed  to  bring  out  with  me. 

After  we  had  been  lying  using  the  glasses  for  some 
time,  Powar  showed  me  two  fair  rams,  a  ewe,  and  a 
young  ram,  resting  under  a  steep  bluff  (at  3),  on  the 
borders  of  a  shallow  watercourse.  They  were  on  our 
side  of  the  vedley,  and  about  Soo  yards  away,  to  our 
right  front. 

There  was  a  little  rising  knoll  (at  4)  right  ahead 
of  us,  and  to  the  left  of  that  was  the  steep  river-scarp, 
twelve  feet  deep,  dropping  to  the  level  of  the  pebbly 

114 


Figll. 


mm*'"""" 


^v,llm/)'i,;li(fl,illii(j,^ 


Fig.V 


Figlll. 


'■■'■''^"iif«im!!iim 


''%^*;i^%!fe''^ 


FigVI. 


%f^y;^,,,,^Y;v 


^llA^/,^''^....#'''4^^i'''^/iii;-^»fe>^''^ 


d.,  i66,  Piccadilly,  London. 


o 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


water-channels,  the  rouiih  surface  beinQ'  some  c;oo 
yards  wide,  with  streams  flowing  here  and  there, 
quietly  at  this  time  of  day  ;  though  later,  in  the  after- 
noon and  night,  they  would  bring  a  rush  of  water 
from  the  snows. 

We  first  satisfied  ourselves  that  the  sheep  were 
unlikely  to  move  for  a  long  time,  and  then  we  got  back 
to  the  ponies,  and  mounted,  signalling  as  we  did  so  to 
the  men  behind  to  keep  under  cover. 

Then  followed  an  hour's  stalk,  in  the  course  of  which 
we  again  left  our  ponies,  and  we  reached  a  second 
position  of  observation  at  the  knoll.  Then  down 
under  the  river-scarp,  and  afterwards  a  painful  crawl, 
almost  under  the  eyes  of  the  sheep,  across  the  pebbly 
bottom  of  a  tributary  torrent  a  hundred  yards  in  width, 
then  back  across  again  further  up  to  the  shelter  of  a 
terrace  which  ran  along  parallel  to  the  main  river, 
almost  in  continuation  of  the  knoll,  but  separated  from 
it  by  a  gap  through  which  we  should  have  been  seen 
had  we  taken  the  direct  course.  Here  at  last  (at  5) 
we  were  down-wind  of  the  sfame  and  not  more  than 
250  yards  away. 

Inch  by  inch  I  crept  up  to  the  edge  of  this  terrace  ; 
first  laying  down  my  hat,  then  getting  my  forehead  and 
eyes  over,  and  levelling  the  field-glass  between  the 
stems  of  grass.     Then  I  could  see  them  clearly. 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

Even  thougli  they  could  only  be  accounted  fair  rams, 
they  were  a  sight  to  gladden  a  hunter's  eyes  ;  and  one 
could  almost  count  the  wrinkles  on  the  fine  horns. 

Powar  reached  out  as  he  lay  for  four  pebbles,  and 
placed  them  by  their  sizes  in  the  relative  positions  in 
which  the  sheep  lay  to  one  another.  Then  pointing  to 
the  biggest  pebble,  he  whispered  "  bolshoi  "  (the  big 
one).  This  I  verified  through  the  glass  ;  and  then  we 
waited  for  about  half  an  hour.  I  had  several  cautious 
spies  through  the  glass,  but  could  not  make  out  even 
the  biggest  to  have  a  really  fine  head  ;  so  getting 
impatient,  and  unwilling  to  lose  the  whole  day,  I 
deliberately  whistled  through  my  fingers  to  make  the 
ram  get  up.  The  only  result  was  that  the  youngest 
ram  rose,  stretched  himself,  and  stared  at  me,  my  head 
being  just  visible.  I  lay  unmoved  for  some  minutes, 
and  then  changed  position  till  I  had  the  bigger  ram, 
which  was  still  sitting,  covered  by  the  rifle,  and  my 
finofer  crooked  on  the  trio^s^er.  Then  one  of  the  ewes 
jumped  up,  and  I  took  rather  a  hurried  shot  at  250 
yards  at  the  still  sitting  ram  and  missed  him  clean. 

Away  trotted  the  sheep,  and  I  watched  them,  too 
disgusted  to  fire  again,  and  fearing  to  wound  by  a 
running  shot  at  such  a  distance.  They  were  soon 
pelting  away  over  a  grassy  bluff,  and  they  never  stopped 
even  to  look  back. 

116 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

As  we  had  now  disturbed  the  ground,  we  went 
home. 

On  the  14th  we  went  down  to  Kosh-Agatch  for  fire- 
wood and  suppHes  for  the  men,  and  I  set  out  with  the 
elder  Cattley  for  a  preliminary  trip  into  Mongolia  by 
way  of  the  Happy  Valley. 

Seton  Karr,  who  was  still  ailing  and  had  elected 
to  await  my  return  with  the  younger  Cattley,  had  now 
got  a  second  trophy,  rather  a  light  one.  As  for  me,  I 
had  been  out  from  Kosh-Agatch  a  whole  week  with 
nothing  to  show  for  it,  and  felt  that  my  trip  would  be 
a  failure ;  hence  my  determination  to  try  on  the 
Mongolian  side. 

Early  on  the  14th  we  started,  Cattley  and  I.  Our 
small  caravan  consisted  of  the  cook,  hunter,  three 
pack-ponies,  and  the  smallest  te7ite  d'abri  (only 
three  feet  high),   in   which   we  were  both  to  sleep. 

We  kept  nearly  in  my  path  of  the  day  before,  care- 
fully scouting.  We  left  behind  us  the  scene  of  our 
initial  defeat  and  clung  to  the  right  bank  of  the  river, 
till  at  noon  we  reached  the  actual  Bain-Chagan  Pass. 
Here,  as  in  the  Chagan-Burgaza,  the  easy  lower 
slopes  of  the  valley,  hitherto  covered  with  grass,  con- 
verging and  getting  steeper  as  we  advanced,  had  now 
run  up  into  tremendous  chasms,  bare  of  all  vegetation 
and  overhung  by  black  precipices  streaked  with  nearly 
perpendicular  snow. 

117 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


This  was  no  longer  the  home  of  the  sheep,  but  ibex- 
ground,  ;uk1  as  we  had  a  long  march  before  us  we  shut 
up  our  glasses  and  hurried  on  up  the  torrent-bed, 
hemmed  in  by  precipices,  which  wound  up  on  to  the 
Chinese  divide.  When  this  should  have  run  up  into 
a  saddle  and  the  "round  beirin  to  fall  in  front  of  us 
into  another  valley,  we  should  be  looking  into  Chinese 
Monorolia. 

It  was  a  bad  road,  half  water,  half  boulders,  dis- 
agreeably rough  for  ponies  ;  and  higher  up  we  had  to 
climb  the  sides  of  the  gully  to  avoid  sheets  of  old 
snow-slip,  which  filled  the  bottom  of  the  gorge.  We 
reached  breezy  open  ground,  crossed  half  a  mile  of 
swampy  reindeer  moss  and  clay,  and  then  knew  we 
had  reached  the  exact  point  of  meeting  of  the  two 
empires. 

A  fine  valley  fell  away  from  our  feet  to  the  south- 
east, which  by  looking  at  the  maps  we  identified  as 
that  leading  to  the  Suok  Karaul,  the  first  Chinese 
post.  A  mile  to  our  right  front  and  300  feet  above 
us,  across  a  further  interval  of  boggy  ground  and  over- 
looking the  valley  which  led  to  Suok,  was  a  craggy 
peak  ;  and  seeing  that  by  climbing  to  the  top  of  this 
we  should  get  a  good  view  of  sheep-ground  in  front, 
for  this  peak  we  made. 

A  cold  wind  came  up  in  our  faces,  pale  blue  moun- 

118 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


tain  ranges  rose  into  snow  peaks  and  olaciers  every- 
where in  the  semicircle  of  vision  to  the  south  of  us, 
looking  cold  and  remote,  but  beautifully  white  in  the 
strong  sunlight ;  and  though  we  beheld  peak  upon 
peak  for  a  hundred  miles  and  more,  nowhere  could 
we  see  near  enough  for  recognition  the  dark  shadows 
which  would  have  indicated  forests  or  clumps  of  trees. 
It  all  gave  the  idea  of  bare  grassy  hills,  shallow  open 
grass  valleys,  and  rock-flanked  snow  peaks. 

We  left  our  ponies  under  cover  and  crept  to  the  top 
of  this  peak  (Catdey,  the  hunter,  and  I),  and  began  to 
spy  the  open  green  mountain  shoulders  which  fell 
away  in  our  immediate  front.  Then  the  sharp-sighted 
Powar  dropped  behind  a  rock  and  held  out  his  hand 
for  the  large  telescope.  He  focussed  it  and  wedged 
it  between  two  stones,  and  was  able  to  show  me  a 
flock  of  eleven  fine  rams  lying  across  a  spur  far  below 
us.  They  must  have  been  1,500  yards  away,  but 
such  was  the  bare  nature  of  the  green  slopes  that  we 
dared  not  leave  the  shelter  of  the  crags  round  us. 
We  had  lone  ao-o  lost  sioht  of  our  caravan,  which  we 
had  cautioned  to  keep  under  cover  and  on  no  account 
to  come  up  till  we  sent  back  a  message. 

The  glass  gave  us  much  interesting"  occupation  for 
an  hour,  for  this  was  the  first  fine  Hock  we  had  seen  ; 
and  its  members  were  lying,  by  the  nature  of  the 
ground,   fully  exposed  to  our  scrutiny. 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Sometimes  a  ram,  carrying  heavy  horns,  would  get 
up,  graze  along  slowly,  and  lie  down  again  in  another 
place.  The  others  lay  still,  looking  about  them,  only 
their  heads  moving.  They  kept  glancing  to  right  and 
left  and  down  the  valley,  sometimes  two  or  three 
getting  up  and  standing  together,  looking  down  hard 
into  the  valley  with  their  backs  turned  to  us,  and 
lying  down  again.  We  realised  what  their  life  must 
be  like — one  of  constant  vigilance  against  wolves  and 
Kalmuk  or  Kirohiz  hunters. 

o 

The  afternoon  passed.  Cattley  and  Powar  were 
both  asleep  ;  and  I  was  just  wondering  whether  the 
former  would  suffer  with  his  head  uncovered  to  the 
sun,  and  was  about  to  rectify  this,  when  another  look 
at  the  flock  showed  me  that  they  were  all  standing 
staring,  first  up  past  our  crag,  then  into  the  valley 
below  ;  and  then  they  took  to  their  heels,  streaming 
away  to  the  left  over  the  spur  and  disappearing  in  a 
deep  valley  beyond. 

Powar,  having  been  awakened  by  me,  was  just  in 
time  to  see  the  last  sheep  disappearing,  and  looked 
very  puzzled  ;  but  a  glance  back  at  the  horizon-line 
of  a  hill  a  mile  behind  us  showed  the  fio-ures  of  our 
drivers  and  pack-ponies  in  full  view,  black  against 
the  skyline.  They  had  become  nervous,  being  in  a 
strange  country,  and  had  followed  us  for  company's 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

sake  ;   and  this  easily  accounted  for  the  panic  of  the 
sheep. 

There  was  nothing  to  be  done,  so  we  made  our 
way  back  to  our  idiotic  Kalmuks,  and  as  the  sun  was 
not  two  hours  from  setting  and  it  had  turned  cold, 
we  lit  a  fire  with  the  last  of  the  wood  we  had  brought 
with  us  and  made  some  tea  for  all  hands  ;  and  then 
we  hurried  on  over  stony  hillsides,  ever  descending, 
till  there  lay  before  us  a  deep  V-shaped  valley,  with 
a  strip  of  green  along  the  narrow  bottom,  where 
there  was  promise  of  shelter  from  the  now  freezing 
wind.  But  before  we  could  reach  it  there  appeared 
before  us  an  800-foot  descent,  the  loose  shaly  slope 
lying  at  an  angle  of  unstable  equilibrium  just  steeper 
than  it  ought  to  lie  ;  and  as  we  zigzagged  over  it  the 
ponies  sent  showers  of  stones  into  the  valley.  As 
one  led  one's  pony,  a  slide  of  hoofs  louder  than  usual 
would  warn  one  to  spring  aside,  the  bridle  would 
slacken,  and  the  pony's  head  would  shoot  past  one 
as  he  skated  down,  only  able  to  pull  up  by  jumping 
straight  like  a  goat  into  the  softer  rubbish  and  waiting 
for  it  to  stop  avalanching.  At  last,  at  dusk,  we  got 
down  and  were  on  green  grass  again  ;  and  here,  as 
the  sun  set,  we  made  our  first  camp  in  Chinese 
territory,  Cattley  and  I  pitching  the  tentc  d'abri,  and 
piling  stones  on  its  edges  to  keep  it  from  letting  in 

12^ 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

tile  cold  night  wind.  The  Kalmuks  had  no  covering 
save  their  dirty  wadded  and  sheepskin  clothes,  but 
they  collected  the  saddles  round  a  scour-hole  in  a 
dry  water-channel  and  lay  under  its  shelter. 

For  the  first  time  the  searchers  returned  without 
good  fuel  ;  for  we  had  long  left  the  region  of  firewood 
and  had  already  used  up  our  spare  stock  ;  so  we  had 
to  be  content  with  a  scanty  supply  of  tezek,  collected 
in  our  hired  Kalmuk  saddle-bags.  This,  as  every 
Central  Asian  traveller  knows,  is  dried  horsedung, 
left  by  the  herds  of  practically  wild  ponies  which  are 
driven  up  here  to  feed  in  winter.  They  find  grazing 
in  spots  where  the  snow  does  not  lie  even  in  winter 
for  various  causes — generally,  I  believe,  exposure  to 
hiorh  winds. 

On  15th  July  we  got  up  early  and  repacked  every- 
thing ;  and  by  seven  we  were  marching  eastward  up 
this  valley  till  we  got  to  its  head  and  gained  open 
downs. 

We  journeyed  a  mile  over  this  and  then  halted 
on  a  commanding  knoll,  and  soon  Powar,  who  had 
been  working  with  the  glasses,  pointed  out  a  flock 
of  thirteen  sheep.  It  was  at  first  difficult  to  find  them 
with  my  large  telescope,  which  has  great  magnifying 
power  and  a  small  field,  but  by  pointing  to  certain 
snowy  peaks  in  the  distance,  twenty  miles  away,  and 

124 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

to  where  a  green  ridge,  a  mile  from  us,  mounted  up 
so  as  to  nearly  blot  out  the  snowy  horizon,  I  at  last 
dropped  the  telescope  on  to  them.  There  were 
thirteen  in  all,  mostly  old  rams,  and  one  or  two  ewes 
and  young  rams,  grazing  on  the  very  summit  of  the 
ridge.  A  shallow  valley  lay  between,  dropping  to 
the  left  towards  a  village  of  Mongolian  nomads  two 
miles  away,  where  a  large  herd  of  horses,  cattle,  and 
sheep  was  being  rounded  in  for  stock-taking ;  these 
were  the  first  inhabitants  we  had  seen  on  the  Chinese 
side,  and  I  wondered  what  would  be  the  effect  on 
them  of  the  shot  I  hoped  to  fire  if  they  should  hear 
it  at  all.  But  they  were  galloping  wildly  about,  and 
though  the  distance  prevented  us  hearing  it,  they 
must  have  been  making  a  tremendous  noise,  and  so 
would  probably  not  detect  me.  What  race  of  men 
they  were  we  could  not  make  out  at  the  distance,  but 
the  hunter  said  they  were  probably  Mongols. 

Steadily  we  watched  these  sheep  for  an  hour,  and  at 
last  we  started,  Cattley,  Powar,  and  I,  to  crawl  over 
an  open  saddle  across  the  valley  to  the  left,  below  the 
sheep  and  within  full  view,  for  their  position,  as  usual, 
commanded  every  inch  of  ground  within  a  mile  or 
two.  We  must  have  been  1,500  yards  away;  but  by 
great  caution  we  had  made  fifty  yards,  when  a  ram 
we  had  not  noticed  before  appeared  right  in  our  front, 

125 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


on  the  side  of  the  valley  nearest  to  our  original  look- 
out post.  Back  we  crawled  and  passed  round  to  the 
rear  of  the  hill,  to  where  our  ponies  were  waiting  ; 
again  we  crept  forward  to  our  original  look-out  post, 
and  spied  for  yet  another  herd.  The  solitary  ram 
had  disappeared,  but  the  flock  was  in  the  same 
position  on  top  of  the  green  hill. 

Suddenly  the  whole  flock,  which  had  been  so  quiet 
all  the  morning,  was  seen  to  bunch  up  and  trot 
away  along  the  hill-top  to  a  deep  chasm  on  our 
right,  where  it  disappeared  for  a  time  and  then  re- 
appeared as  a  long  string  of  animals  walking  slowly, 
pictured  against  the  skyline  of  the  main  frontier 
ridge,  which  was  a  wall  of  brown  precipices  and  snow 
cornices. 

They  crossed  this,  the  top  of  the  Russo-Chinese 
divide,  and  descended  to  the  Chagan-Burgaza,  and 
we  saw  them  no  more.  Seton  Karr  was  there  on 
the  Siberian  side,  as  it  happened,  on  that  day,  and 
afterwards  told  me  about  this  flock,  which  I  had 
driven  over  to  him  without  knowing  it  at  the  time. 

From  the  position  of  my  ponies  and  men  when 
I  looked  back,  I  suspected  the  flock  had  caught  a 
glimpse  of  them — hence  our  defeat. 

This  flock  was  gone  for  ever.  We  continued  our 
march,  feeling  rather  low.     There  are  plenty  of  ups 

126 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

and  clowns,  in  more  senses  than  one,  in  this  kind  of 
shootinof.  Towards  noon  we  came  to  some  diffs 
overlooking  a  big  valley  some  600  feet  deep,  with 
boulder-strewn  slopes  lying  steeper  than  the  proper 
angle  of  rest.  And  as  we  crept  into  the  outermost 
overhanging  crag  to  spy  (at  i,  Fig.  II.),  Powar 
pointed  at  once  to  a  small  Hock  of  a  dozen  rams 
galloping  down  the  slope  not  400  yards  away  (at  2). 
I  signalled  to  Cattley  to  come  up,  this  being  a  good 
opportunity  for  him  to  use  the  telescope  and  share 
with  me  the  glorious  sight  which  it  was  certain  we 
should  have  when  they  should  stop  at  the  other  side 
of  the  chasm.  We  were  not  disappointed.  They 
were  a  long  way  off  and  were  not  badly  frightened, 
having  bolted  at  the  first  alarm,  probably  having 
heard  us,  without  having  properly  made  us  out  in  our 
brown  clothes  amono-  the  dark  confusion  of  craQs. 

The  rams  moved  on,  and  were  last  seen  by  me 
climbing  slowly  up  the  lower  slopes  and  precipices  of 
the  opposite  hill  ;  meanwhile,  leaving  my  companion 
and  the  men  and  all  the  ponies  to  watch  at  the  edge 
of  the  chasm  from  above,  and  taking  Powar,  I  started 
on  foot  down  the  slope  to  our  right  front,  and  now 
sliding,  now  jumping  like  goats  on  to  soft  moving 
shale,  we  at  last  reached  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  very 
hot.      Here  we  got  an  iced  drink  by  lying  fiat  over 

127 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


the  edge  of  the  clear  brook  which  issued  from  a  small 
ice-field  below  a  bis:  overhanoino-  half-demolished 
snow-cornice. 

Then  we  started  to  climb  700  feet  up  the  other 
slope,  working-  at  first  to  the  left  along  the  contour. 
After  half  an  hour  I  was  so  done  that  I  rested 
and  watched  for  siof-nals  from  the  crag-s  where 
Cattley  was  waiting,  but  could  not  make  him  or  the 
ponies  out ;  and  I  sent  Powar  climbing  on,  to  round 
the  spur  and  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  present 
position  of  the  flock.  This  took  an  hour,  and  I  was 
getting  impatient  and  stiff  and  very  tired,  when  at 
last  he  appeared,  looking  blankly  at  me,  and  only 
replied,  '' 7ie  znaiyti"  (I  don't  know)  to  my  whispered 
questions.  Another  long  cast  of  half  an  hour  straight 
uphill  brought  us  to  what  we  thought  was  the  top  ; 
but  when  we  were  clear  of  the  rocks  there  were  many 
elusive  summits  of  green  hill  towering  successively 
above  us,  and  it  was  well  on  in  the  afternoon  by  the 
time  we  reached  the  real  summit.  By  this  time  I  was 
crawling,  sitting  down,  gasping,  after  every  twenty 
steps  ;  for  we  were  at  some  9,000  or  10,000  feet  above 
sea-level,  and  my  stay  in  the  country  had  been  too 
short  for  me  to  have  vet  become  used  to  the  elevation, 
besides  which.  I  was  utterly  done  up. 

Powar,  who  went  a  long  way  ahead,  took  off  his  felt 

128 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 

boots,  and  creeping  forward,  peered  over  the  final 
summit ;  here  he  beckoned  to  me,  so  I  made  a  spurt 
and  threw  myself  down  at  his  side. 

There    were    the    sheep,    galloping   straight    away 


OUR   KALMUK   COOK,    YEMBAI,    IiN    CAiMl'   AT   TARKUTA 


down  an  easy  mile-long  slope  of  grass  into  the  next 
valley,  a  rather  shallower  one  than  the  great  valley  we 
had  crossed.  We  looked  back  and  could  now  see  our 
ponies   standing  quietly  in   their  old  position  behind 


129 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


the  cra^s,  little  clots  aj4"ainst  the  skyline  a  mile  away. 
The  sheep  had  not  seen  them  from  the  bottom  of  the 
valley,  but  from  this  height  they  were  no  longer  under 
cover. 

However,  it  was  worth  while  going  on,  as  this  was 
a  fine  flock,  and  we  should  now  only  have  an  easy 
walk  downhill  over  a  grassy  plateau,  and  Powar 
hoped  to  catch  sight  of  them  again  when  we  should 
be  able  to  look  into  this  second  valley  ahead  of  us. 
We  walked  down  this  carefully  and  slowly,  standing 
upright  on  tiptoe  every  few  steps  and  spying  through 
our  field-crlasses.  I  was  too  done  to  walk  fast.  At 
last  we  saw  them  again  (from  3),  and  fell  fiat  and 
wormed  ourselves  forward  to  some  stones  which  o-ave 
a  little  cover.  Here  a  careful  spy  showed  the  flock 
to  have  settled  down  under  some  tooth-like  rocks 
(at  4)  on  the  further  side  of  the  valley  in  front  of  us. 
There  would  be  a  hundred  yards  of  fiat,  bare  rock  to 
cross  out  of  view,  and  then  we  should  have  to  work 
round  the  head  of  the  valley  on  our  right  and  climb 
along  the  contour  a  little  above  the  sheep,  so  as  to 
get  a  spy  down  on  them  from  crags  above  them  and 
200  yards  distant.  This  we  did,  and  it  took  us  only 
half  an  hour.  But  just  before  reaching  it  we  found 
our  crag  to  be  slightly  up-wind  of  the  fiock,  and  had 
to  desist  and  try  a  better  way. 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


We  then  made  a  detour  of  a  mile  round  the  head 
of  the  green  shallow  open  valley,  on  the  edge  of  which 
they  lay,  and  towards  five  in  the  afternoon  we  were 
crawling,  glass  in  hand,  foot  by  foot  to  the  edge  of 
a  grass  bluff  down -wind  and  200  yards  away  from 
them,  I  had  let  Powar  crawl  five  yards  ahead  of  me 
with  his  glasses,  and  lay  taking  in  breath  myself  (at  5). 
He  was  very  deliberate,  and  slowly  began  making  the 
usual  map  with  pebbles,  to  show  the  situation  of  the 
two  biggest  rams,  when  I  had  at  last  got  up  to  his 
side.  Suddenly  he  rose  and  began  running  to  the 
right,  and  leaving  my  hat  and  glasses  on  the  grass 
and  seizing  my  rifle,  I  followed,  first  glancing  to  the 
plateau  in  the  direction  from  which  I  had  come,  only 
to  see  the  ponies  being  brought  up  (at  6) — they  had 
again  frightened  my  rams !  But  all  this  was  seen  at 
a  glance.  The  sheep  were  not  a  hundred  yards  away, 
galloping  full  speed  along  the  contour,  and  before 
I  could  get  a  proper  right-and-left  shot  they  had 
disappeared  round  the  corner,  so  both  shots  missed, 
I  seized  the  other  rii:le  and  ran  on,  and  got  a  moving- 
shot  at  200  yards  at  the  last  ram,  and  heard  the 
loud  "  tell  "  of  the  bullet  striking  ;  also  another  shot 
which  missed. 

Running  up,  I  reached  the  brow  of  the  plateau  and 
saw  the  flock   streaming  away  to  the   frontier  ridge, 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

which  was  here  only  two  miles  away  ;  but  the  wounded 
ram  had  left  the  flock,  and  was  to  be  seen  going  down 
the  hill  in  front.  I  got  him  with  another  shot  fired 
from  the  plateau  edge  (from  7). 

This  was  my  first  ram.  His  was  a  lighter  trophy 
than  the  other  four  bagged  by  me  afterwards,  his 
horns  measuring  40  inches  round  the  curve.  In  the 
hurry  of  a  running  shot  I  had  been  unable  to  choose. 

Still,  he  was  an  Ovis  aimuoii  ram,  and  I  hoped  he 
would  change  my  luck.  We  camped  at  the  bottom 
of  the  long  and  steep  slope  on  which  the  dead  ram 
lay,  in  another  valley  sheltered  from  the  wind.  Our 
"  kotchkor  "  steaks  were  very  good  eating,  and  we 
lived  on  little  else  but  mutton  for  the  rest  of  the  trip. 

This  ram  measured  72  inches  from  nose  to  tail  and 
45  inches  in  height  at  the  withers.  He  looked  as 
large  as  a  donkey,  and  was  a  good  deal  larger  than 
the  set-up  museum  specimens  I  had  seen.  The  shrink- 
ing of  the  skin  before  specimens  are  set  up  may 
account  for  this,  where  there  are  no  skeletons  to 
guide. 

On  the  1 6th  I  started  with  Powar  on  a  ride  to  the 
east,  but  the  weather  looked  so  threatening,  with 
heavy  black  clouds,  that  when  snow  began  to  fall 
tlhckly,  with  a  freezing  wind,  we  turned  tail  and  came 
into  camp,  after  doing  only  four  miles. 


The  Happy  Valley  and  Mongolia 


In  the  afternoon  we  marched  over  the  Chagan- 
Burgaza  Pass  back  into  Siberia,  and  found  the  main 
camp  in  the  same  place.     Seton  Karr  had  found  the 


SIBERIAN   ARGALI    (OVIS   AMMON) 


head  of  his  wounded  ram,  a  particularly  fine  one  ;  so 
now  he  had  two  good  heads  and  one  small  one.  My 
ram's  head  was  a  oood  deal  smaller  than  the  larire 
one  he  had  first  shot. 


Through  the  Highlands  of   Siberia 

We  spent  the  rest  of  the  1 6th  looking-  for  dereh'ct 
heads  near  camp  ;  and,  with  those  we  had  collected 
from  the  river-bed  before,  we  had  twenty  skulls  in 
camp  that  evening.  We  put  them  together  and  drew 
lots  for  them  one  by  one  ;  and  I  became  the  owner 
of  nine  derelict  heads  and  one  shot  specimen  of 
moderate  size. 

Next  day,  17th,  we  sent  them  all  down  to  Kosh- 
Agatch  to  be  kept  for  us  there. 

We  had  arran'^ed  in  London  to  have  two  caravans 
and  journey  side  by  side,  separating  occasionally 
should  different  hunting-grounds  tempt  us  ;  and  as  I 
had  seen  more  rams  in  Mongolia,  and  further,  w^as 
interested  in  that  country,  I  determined  to  at  once 
go  back  there. 

We  were  both  rather  tired  of  the  Kalmuks,  who 
mutinied  on  this  day,  saying  they  were  sick  of  having 
work  to  do,  and  they  had  to  be  appeased  with  a  bottle 
of  vodki.  Seton  Karr  felt  that  he  had  a  satisfactory 
collection  of  trophies  and  decided  to  make  his  way 
back  to  England.  He  took  the  vounoer  Cattley  with 
him.  Later,  1  heard  that  he  had  shot  another  ram 
before  he  actually  left. 


134 


CHAPTER   VIII 

FIRST   SUCCESS 

WE  left  the  main  camp,  the  elder  Cattley  and  I, 
at  3.30  p.m.  on  17th  July,  for  the  Mongolian 
ground,  where  I  had  decided  to  spend  the  rest  of  the 
trip. 

We  marched  up  the  Chagan-Burgaza  Pass.  While 
we  were  still  on  the  Siberian  side,  and  as  the  slopes  of 
the  valley  began  to  converge  into  ibex-ground,  Powar 
and  I,  who  were  scouting  ahead,  spied  a  large  herd 
of  some  twenty  Ovis  amnion  grazing  on  a  bluff  over- 
looking the  river,  at  the  foot  of  a  stone  shoot  about 
800  feet  high. 

A  dark  snowstorm  was  raging  three  miles  down 
the  valley  and  was  coming  towards  us,  also  the  even- 
ing light  was  falling  ;  so  first  going  back  and  asking 
Cattley  to  camp  in  a  sheltered  spot  at  the  river  level 
with  as  little  noise  as  possible,  and  to  keep  the  ponies 
out  of  view,  I  hurried  on  ahead  on  foot.  The  snow 
coming  up  as  we  lay  spying,  obscured  the  sheep  ;  so 
we  were  able  to  work  down  some  way  towards  the 
level  of  the  river,  opposite  to  where  the  sheep  were 

135 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


lyiiii^",  hoping"  in  the  thick  weather  to  i^et  under  the 
IjkitT  and  creep  up  for  a  shot.  But  though  they  were 
a  mile  away  they  saw  us,  and  scattering"  hke  a  burst 
shell  they  collected  again  at  the  stone  shoot  and 
began  deliberately  to  climb  up  its  sides.  I  never  saw 
such  a  (jueer  place  for  sheep  ;  they  seemed  to  climb 
quite  as  well  as  ibex  ;  and  we  watched  them  till  it 
was  quite  dark.  The  storm  moderating,  w^e  made  our 
way  back  to  camp  over  grass  slopes  on  which  the 
snow  lay  thickly. 

On  the  1 8th  we  got  up  early  and  marched  over  the 
pass  to  the  camp  where  I  killed  my  first  ram,  and 
we  found  vultures  there  eating  the  remains  of  dinner 
left  round  camp  by  the  cook.  We  marched  some  ten 
versts  to  the  south-east  in  the  direction  of  Suok,  and 
requiring  mutton,  pitched  camp  for  the  night  half 
a  mile  above  the  Mongol  village  of  Zamok,  which  we 
had  seen  from  a  distance  on  July  15th. 

We  wondered  what  these  first  natives  on  the 
Chinese  side  of   the  frontier  would   be   like. 

The  "  karaul "  was  surrounded  by  a  packed  mass 
of  sheep  and  goats  and  long-haired  black  or  grey 
and  white  yaks  ;  and  dogs  were  barking  round  the 
''vurtas,"  or  felt  huts.  Towards  eveninsf  I  sent  the 
hunter  down  to  buy  a  sheep,  and  he  brought  three 
Mongols   riding-    back   with   him,    who    looked   oood- 

136 


First  Success 


natured,  honest  sort  of  fellows.  The  leader  offered 
me  snuff  out  of  a  jar  with  a  long  slender  spoon  in  it ; 
also  some  cheese  and  butter,  both  the  latter  being 
very  sour. 

These  men  said  they  were  in  the  employment  of 
the  Chinese  Government ;  and  they  called  themselves 


MONGOL   SHEPHERD 


soldiers,  and  pointed  to  their  curious  red  cloth  caps, 
provided  with  ears,  shaped  very  like  those  of  Mephis- 
topheles  on  the  stage.  They  carried  no  arms,  and 
were  clearly  not  regular  soldiers.  They  seemed  more 
like  caretakers  of  government  flocks. 

They  stayed  a  long  time,  smoking  our  cigarettes, 
and  promised  to  show  us  rams  next  day. 

On  July  19th  I  took  out  Powar  and  one  Mongol  and 
made  a  long  search  to  the  west  for  sheep.  I  had 
long  since  given  up  taking  pack-ponies  with  lunch- 
T  137 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


baskets,  as  ihcy  had  never  failed  to  appear  on  the  sky- 
Hne  at  the  wrong  moment,  spoiling;"  the  stalks.  We 
wandered  up  and  down  for  some  miles  before  we  saw- 
any  game  ;  and  then  some  pale  specks  appeared 
three  miles  away  in  a  direct  line,  which  on  using  the 
large  telescope  we  identified  as  a  herd  of  ibex,  about 
a  dozen  in  number.  Several  were  carrying  long 
curved  horns,  so  I  resolved  to  get  nearer. 

A  slight  snowstorm  coming  on,  we  sat  it  out 
under  a  commanding  crag ;  and  when  the  weather 
cleared  we  made  a  march  of  a  few  miles  to  another 
commanding  position  only  a  mile  from  the  ibex,  from 
which  we  could  watch  them  better.  When  we 
reached  it,  I  sent  home  the  Mongol  soldier,  because 
he  was  too  conspicuous.  He  wore  a  bright  red  cap, 
had  a  red  saddle-cloth,  and  had  not  the  slightest  idea 
of  keeping  himself  or  his  pony  under  cover. 

A  tremendous  green  valley,  with  a  climb  up  the 
further  side  of  some  1,200  feet,  separated  us  from 
the  ibex ;  but  we  were  able  to  ride  a  good  deal 
of  the  way  on  the  powerful,  strong-lunged  little 
ponies. 

At  last  we  were  half-way  up  the  final  ascent,  and 
throwing  loose  the  bridles  on  our  ponies'  necks,  we 
climbed  up  on  foot  for  a  shot. 

The  top  of  this  hill  must  have  been  high,  probably 

138 


immh 


First  Success 

about  10,000  feet  above  sea-level ;  for  I  was  much 
more  out  of  breath  than  would  be  accounted  for  by 
the  steepness  of  the  slope. 

At  the  summit  I  felt  quite  done,  but  we  no  sooner 
got  there  and  were  preparing  to  spy,  when  there  was 
a  trampling  sound,  and  the  ibex  could  be  seen  ; — at 
least  their  heads  and  horns  were  visible  over  the 
intervening  swell  of  the  summit,  as  they  galloped 
across,  going  from  our  right  to  our  left,  at  150  yards' 
range. 

No  time  was  lost  in  knocking  one  of  the  horned 
ones  over ;  but  he  got  up  and  followed  the  herd, 
finally  lagging  behind  and  taking  to  some  precipitous 
crags. 

I  was  very  tired,  but  also  took  to  the  crags,  and  at 
last  managed  to  shoot  him  across  a  snow-cornice, 
as  he  stood  a  yard  or  two  from  the  edge  of  a  200 
feet  drop. 

His  horns  proved  to  be  36  inches,  and  the  hunter 
said  they  do  not  grow  much  larger  in  these  mountains. 

Later  on  in  the  trip  we  had  two  more  ibex  hunts, 
but  saw  nothing  carrying  horns  over  42  inches. 
They  are  thus  inferior,  as  trophies,  to  the  Kashmir 
ibex,  and  must  not  be  confused  with  those  of 
Turkestan — which  have  very  fine  horns,  up  to  50 
inches  and  more. 

141 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

On  the  way  to  camp  wc  found  several  heads  of 
wild  sheep,  and  we  put  one  skull  on  a  hig'h  stone 
ready  for  the  caravan  to  pick  up  on  the  morrow. 

Before  leaving  the  top  of  the  plateau  where  the 
ibex  had  been  bagged,  we  saw  far  below,  not  three 
miles  away,  a  miniature  lake  covered  with  thick  ice 
and  snow,  and  chose  it  for  the  next  day's  camp. 

Up  to  this  time  I  had  been  more  than  ten  days  on 
sheep -ground,  and  there  were  only  one  small  ram's 
head  and  a  very  moderate  ibex  to  show  for  the  hard 
work. 

I  had  only  allowed  myself  three  weeks  on  both 
sides  of  the  frontier,  and  now  half  this  time  had  gone 
without  real  success.  I  was  beginning  to  think  my 
trip  would  be  for  nothing. 

On  July  20th  we  left  the  village  of  Zamok  and 
marched  to  the  snow  lake,  which  we  found  out  from 
the  Mongols  was  called  Tilig  ;  and  Cattley  brought 
forward  the  camp  this  fifteen  versts,  while  I  went  out 
at  nine  a.m.  in  the  direction  of  the  hill  where  I  had 
baoraed  the  ibex. 

After  going  half  the  distance  (to  i,  Fig  III.)  and 
somewhere  near  the  place  we  had  left  the  derelict 
trophy,  we  spied  a  herd  of  eighteen  rams,  sitting- 
down  watching  the  valley  below  (at  2),  and  though  I 
little  guessed  it,  success  was  to  come  to  me  that  day. 


First  Success 


Lookino-  back  towards  Zamok,  our  last  nioht's 
camp,  we  could  see  the  wide  valley  where  we  had 
picked  up  the  skull  ;  and  this  valley  rose  and 
narrowed,  leading  past  on  our  right  hand  towards 
the  snow  lake  which  I  had  chosen  for  the  new 
camp. 

The  sheep  were  in  a  tributary  valley  which,  as  we 
looked  back  towards  Zamok,  entered  this  main  valley 
from  our  left  at  right  angles  ;  and  they  were  in  such 
a  position  that  if  Cattley  and  the  caravan,  in  changing 
camp,  should  come  past  the  point  of  junction,  they 
would  be  seen,  from  a  distance  of  a  mile  and  a  half,  by 
the  rams. 

We  were  waiting  for  the  caravan  to  appear,  and 
intending"  to  ride  down  under  cover  of  a  rido"e  and 
give  them  warning,  when  the  sheep  began  to  graze 
along  the  side  of  their  tributary  valley  in  the  direction 
away  from  the  point  of  junction  with  the  main  valley  ; 
and  turning  a  corner  of  a  spur,  they  were  no  longer 
visible  from  the  junction.  So  as  it  was  now  safe,  we 
just  rode  to  the  junction  and  followed  the  main  valley 
down  till  we  could  approach  the  tributary  valley  by 
the  back  of  the  high  hill,  on  the  lower  slopes  of  which 
the  sheep  were  grazing. 

The  detour  was  one  of  about  three  miles,  but  we 
topped  the  hill  at  last  and  could  see  down  into  the 

143 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


tribuUii-y  \-cilley — with  the  wind  right  ;  but  the  sheep 
must  have  been  far  below  us,  hidden  from  our  view, 
and  as  we  had  not  seen  them  for  over  an  hour,  it 
became  necessary  to  find  them  again. 

Powar  was  very  good  at  this  kind  of  work.  He 
rode  his  pony  slowly  down  the  steep  slope,  rising 
in  his  stirrups  and  spying  through  the  field-glass.  I 
followed,  stooping  in  the  saddle,  fifty  yards  behind 
him,  ready  to  dismount  quickly. 

Up  and  down  the  hill  we  went  for  over  an  hour,  but 
without  success,  and  at  last,  going  back  to  the  summit, 
we  left  our  ponies  and  tried  again  on  foot.  When  we 
had  climbed  nearly  to  the  bottom  and  were  close  to 
the  head  of  the  valley,  Powar  lay  flat  on  the  hillside 
and  began  to  spy  more  definitely.  I  crawled  down  to 
his  side,  for  I  had  been  following  well  above  him  ; 
and  with  my  little  Zeiss  glass  I  made  out  several 
rams,  lying  about  among  some  steep  rocks  low  clown, 
overhanging  the  grassy  meadow  at  the  bottom  of  the 
valley. 

The  stalk  was  a  difficult  one,  the  slope  of  the  hill 
giving  no  cover.  I  had  to  crawl  down  by  alternately 
straightening  and  bending  my  knees,  keeping  my 
head  back  out  of  sight  and  resting  the  rifle  across  the 
hips.  I  got  within  170  yards,  and  fired  deliberately 
at  the  only  ram  which  was  to  be  seen.      He  dropped 

144 


First  Success 


stone  dead  In  his  tracks,  and  the  flock  galloped  into 
the  meadow  below  and  were  up  the  opposite  slope  in 
no  time.  They  went  together  like  a  pack  of  hounds, 
and  it  would  not  hav-e  been  difficult  to  empty  the 
magazine  of  the  Mannlicher  into  them  and  wound 
several,  only  to  die  later  by  wolves.  But  I  waited, 
and  they  stopped  at  300  yards'  distance,  when  I  fired 
the  left  barrel  of  the  '450  at  the  hindmost  ram,  aiming 
a  little  above  the  top  line  of  the  withers.  He  also 
dropped  stone  dead  in  his  tracks  (at  3),  and  an  exam- 
ination of  both  carcases  showed  a  hit  in  exactly  the 
right  place — straight  through  the  heart. 

Success  at  last!  But  owino-  to  distances  dwarfina: 
the  grand  horns,  I  did  not  care  to  believe  in  my  luck 
till  I  could  see  them  from  close  by  ;  so  I  ran  down 
the  hill  over  the  loose  stones,  getting  out  my  pocket- 
tape  meanwhile.  Both  heads  turned  out  to  be  good 
ones.  The  horns  of  the  one  shot  at  the  longer  dis- 
tance,  which  were  very  curly,  measured  51  inches  on 
the  curve,  18^  inches  in  circumference,  and  26f  inches 
between  tips  ;  those  of  the  other  measured  48^  inches 
long,  igj;  inches  in  circumference,  and  35:^  inches 
between  tips.  Sending  Powar  back  to  the  top  of  the 
hill  to  get  the  ponies,  I  threw  myself  clown  in  the 
meadow  and  drank  from  the  brook  which  ran  through 
the  centre  of  this  valley.     As  I  looked  down  stream 

147 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

one  ram  lay  to  the  right  of  me,  a  hundred  yards  away, 
and  twenty  feet  above  me  on  the  hillside  ;  while  the 
other  lay  to  my  left,  thirty  yards  away  and  as  many 
feet  above  me,  on  the  opposite  slope. 

As  the  latter  ram  lay  on  steep  ground,  I  climbed  up 
and  rolled  him  down  to  the  stream,  to  make  it  easier 
for  the  pony  to  get  near  him  for  packing  purposes. 

After  a  long  and  solitary  wait  at  this  spot,  and  not 
until  sunset,  did  Powar  appear  round  the  shoulder  of 
the  hill  behind  me,  bringing  the  ponies ;  and  it  was 
nearly  dark  when  we  got  down  to  the  junction  of  the 
valleys. 

On  the  way  we  heard  wolves.  Their  howling  was 
like  that  of  a  pack  of  jackals  round  an  Indian  station, 
but  deeper  and  more  weird.  They  do  not  form  large 
packs,  and  give  little  or  no  trouble  to  human  beings, 
I  am  told.  In  Southern  Siberia  one  hears  no  stories 
of  the  wolf-and-sleigh  kind.  Arrived  at  the  junction, 
we  turned  to  the  right  up  the  main  valley  and  followed 
it  for  two  miles,  passing  many  skulls  of  wild  sheep 
scattered  along  the  base  of  the  hills  ;  and  then  climb- 
ing up  the  proper  left  slope  of  this  main  valley  for 
500  feet,  we  dropped  down  into  a  wild  mountain 
basin,  where  we  found  the  camp  pitched  near  the 
margin  of  the  snow  lake,  or  tarn,  which  we  had  seen 
before  from  the  ibex  hill. 

148 


First  Success 


Cattley  had  nearly  given  me  up  for  the  night,  and 
was  deHohted  to  see  the  two  fine  heads  hanoin^-  on 
Powar's  saddle. 

The  2  I  St  July  we  spent  in  a  fruitless  seach  for  wild 
sheep,  and  returned  early  only  to  spend  a  very  dis- 
agreeable afternoon  at  Snow  Lake  Camp,  owing  to 
the  number  and  virulence  of  the  mosquitoes.  Contrary 
to  the  habits  of  their  brethren  in  India,  which  bite 
mostly  at  night,  these  Siberian  mosquitoes  are  most 
active  on  the  hot  days  of  sunshine,  the  cold  sending 
them  to  rest  at  dusk.  They  were  so  bad  that  we 
decided  to  move  camp  next  day,  entirely  on  their 
account.  Only  on  the  Belezoni  Canal,  on  the  Tana 
River  of  East  Africa,  a  noted  place  for  them,  have  I 
known  them  to  be  so  bad  ;  so  if  one  should  wish  to 
sleep  in  the  day,  mosquito  curtains  would  be  useful, 
though  we  used  none  ourselves.  The  mosquitoes  are 
not  generally  bad  everywhere,  but  only  on  certain  hot 
days  and  in  certain  spots  where  the  grass  is  swampy  ; 
often  they  occur  quite  high  up  on  the  hilltops,  where 
snow  has  lately  been  lying. 

I  had  now  struck  what  Prince  Demidoff  in  his  book 
calls  a  golden  vein,  in  more  senses  than  one. 

In  this  summer  month  of  July,  in  all  the  stalks 
I  had  already  had  and  in  those  which  were  to  follow, 
we   had    been    ridino-    over  hills   covered  with  oreen 

151 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

and  gold,  over  sheets  of  cowslip  and  buttercup, 
marguerite,  wild  pansy,  and  blue  and  grey  forget-me- 
not  ;  and  often  we  found  edelweiss.  Being  ourselves 
at  over  8,000  feet  above  sea-level,  there  was  nothing 
to  obstruct  the  view  over  the  open  treeless  hills  to 
the  great  mass  of  Muss-ta,  distant  about  thirty  miles, 
rising  with  his  head  in  eternal  snow,  above  all 
possibility  of  civilisation  and  above  all  commonplace 
— a  fine  peak  for  the  Alpine  climber,  probably  having 
an  altitude  of  anything  up  to  i  2,000  feet. 

The  rocks,  where  they  rose  above  the  carpet  of 
grass  and  flowers,  were  flecked  with  hot  burnt  sienna, 
bright  rusty-red,  or  pale  green,  or  lemon-yellow 
lichens,  vying  with  the  flowers  in  brightness  of  hue. 

All  that  has  been  said  of  the  beauty  of  Alpine 
pastures,  pine  forests,  snow  peaks  and  glaciers,  and  of 
the  fascination  of  the  southern  veldt  or  the  western 
prairie,  holds  good  of  the  Altai  and  the  Mongolian 
frontier. 

Everywhere  the  green  grass  or  rock-covered  slopes 
are  clean  ;  there  is  no  dust  or  mud,  which  are  only 
abominations  of  wheeled  traffic,  where  the  ground  is 
cut  up  too  often  for  the  grass  to  keep  its  hold. 

The  weather  is  changeable  in  these  regions. 
Sometimes  it  rains,  sometimes  hailstones  as  large  as 
peas  come  down,  and  one  is  glad  of  the  protection  of 

152 


First  Success 


a.  pith  hat;  or  one  looks  over  a  bank  of  flowers,  in  the 
bright  sunshine,  to  snow-sprinkled  slopes  gleaming 
white  against  an  inky  cloud,  perhaps  three  or  four 
miles  away  ;  or  the  dawn  shows  the  hilltops  white 
with  the  sprinkling  of  the  night  before.  Then,  like 
ocean  waves,  seemino-  to  rouse  themselves  to  oreater 
effort,  they  heave  their  shoulders,  here  and  there,  up 
into  spotless  white,  w^here  the  light  new  snow  overlies 
the  coverinof  left  unmelted  from  last  winter. 

The  most  prominent  picture  left  in  my  mind's  eye 
of  these  scenes  is  that  of  my  hunter's  back,  as  he  leads 
the  way  on  his  little  pony,  field-glass  in  hand,  a  fur 
cap,  skin  turned  outwards,  on  his  head,  and  a  short 
pigtail ;  thick,  wadded  clothes  hide  the  squat  figure, 
while  a  large  grey  overcoat  with  a  light  blue  edging, 
and  a  slung  rifle  go  over  all ;  and  on  his  legs  are  baggy 
breeches  and  felt-lined  knee-boots,  with  soft  mocassin 
soles.  The  man  and  his  pony  are  a  blend  of  quiet 
tertiary  greens  and  browns,  with  a  background  of 
steeply  sloping  hillsides,  ablaze  with  golden  or  purple 
wild  flowers. 

Our  camp  life  in  these  wilds  was  primitive. 
Besides  Cattley  and  myself,  there  were  only  six 
Kalmuks,  the  best  of  whom  were  Powar,  the  hunter, 
Matai,  my  tent -boy,  and  Yembai,  the  cook.  These 
three  did  all  the  work,  not  because  they  could  in  any 
^  153 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

way  be  called  industrious,  but  because  they  knew  a 
word  or  two  of  Russian,  and  were  a  degree  less  lazy 
and  independent  than  the  remaining  three,  who  would 
do  nothing  except  lasso  and  pack  the  ponies,  and  help 
to  pitch  their  own  tents  or  ours. 

Yembai  could  not  cook  a  bit  at  first  ;  his  one  talent 
and  claim  to  our  admiration  lay  in  chasing  fish 
(probably  grayling)  up  and  down  the  shallows  of  the 
streams,  till  they  sulked  in  some  pool  ;  then  down 
would  go  his  bare  arm  under  the  weeds,  and  up  would 
come  a  fish.  Cattley  kindly  did  most  of  the  cooking ; 
and  we  took  our  meals  at  odd  times,  whenever  there 
was  time  for  the  tezck  (or  dried  horsedung  fuel)  to 
burn.  We  did  our  own  laundry  work  in  the  sun- 
shiny hours  between  snowstorms. 

None  of  the  Kalmuks  had  the  slightest  idea  of 
obeying  orders,  and  money  seemed  to  have  no 
particular  attraction  for  them  ;  so  when  they  put  their 
hand  to  any  piece  of  work,  it  was  done  out  of  good 
nature,  in  off  moments  when  they  were  not  seriously 
employed  in  making  themselves  comfortable,  chewing- 
dried  wild  mutton,  or  loudly  sipping  tea. 

By  far  the  best  man  we  had  was  Powar,  the  hunter. 
He  alone  of  the  Kalmuks  knew  his  business.  His 
eyes  were  those  of  a  hawk,  and  he  could  get  the 
maximum  of  service  out  of  a  field-glass  or  telescope. 

154 


First  Success 


A  more  conscientious  hunter,  or  a  more  pleasant  wild 
companion  to  spend  a  lonjj;'  day's  huntin;^  with,  I  don't 
remember.  His  Russian  was  as  limited  as  mine. 
"  Skurry  sichass "  (look  sharp,  at  once)  was  his  in- 
variable signal  for  the  attack  ;  then  there  was  "  bolshoi 
kotchkor  "  (big  ram) ;  "  boom"  (shoot-sign  language) ; 
"ow-ow-ow,"  and  tearing  at  the  waistcoat  (wolves); 


KALMUK   BOY 


A   KALMUK  COWBOY 


and  when  the  stalk  failed  and  the  sheep  streamed 
away,  his  speech  culminated  in  a  cheerful  "  Odam  !  " 
To  which  of  my  predecessors  he  owed  this  phrase  I 
don't  know.  Whenever  we  failed,  and  it  was  at  all 
late,  he  would  point  to  camp  and  say,  "  Chai  pit " 
(drink  tea). 

He  had  one  orreat  fault,  for  it  was  difficult  to  induce 
him  to  take  the  trouble  to  track  wounded  game. 

Perhaps  the  most  vivid  of  my  camp  recollections 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

are  those  of  my  various  sporting  followers  ;  all  rough- 
hevvn  characters,  without  polish  as  without  vulgarity, 
Deria  Hassan,  Somali;  Gaffur  I:)U\',  Kashmiri;  Powar, 
Kalmuk  ;  they  all  have  a  family  likeness,  though  their 
homes  are  so  far  apart.  They  have  alike  the  charac- 
teristics which  express  the  attitude  of  the  untutored 
man  to  his  civilised  brother  ;  while  there  are  other 
characteristics,  mainly  physical,  widely  differing, 
which  date  from  the  dawn  of  the  race,  before  the 
formation  of  language  ;  the  colour  of  the  skin,  the 
slant  of  the  eye,  or  texture  of  the  hair  ;  the  character- 
istics of  the  African,  the  Aryan,  or  the  Mongol,  But 
in  their  camp  ways  and  in  their  attitude  to  their 
master  they  are   the  same. 


156 


CHAPTER    IX 
AMONG   THE  WILD   SHEEP 

ON  July  22nd  we  shifted  camp.  The  caravan 
first  got  into  the  main  valley  and  then  followed 
its  course  upstream  to  the  eastward  for  ten  versts. 

Meanwhile  we  went  out,  and  after  riding  for  two 
miles  along  an  ascending  slope  we  came  to  a  great 
valley,  where  there  were  no  less  than  400  ewes  and 
young  rams — too  many  to  count — and  not  at  all  shy 
(at  I,  Fig.  IV.).  They  could  see  us  plainly  standing 
above  them  only  300  yards  away,  and  seemed  to 
know  they  were  not  fair  game.  This  was  curious, 
for  the  Kalmuks  make  no  distinctions  when  they 
go  shooting,  and  one  would  think  the  wolves  would 
prefer  the  ewes  and  lambs. 

It  was  not  till  we  walked  towards  them  waving  a 
handkerchief  that  they  made  off,  and  then  they  joined 
together  in  bands  from  all  points  of  the  compass  like 
an  Abyssinian  army  corps  assembling  for  a  review, 
and  streamed  clown  into  the  valley  below  by  a  goat 
track.  They  were  soon  lost  to  sight,  but  the  valley 
reverberated  with  their  loud  and  deep  baaing.     This 

157 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


was  the  only  time  I  ever  heard  wild  sheep  making  a 
noise.  Of  course  I  had  not  tired,  but  had  reserved 
my  cartridges  for  nobler  game. 

We  made  a  detour  to  the  left  to  avoid  these 
^'arkar,"  and  we  ourselves  also  disappeared  into  the 
great  valley  by  another  goat  track.  The  ground  was 
so  steep  that  we  dismounted  and  dragged  the  bridles 
over  the  ponies'  ears  ;  then  man  and  pony  avalanched 
tosfether,  as  quietlv  as  mi-'-ht  be,  down  the  loose  and 
soft  grey  shale.  It  was  an  800-foot  stumble  down 
a  slope  tilted  up  at  apparently  much  over  forty- 
five  degrees.  When  we  had  got  half-way  down, 
Powar  pulled  himself  and  his  pony  up,  ankle-deep  in 
gravel,  and  with  the  most  comical  expression  of  con- 
trition on  his  face  showed  me  there  was  no  rifle — he 
had  left  it  at  the  top  of  the  hill,  where  he  had  been 
looking  at  the  ewes.  One  gets  into  the  bad  habit  of 
not  carrying  one's  rifle  in  this  country,  as  it  is  mostly 
riding  work,  and  the  Kalmuk  riding  light,  his  pony 
can  the  better  take  the  extra  weight. 

I  sent  this  scatter-brained  Kalmuk  up  the  hill  and 
sat  down  to  wait  for  him.  So  we  wasted  over  half 
an  hour  in  this  manner.  Then  we  proceeded,  going 
down  Into  the  meadow  and  across  the  stream  of  ice- 
cold  water  at  the  bottom  of  this  valley ;  then  we 
climbed  up  the  other  side  for  600  feet,  over  a  hillside 

158 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


covered  with  wild  flowers ;  there  followed  another 
dip  of  500  feet  and  a  rise  of  the  same  distance, 
and  from  the  further  end  of  a  little  plateau  (from  2) 
we  saw  sheep,  and  sank  down  flat  behind  the  stones. 
They  were  over  two  miles  away  (from  3),  across  a 
third  valley,  just  a  few  feet  above  a  snow  patch, 
which  we  found  to  be  a  fine  landmark  in  the  subse- 
quent stalk.  We  lay  thus  for  a  couple  of  hours, 
the  sheep  also  lying-  still,  watching  the  neighbour- 
hood ;  and  I  had  my  usual  lunch — a  biscuit,  a  pull 
at  the  water-bottle,  and  a  bite  from  a  buloino-  bundle 
of  sheep  meat,  which  was  kept  all  day  in  my  coat 
pocket.      Powar  also  had  dried  mutton. 

At  last,  as  afternoon  drew  on,  the  sheep  rose  and 
grazed  down  the  hill,  and  again  they  lay  down,  only 
one  being  in  view,  the  rest  beyond  the  brow.  We 
led  our  ponies  over  a  mile  of  open  ground  at  the  head 
of  the  valley,  quite  two  miles  from  this  solitary  sentry. 
I  allowed  Powar  to  set  the  pace,  and  kept  in  line 
with  him,  so  that  we  made  only  one  moving  spot, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  sheep. 

Powar  went  very  cautiously,  and  often  stopped 
dead,  for  we  were  in  full  view  ;  but  we  gained  the 
friendly  further  side  of  the  valley  and  sheltered  be- 
hind a  fold  of  the  ground.  Mounting  again,  we  crept 
slowly  along  the  contour,    Powar   leading  ;    both  our 

159 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

field-glasses  were  up,  and  we  were  constantly  stopping 
to  spy.  But  we  at  last  got  below  the  snow  patch  ; 
and  we  had  just  thrown  our  bridles  over  the  ponies' 
necks  and  left  them,  to  ourselves  toil  up  the  hill 
on  foot  for  the  final  stalk,  when  Powar  pointed  to 
the  skyline  three-quarters  of  a  mile  away,  far  above 
us,  on  the  hill  (at  4)  on  that  side  of  the  valley 
which  we  had  left,  and  there  I  saw  a  queer  thing. 
Through  the  telescope  appeared  a  big  ram's  head 
lookino-  over  the  brow  of  the  hill  straigfht  down 
upon  us.  It  was  quite  motionless,  and  how  Powar 
saw  it  I  do  not  know  ;  but  a  look  through  the  glasses, 
and  afterwards  a  spy  with  the  large  telescope,  plainly 
showed,  in  the  middle  of  the  circular  field,  the  well- 
known  form  of  a  colossal  ram's  head  with  a  grey 
Roman  nose  and  pair  of  eyes  staring  me  out  of 
countenance.  I  felt  I  could  almost  see  the  interested 
expression  of  the  eyes,  the  whole  pose  was  so  sug- 
gestive of  quiet  watching.  He  had  evidently  seen 
us ;  then  another  head  came  up  above  the  brow 
beside  the  first  one  and  stared  at  me.  That  is  the 
sort  of  sight  they  have.  I  took  my  eye  from  the 
telescope,  and  just  then  the  rams'  heads  turned  at 
right  angles,  and  heads  and  backs  could  be  seen  as 
they  trotted  away.  They  were  followed  by  a  string  of 
some  sixty  grand  rams'  heads  and  backs  in  silhouette 

160 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


against  the  skyline.  Every  one  of  them  passed  in 
review  before  my  telescope,  and  there  was  not  one 
which  was  not  a  faultless  head.  Then  they  took 
down  along-  the  hillside,  fully  in  view,  and  nearing  us, 
but  still  keeping  on  the  other  side  of  the  valley  and 
five  or  six  hundred  feet  above  us.  We  let  them  trot 
along  towards  the  head  of  the  valley,  to  where  there 
was  not  an  inch  of  cover  on  the  great  slopes  of  gravel 
and  crrass  short  as  that  of  a  cathedral  lawn.  Powar 
was  for  going  after  them,  but  they  were  now  down- 
wind and  thoroughly  alarmed,  so  I  held  on  after  those 
we  had  been  stalking  all  day.  No  sooner  had  I 
decided  to  do  so  than  two  rams  appeared  lower  down 
the  same  hill  across  the  valley  and  to  our  left  front 
(at  5),  near  the  junction  with  the  main  valley,  which 
formed  the  road  for  the  day's  march  of  the  caravan. 

We  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  on  after 
our  original  quarry,  which  I  was  obstinate  about,  for 
these  two  rams  last  seen  were  in  quite  an  impossible 
position  with  respect  to  the  wind  for  a  successful 
stalk  from  where  we  stood.  We  kept  on  up  the  hill 
and  up  the  wind,  and  we  climbed  for  300  feet ;  but 
on  getting  to  the  top  we  found  our  original  flock 
gone.  No  doubt  they  had  seen  the  sixty  rams  on  the 
opposite  side  canter  away,  and  had  taken  the  hint  and 
trotted  off  also. 

Y  161 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Thus  there  had  been  three  separate  flocks  of 
rams,  and  none  of  them  giving-  a  chance  of  a  stalk. 
My  best  day's  find,  and  a  pretty  mess  we  had  made 
of  it !  Powar  was  lost  to  siijht,  as  he  had  made  a  cast 
back.  The  two  horses  were  small  dots  in  the  distance, 
standing  still  where  we  had  left  them  grazing  far 
below.  I  took  my  glass  and  scanned  the  opposite 
valley  high  up.  There  were  the  sixty  rams,  now 
walking.  The  two  rams  which  we  had  last  seen  below 
had  left. 

Then  I  saw  why  ;  a  line  of  men  and  pack-ponies 
were  marching  up  the  main  valley,  at  the  junction  of 
which  the  crags  from  whose  top  I  was  spying  stood. 
I  quickly  scanned  them  with  the  glass.  Tartars  they 
looked  like,  probably  a  wandering  army.  There  were 
mounted  men,  with  long  black  coats  ;  no,  they  were 
my  Kalmuks,  with  Cattley  a  hundred  yards  ahead, 
doing  the  day's  march.  Cattley,  who  looked  like 
a  little  black  dot,  trotted  forward  to  a  lake,  gun  in 
hand.  There  were  two  smaller  brown  dots  at  the 
margin,  Brahmini  ducks  apparently,  very  like  the 
Indian  kind,  and  so  called  by  my  friends  in  Siberia. 
The  ducks  flew  away  ;  then  I  shut  my  telescope  and, 
keeping  the  rocks  between  myself  and  the  sheep, 
waved  my  handkerchief  fixed  on  the  end  of  it.  After 
what  seemed  a  long  time  Cattley  looked  up  and  saw 

162 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


me,  and  I  ran  down  the  rocks  in  time  to  stop  the 
caravan  behind  a  grassy  mound  beside  the  river-bed 
near  the  junction.  Then  we  camped  (at  6)  under 
this  sHght  cover,  making  as  Httle  noise  as  possible, 
and  driving  the  pack-ponies  to  graze  up-river,  where 
they  would  be  out  of  view  of  my  sixty  rams.  These, 
however,  were  by  now  two  miles  away,  at  the  top  of 
the  tributary  valley. 

We  then  coaxed  some  water  to  boil  and  had  tea  ; 
this  took  an  hour,  as  tezek  is  slow  in  burning. 

I  had  made  an  arrangement  with  Cattley,  that, 
having  come  so  many  thousand  miles  from  Europe, 
I  was  to  succeed  in  getting  two  or  three  good  heads 
before  letting  him  share  the  ground.  However,  there 
were  so  many  rams  that  there  seemed  a  chance  for 
both,  and  I  claimed  the  first  shot  at  these  sixty,  agree- 
ing that  after  my  first  shot  with  the  Express  rifle  he 
might  have  a  try  with  the  Mannlicher. 

Just  as  we  had  camped,  we  had  seen  many  more 
rams  joining  the  first  ones  along  the  skyline  of  the 
same  high  hill,  having  come  across  the  main  valley  in 
full  view  of  the  advancing  caravan  ;  this  was  the  fourth 
lot  of  sheep  I  had  seen  that  day.  We  had  struck  what 
Demidoff  in  his  book  calls  "a  golden  vein"  of  wild 
rams. 

So  we  started,  Cattley  and  I  and  Powar,  to  try  and 

165 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

stalk  these  rams,  though  it  was  late  afternoon.  We 
went  down  the  main  valley,  retracing-  the  journey  of 
the  caravan  for  a  mile,  to  the  edge  of  another  bay  in 
the  hills,  where  we  found  many  derelict  rams'  skulls  ; 
then  we  turned  up  a  valley  to  the  left,  so  as  to  get  at  the 
back  of  the  high  hill  on  which  the  sheep  had  last  been 
seen,  breaking  into  a  walk,  an  hour  or  two  before. 
Then  we  put  our  ponies  (mine  had  been  changed)  at 
the  very  steep  back  of  this  hill ;  as  they  breasted  it 
we  kept  slipping  back  in  the  saddles,  and  our  gallant 
little  steeds,  put  to  a  slope  which  probably  none  but 
the  Kalmuk  breed  could  attempt,  were  often  in  danger 
of  overbalancing  backwards  and  falling  into  space. 

When  we  had  topped  the  hill  at  last,  a  search 
showed  that  the  flock  was  no  longer  there  ;  but  Powar, 
with  his  unerrino-  hunter's  instinct,  made  a  lono"  cast  for 
nearly  two  miles  to  the  very  head  of  the  valley.  As 
we  neared  the  place  where  Powar  thought  they  would 
be  if  they  were  to  be  found  at  all,  we  all  began  walk- 
ing our  ponies  step  by  step  downhill,  while  we  sat  in  the 
saddle  field-glass  in  hand.  Then  Powar  jerked  him- 
self off  his  horse  and  threw  the  reins  over  the  neck. 
I  had  got  to  know  this  signal  to  mean  "enemy  in 
siorht,"  and  we  also  dismounted.  Then  we  crawled  for 
fifty  yards  downwards  over  steep  rocks,  and  we  were 
in  a  little  fold  of  the  ground  (at  7),  Powar  lying  a  few 

166 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


yards  forward  working  with  the  glass.  He  quietly 
beckoned,  and  I  crawled  down  to  him  very  slowly, 
making  no  noise,  and  he  began  the  usual  mysterious 
mapping  with  pebbles.  He  put  a  large  pebble  to  the 
right,  pronounced  the  word  "bolshoi"  (the  big  one),  and 
gave  a  wave  of  the  hand  to  the  head  of  the  valley  to 
show  the  direction  of  movement.  Taking  off  my  hat, 
I  raised  my  forehead,  then  my  eyes,  foresight-bead, 
and  the  V  of  the  backsight,  and  crooked  my  finger 
round  the  trigger.  There  was  a  big  ram  just  turning 
the  corner  of  a  rock  into  full  view,  150  yards  down 
the  slope.  A  short  wait  in  this  constrained  position, 
and  as  he  moved  a  step  forward  in  grazing,  his 
shoulder  became  visible,  and  I  pulled  the  trigger, 
hearinor  the  "tell"  of  the  bullet.  The  left  barrel  went 
off  at  another,  a  running  ram,  and  hit  the  rocks  twelve 
feet  away  a  tremendous  crack,  so  slightly  elevated  had 
been  my  rifle. 

Then  Cattley  stood  up  and  had  a  shot  or  two  at  the 
hindmost  ram  as  the  flock  galloped  down  the  hill. 
The  ram  I  had  fired  at  galloped  1 50  yards,  and  then 
fell  dead.  His  horns  measured  47^  inches  along  the 
curve,  20  inches  in  circumference,  and  26^  inches 
between  tips. 

Down  into  the  deep  valley  they  went  and  up  the 
other  side,  600  yards  away.     Cattley  had  not  appar- 

167 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


ently  scored,  and  I  saw  we  should  not  get  near 
them  again,  as  it  was  now  getting  dark.  So  we 
reluctantly  left  them,  and  getting  the  sheep's  head  put 
on  to  Powar's  saddle,  we  turned  our  faces  to  camp. 
On  our  way  down  the  valley,  where  it  was  already 
dark,  and  as  we  passed  a  place  where  the  central 
stream  formed  a  small  ice  lake,  we  heard  a  pack  of 
wolves  dismally  howling  on  the  top  of  the  high  hill 
behind  us. 

The  23rd  was  a  blank  day  of  fruitless  search. 

On  the  24th,  crossing  the  stream  by  which  we  were 
camped,  we  went  hunting  on  the  right  side  of  the  main 
valley,  and  mounted  a  high  plateau,  and  in  a  shallow, 
wide  valley  we  saw  a  small  herd  of  "  yeren  "  antelopes 
(Przewalski's  gazelle).  I  got  one,  but  to  my  dis- 
appointment there  was  only  one  of  the  little  lyre- 
shaped  horns  perfect,  the  other  being  an  old  stump, 
probably  knocked  off  by  some  Kalmuk's  bullet. 

We  found  a  very  fine  derelict  ram's  head  on  the 
way  to  camp.  The  ponies  were  just  being  packed, 
and  we  marched  upstream  some  seven  versts,  and 
camped  in  a  wide  valley  with  an  isolated  hill  in  the 
middle  of  it. 

We  saw  no  game  here,  and  on  the  25th  we  marched 
another  six  versts  to  near  the  site  of  Demidoffs 
Olonur  camp.      Here   we   found   a  small    lake    deep 

168 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


down  in  the  hills  at  the  mouth  of  a  long  valley, 
running  up  to  our  right  into  snow  peaks,  where  is 
the  Elan  Daba  Pass.  The  plateau  just  behind  camp 
was  called  Nam  Daba,  not  to  be  confounded  with 
the  name  of  the  pass  just  mentioned.  It  was  under 
Nam  Daba  that  Powar  had  told  us  we  should  find 
many  derelict  rams'  skulls,  much  better  and  more 
numerous  than  those  we  had  picked  up  in  the  Happy 
Valley,  on  the  Siberian  side,  a  week  before. 

I  had,  on  the  caravan  starting  for  this  new  camp, 
ofone  out  as  usual  with  Powar,  this  time  making  for 
the  hills  near  the  Tarkuta  Pass  into  Siberia. 

As  we  neared  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  with  the  aid 
of  the  glasses  we  spied  (from  i.  Fig.  V.)  a  small  herd 
of  ibex  on  the  green  sheep-ground  two  miles  ahead 
of  us  (at  2),  near  the  place  where  the  ground  began 
to  fall  northward  into  Siberia. 

After  a  long  stalk  without  leaving  our  saddles,  we 
got  to  the  pass,  the  sides  of  which  descended  in  the 
form  of  bad  ibex-ground  ;  and  as  we  suddenly  came 
to  the  edge  of  this  descent,  which  is  abrupt,  a  small 
goat-like  animal  started  up  from  some  rocks  opposite, 
across  a  gully,  and  hopped  down  the  rocks  out  of 
view.  I  could  never  understand  Powar  sufficiently 
to  learn  what  it  was  ;  also  he  was  too  intent  on  the 
ibex  to  satisfy  my  curiosity.  It  may  have  been  a 
z  169 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


young  ibex  ;  but  I  suspect  it  was  a  little  buck  called 
sulti,  mentioned  by  Demidoff,  and  not  yet  identified. 
It  seemed  dark  brown  in  colour  with  patches  of  grey, 
to  carry  small  horns,  and  to  negotiate  the  rocks  like 
an  African  klipspringer ;  but  whether  the  *'  sulti " 
is  a  rock-climbing  animal,  or  whether  it  lives  in  the 
open  plains,  I  do  not  remember  ;  and  we  never  saw 
anything  of  the  sort  again.  We  got  to  a  steep,  rocky 
descent  (at  3),  and  here  Powar,  crawling  forward,  saw 
a  curious  thintr.  He  said  there  were  five  ibex  down 
one  side  of  a  ridge  grazing,  and  five  wolves  asleep 
on  the  other  side  of  the  same  ridge,  and  close  below 
us. 

Powar  and  I  constituted  ourselves  a  council  of  war 
— strictly  carried  on  by  the  sign  language — for  our 
Russian  was  equally  limited  on  both  sides,  and  I  had 
only  mastered  three  words  of  Kalmuk.  He  was 
rather  dramatic,  and  made  the  motion  of  shooting 
at  the  ibex,  then  howled  and  said  "  Volk  "  (wolf),  and 
grabbed  hold  of  my  waistcoat  and  went  through  the 
motion  of  worrying  it.  This  was  pretty  clear  ;  it  was 
a  matter  for  choice  ;  but  if  I  elected  to  fire  at  the 
ibex,  the  w^olves  would  come  and  tear  us  to  pieces. 

This  seemed  absurd,  so  to  test  the  matter  I  chose 
the  ibex.  Looking  down,  there  on  the  face  of  the 
precipitous  cliffs  was  a  fine  buck  ibex,  stepping  down 

170 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


from  a  high  rock  on  to  a  ledge.  The  tops  of  the 
horns  of  a  few  others  were  just  visible  over  the  rocks. 

I  fired  at  this  one  and  heard  the  bullet  "  tell,"  and 
away  went  the  herd  down  the  face  of  the  rocks,  and 
down  the  500-foot  slope  of  detritus  at  their  base, 
then  across  the  stream  and  up  1,000  feet  of  the  sides 
of  a  stone  shoot  on  the  other  side.  Very  slowly  they 
had  to  go  up  this,  for  it  was  fearfully  steep  even  for 
ibex  ;  and  we  watched  them  carefully  with  the  big 
telescope.  There  was  no  wounded  one  with  them, 
that  was  quite  certain.  They  reached  the  top,  which 
was  corniced  with  snow,  and  disappeared  over  the 
narrow  ridge  to  the  next  precipitous  valley.  The 
wolves  I  never  saw. 

We  now  climbed  down  to  the  spot  where  the  buck 
had  been  standing.  There  was  blood  on  the  rocks, 
but  though  we  searched  the  hill  from  top  to  bottom, 
we  did  not  see  this  ibex  again.  Powar  was  always 
most  unwilling  to  follow  a  trail,  and  was  particularly 
so  in  this  instance  ;  for  he  had  at  first  said  there  was 
no  hit,  and,  like  the  obstinate  and  contrary  Kalmuk 
he  was,  when  he  had  been  proved  wrong  he  became 
sulky. 

By  one  o'clock  we  found  ourselves  at  the  bottom 
of  the  valley  by  the  stream  margin,  while  the  ponies 
were  far  behind  on  the  hill  above  where  we  had  left 

171 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

them,  so  Povvar  went  up  to  get  them,  and  then  we 
rode  to  the  head  of  the  valley  and  passed  round  to 
the  corniced  ridge  where  the  herd  had  disappeared. 

Here  in  front  of  us  (at  4)  the  rocks  fell  away 
into  worse  ground  than  that  we  had  left ;  tooth-like 
pinnacles  of  rotten,  crumbly  rock  fell  nearly  sheer 
for  a  couple  of  hundred  feet  or  so  to  a  long  900-foot 
detritus  slope  of  very  loose,  unstable,  grey  shale. 
We  threw  the  bridles  over  our  ponies'  necks  and  left 
them  to  stand  on  the  narrow  ridge  ;  then  w^e  crept 
round  the  edges  of  the  huge  chasm  to  try  and  see 
if  we  could  find  the  herd  of  ibex. 

At  about  three  o'clock  we  saw  them,  far  below 
(at  5),  at  the  bottom  of  this  chasm,  which  lay  in 
Siberian  territory,  and  we  started  to  negotiate  the 
cliffs.  This  was  a  long  and  tedious  business,  but 
as  the  wind  was  right  and  we  were  above  the  ibex, 
there  was  a  crood  chance  of  success  if  we  should 
manage  to  get  down,  without  mishap,  while  daylight 
lasted. 

There  were  many  delays,  owing  to  false  moves  in 
unsatisfactory  directions,  and  bad  weather  began  to 
threaten,  I  dropped  the  large  telescope  and  it  slid 
thirty  feet,  denting  the  metal- work  and  tearing  off 
the  protection  of  the  eyepiece  ;  my  knuckles  were 
scratched   and   bleeding  from   the   sharp   stones,   and 

172 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


my  feet  bruised  from  the  same  cause.  Povvar,  in 
his  fek-lined,  leather,  mocassin-Hke  knee-boots  fared 
better. 

The  difficulty  in  getting  down  was  that  one  had 
to  stick  to  the  steep,  crumbling  rocks,  because  the 
talus  slopes  between  them,  though  lying  at  a  less 
steep  angle,  were  entirely  composed  of  loose  shale 
and  clinkers,  probably  fifty  feet  in  thickness,  and  at 
every  foothold,  no  sooner  was  the  weight  put  on  to 
the  foot  than  the  surface  rubbish  began  to  slide. 
This  might  start  one  on  a  long  roll,  or  it  might  loosen 
a  boulder,  the  noise  of  which  would  frighten  the 
game. 

We  got  down  at  last,  and  seeing  what  appeared  to 
be  a  fine  buck  standing  on  a  pinnacle,  I  knocked  him 
over  dead  with  one  shot,  and  the  body  slid  down  two 
yards  and  fell  forty  feet,  sheer,  on  to  the  slope  of  the 
rocks  below,  without,  however,  breaking  the  horns. 
The  herd  bolted. 

After  all  my  trouble  I  was  disappointed,  for  the 
horns  proved  to  be  only  34  inches  long. 

It  was  now  late  afternoon  and  beo'innino;'  to  snow. 
We  had  to  decapitate  the  ibex  and  carry  the  head 
and  skin  up  some  1,100  feet  to  the  ponies,  while  we 
were  obliged  to  leave  the  meat  to  be  sent  for  next 
day. 

175 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


We  had  many  hundreds  of  feet  of  the  dangerous 
talus  slopes  to  surmount,  and  we  could  hear  water 
trickliuL;-  underneath  our  feet.  The  climbing-  took  us 
from  five  till  half-peist  six  in  the  evening.  As  we 
reached  half-way,  the  weather  settled  down  to  a  thick 
snowstorm.  Both  the  crumbling;  rocks  and  the  shale 
slopes  had  become  slippery,  and  every  foothold  was  a 
temporary  moving  one  which  had  to  be  left  quickly 
for  another.  The  labour  was  very  great,  but  by  dusk 
we  threw  ourselves  down  on  the  ridge  at  the  top 
(at  4),   utterly  done. 

The  ponies,  good  little  nags,  had  been  standing 
patiently  in  the  snow  for  five  hours,  exactly  where  we 
had  left  them.  They  were  not  grazing,  not  having 
found  anything  but  rocks  and  snow  ;  and  they  seemed 
as  cold  and  weary  as  ourselves.  They  had  no  blankets, 
as  the  Kalmuks,  though  they  are  kind,  do  not  pamper 
them  ;  and  their  tails  were  turned,  when  we  found 
them,   to   the   snowy   wind. 

I  discovered  some  meat  in  the  holsters  and  shared 
it  with  Powar,  and  soon,  the  snow  moderating,  we 
rode  homewards  in  the  evening  light,  over  a  swampy 
plateau  of  gravel,  wet  clay,  and  reindeer  moss  ;  and 
here  we  saw  a  fine  pair  of  bleached  horns  of  a  maral, 
or  Asiatic  wapiti  stag,  showing  that  here  had  once 
been  the  haunt  of  this  fine  animal,  before  the  Chinese 

176 


SIBERIAN   WAl'ITI    (CERVUS   CANADENSIS   ASIATICUS) 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


trade  in  horn-medicine  had  driven  him  to  the  forests. 
We  got  back  safely  after  dark  to  our  new  camp,  by 
the  small  lake  below  the  Nam  Daba  plateau. 

On  26th  July  we  kept  to  the  sheep-ground.  The 
changeable  weather  continued,  and  we  had  not  been 
out  two  hours  when  it  came  on  to  snow  heavily. 

The  open  green  hills  broke  into  tooth-like  rocky 
eminences  here  and  there,  and  under  one  of  these  we 
took  shelter  (at  i.  Fig.  VI.). 

We  had  waited  an  hour,  when  we  suddenly  saw 
appearing  through  the  mist  of  snow  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  away  (at  2),  and  coming  towards  us,  a  moving 
dark  mass.  This  I  thought  must  be  a  wandering 
troop  of  mounted  Mongolians  marching  four  abreast, 
though  I  did  not  stop  to  wonder  why  they  should  take 
military  order  ;  but  I  was  down  on  the  ground  with  the 
telescope  in  no  time,  and  saw  at  once  a  dense  mass 
of  great  heads  and  horns.  They  were  trotting 
straight  through  the  mist  towards  our  position,  over  a 
saddle,  along  the  opposite  side  of  the  shallow  valley, 
which  was  overlooked  by  the  rocks  under  which  we 
had  taken  refuoe.  These  rocks  formed  a  o-ood  back- 
ground  to  khaki  and  brown-coloured  clothing,  so  we 
were  not  seen  in  the  dull  lioht. 

Then  they  seemed  to  get  a  slant  of  our  wind  and 
turned  up  the  hillside  away  from  us,  and  we  lost  sight 

179 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


of  them.  The  snow  continued  for  two  hours  more, 
and  fidlinq-  through  comparatively  warm  air,  it  lay  just 
thickly  enough  to  temporarily  whiten  the  face  of  the 
country.  As  it  cleared,  we  crept  out  of  our  shelter 
and  searched  the  opposite  slopes  ;  but  the  sheep  were 
gone,  and  as  they  were  down- wind,  we  gave  them  up. 

We  now  turned  our  faces  to  the  north,  and  before 
long  we  found  a  fiock  of  rams  a  mile  away  out  in  an 
open  plain,  which  was  two  miles  wide.  They  were 
quite  unapproachable. 

We  went  on  for  several  miles  to  the  Tarkuta  Pass, 
and  then  turned  back. 

On  the  road  home,  at  two  in  the  afternoon,  we  came 
upon  another  large  flock  of  rams.  They  were  (at  3) 
about  800  yards  to  the  west  of  the  rocks  under 
which  we  had  sheltered  during  the  snowstorm, 
and  quite  unapproachable  from  where  we  were.  To 
get  near  them  we  had  to  go  down  into  the  main  valley, 
at  the  bottom  of  which,  four  miles  away,  our  camp  lay. 
Then  we  rode  along  the  contour  of  the  valley  side, 
under  some  cliffs  strewn  with  derelict  sheep  skulls, 
and  above  a  string  of  small  lakes  which  shone  like 
pearls.  This  seemed  to  be  Demidoffs  Lake  Valley, 
so  I  will  call  it  by  that  name.  After  this  detour  of  two 
miles,  we  turned  at  right  angles  up  a  valley  till  we 
were  again  on  the  plateau,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 

180 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


flock.  Here  (at  4)  we  left  our  ponies  grazing  under 
the  rounded  summit  of  a  hill,  and  climbing  to  the  top, 
we  lay  watching  the  flock  with  our  glasses  (looking 
east).      It  was  now  three  o'clock. 

The  position  which  the  sheep  had  taken  up  was  an 
instance  of  their  wonderful  cleverness  in  the  utilisation 
of  ground.  To  the  south  of  us  the  open  valley  rose 
eastwards  towards  a  saddle  at  its  head,  and  on  this 
saddle  (at  3),  on  our  side  of  an  outcrop  of  rocks,  were 
the  sheep.  Over  this  saddle  and  behind  the  rocks 
the  ground  sloped  down  to  the  east.  To  the  south 
of  the  sheep  the  further  side  of  our  valley  rose  in 
a  mile-long  open  slope  to  a  point  400  feet  above 
them.  To  the  north  of  them  the  ground  rose 
a  little,  and  then  it  fell  in  a  hollow  slope  to  a  wide 
plain.  The  wind  was  blowing  towards  us  over  the 
backs  of  the  sheep  from  the  crags  behind,  in  a 
westerly  direction.  So  with  the  wind  coming  from 
beyond  the  crags  over  the  only  ground  which  they 
could  not  see,  and  every  inch  of  the  short-grassed, 
mile-long  slopes  in  every  other  direction  being  under 
their  gaze,  they  would  be  quite  unapproachable  till 
such  time  as  they  should  choose  to  get  up  and  move 
towards  better  ground. 

At  about  four  o'clock  two  of  the  largest  rams  rose 
and    stretched    themselves,    and    walked    undecidedly 

181 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


forward,  sniffing-  at  the  air.  It  was  quite  plain,  through 
the  large  telescope,  that  they  were  comparing  notes 
with  each  other  about  the  proper  direction  for  the  after- 
noon grazing  of  the  herd.  Two  staff-officers  selecting 
points  to  march  upon  could  not  have  been  more  clear 
in  their  pose.  The  leader  walked  a  little  way  down 
the  valley  towards  us  ;  but  the  other  ram  stood  and 
looked  up  at  the  crags  to  the  east.  Then  No,  i  went 
back  and  joined  No.  2,  and  they  both  moved  together 
up  the  long"  slope  to  the  south.  Then  the  whole  herd 
got  up  by  twos  or  threes,  stretched  their  limbs,  and 
steadily  grazed  after  the  two  leaders. 

We  watched  them  slowly  mounting  the  easy  slope 
of  the  hill  in  a  long  straggling  bunch  (towards  5)  ; 
then  we  shut  our  glasses  and  ran  down  to  the  ponies. 
Cantering  quickly,  we  made  the  best  of  our  way  back 
down  into  the  Lake  Valley  behind  us,  and  so  along 
under  the  bluffs  to  near  our  original  position,  where 
we  had  sheltered  from  the  snowstorm  in  the  morning  ; 
and  after  many  rides  and  counter-rides,  to  get  into  a 
favourable  position  on  the  high  ridge  towards  which 
they  must  be  grazing,  occupying  till  nearly  six  o'clock, 
we  left  the  ponies  and  crawled  down  to  a  crag  over- 
looking a  small  gully  (near  5),  up  which  we  had  spied 
them  coming.  The  range  was  200  yards.  They 
were  all  fine  rams,  so  that  it  was  difficult  to  choose 

182 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


between  them  ;  but  the  leader  had  his  horn-tips  stick- 
ing well  out  from  his  face,  and  I  recognised  him  as 
one  of  the  two  which  had  before  got  up  to  lead  the 
herd,  and  accordingly  covered  his  shoulder  and  fired. 
He  made  off  down  the  hill  with  the  flock,  and  as  they 
were  running  they  bunched  up  so  that,  in  sporting 
phrase,  "a  blanket  would  have  covered  them."  I 
would  not  fire  again  for  fear  of  only  wounding,  which 
would  have  been  unsportsmanlike  under  the  circum- 
stances. Then  I  ran  down  the  hill.  The  light  was 
failing,  and  my  hunter  had  sat  down  and  given  up  the 
hunt.  I  could  see  he  was  convinced  that  I  had 
missed,  nor  could  we  find  any  traces  of  blood. 

But  I  had  heard  the  sound  of  the  bullet  striking, 
and  knowing  the  great  power  and  accuracy  of  the 
rifle  which  I  was  using,  a  "450  cordite  Express  by 
Holland  and  Holland,  I  kept  on  for  a  mile,  running 
alone,  till  quite  near  the  stream  at  the  bottom  of  the 
same  valley  which  we  had  been  manoeuvring  round  all 
day.  Then  I  saw  him  crossing  the  stream  and  going 
up  the  valley  to  the  right,  while  the  remainder  of  the 
herd  had  crossed  lower  down  and  climbed  up  to  the 
crags  at  our  afternoon  watching-place. 

I  ran  on,  now  getting  very  tired,  and  firing  two  or 
three  shots  in  the  evening  light ;  but  my  firing  was  so 
unsteady  and  the  distance  still  so  great  for  a  sporting 

183 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


rillc  (over  200  yards)  that  I  desisted.  I  walked  on 
up  the  valley,  and  last  saw  this  grand  ram  standing 
in  silhouette  on  a  crag  half-way  up  a  precipitous  bluff 
{at  6)  which  overlooked  the  stream.  It  was  now 
g'rowing  dark,  and  I  made  my  way  back  up  the  hill 
to  look  for  my  hat,  telescope,  Zeiss  glass,  and  overcoat, 
all  of  which  had  been  dropped  at  various  points. 
Having  collected  these,  I  waited  for  the  hunter,  who 
brought  down  the  ponies,  and  we  followed  our  valley 
down  to  its  junction  with  the  Lake  Valley,  and  then 
turned  to  the  left,  and  reached  camp  in  the  dark  at 
a  little  before  eio^ht.  I  was  resolved  to  00  after  the 
wounded  ram  on  the  morrow.  As  we  entered  the 
Lake  Valley  we  heard  a  pack  of  wolves  hunting 
round  the  valley  in  full  cry,  as  jackals  do  round  an 
Indian  station. 

Next  day,  the  27th  July,  we  accordingly  started  up 
the  valley  from  camp,  calling  on  the  way  at  the  high 
rocky  bluffs,  on  the  proper  left  side  of  Lake  Valley, 
under  which  I  had  seen  so  many  sheep-skulls.  This 
is  probably  the  precipice  mentioned  by  Demidoff. 

By  a  careful  search  over  all  this  ground,  and  by  an 
examination  of  a  few  hundred  derelict  sheep -skulls, 
I  am  led  to  believe  that  the  wolves,  when  once  settled 
down  in  pursuit  of  a  sheep,  drive  him  to  these  rocks 
where   they   have   their   lairs,  and  kill  him  there  for 

184 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


convenience,  and  so  that  the  young  woh'^es  can  share 
the  feast,  just  as   in   liunting  bool^s  on  South  Africa 


DKRKI.ICr   OVIS    AM.MON    SKULL    LHOTOC.KAl  Hbb,    AS    Vl    WAS    FOUND,    I.N    A    RAVIM, 

we  hear  of  eland  bulls  being  driven  to  a  Boer  camp 
and  then  shot  down  near  the  waggons. 

That  the  sheep  are  killed  in  winter  by  avalanches 
would  not  account  for  what  we  saw  ;  for  some  of  the 

2  i;  185 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

sheep,  whose  skeletons  were  with  the  skulls,  had  only 
been  killed  quite  recently,  in  the  late  spring,  and  in 
spots  where  avalanches  could  not  have  occurred.  As 
we  approached  one  skeleton,  that  of  a  ram  with  a  fine 


]1ILLS,    A  I      illK    llAsK    OF    WHICH    1 50   SKULLS    WERE    FOUND,    LAKF,    VALLEY 

head,  a  wolf  ran  away  from  it  in  full  view,  and  there 
were  shreds  of  dried  meat-fibre  still  sticking  to  the 
ribs. 

In  the  valley  under  the  slopes,  for  the  distance  of  a 
mile  or  so,  I  estimated  that  there  were  about  150 
skulls,  of  all  ages  ;  some  were  rotten  with  time,  the 

186 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


skeletons  having  long-  since  been  carried  away  piece- 
meal ;  some  had  been  killed  within  the  year,  or  even 
a  week  or  two  before  our  presence  here. 

There  seems  to  be  no  other  way  in  which  to  account 
for  this  extraordinary  fact,  that  the  rams  go  to  one 
place  to  die,  unless  we  accept  the  theory  that  they  are 
driven  there  by  wolves  or  men. 


F(f*r'JMifyi'aF» 'r';TS8MK3H^«a|ija*tf-»«jf.jr.-     i  ,v-t»«.    v' 


■^r-'^w.wr. 


SKELETON    OF    OVIS    AMMON,    KILLED    BY    WOLVES,    AS    IT    LAY 

In  these  places  of  skulls  we  sometimes  saw  several 
heads  together  in  one  spot,  lying  in  a  group,  as  if 
the  sheep  had  defended  themselves  together.  The 
skeletons  are  nearly  always  lying  on  the  back — the 
bodies,  no  doubt,  falling  in  that  position  because  they 
are  borne  down  by  the  horns,  which,  with  the  skull, 
weigh  as  much  as  forty  pounds. 

It  is  said  that  in  certain  valleys  the  sweep  of  the 

187 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


wind  prevents  the  snow  from  lying  deep  over  the  grass 
in  winter,  that  these  favoured  grazing  spots  are  re- 
sorted to  by  the  sheep,  and  many  die  there.  But  if 
this  were  the  correct  explanation,  there  would  also  be 
many  skeletons  of  ponies  which  had  been  driven  out 
to  pick  up  their  food  in  these  spots  in  winter.  Besides, 
I  could  see  no  reason  for  the  wind  sweeping  this  rather 
sheltered  valley  clear  of  snow. 

The  horns  of  the  dead  ram  from  which  we  had 
driven  the  w^olf  were  so  perfect  and  so  evidently  fresh 
that  we  kept  them,  with  two  other  fairly  fresh  horns  ; 
also  we  saved  two  derelict  heads,  with  the  horns  rather 
bleached  from  lying  out  through  one  or  two  winters, 
and  recognisable  as  picked-up  heads,  but  on  the  whole 
in  very  good  condition. 

We  had  brought  some  pack-ponies  to  take  any 
heads  which  we  should  pick  up  back  to  camp  ;  and 
with  Powar  and  two  men,  and  a  pack-pony,  I  held  on 
for  the  rock  where  I  had  last  seen  the  wounded  ram 
late  on  the  evening  before.  We  heard  wolves  as  we 
went  up  the  valley,  and  approached  the  rocks 
cautiously,  with  a  view  to  getting  a  shot  at  a  wolf 
on  the  carcase,  should  the  ram   have  died. 

As  I  came  to  a  rock  opposite  to  the  one  on 
which  I  had  last  seen  him,  I  put  up  the  glasses— and 
there  he  lay,  a  grand  ram,  exactly  on  the  spot  where 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


he  had  been  seen  standing  on  my  giving  up  the  chase. 
He  must  have  dropped  soon  after  I  left  him,  and  died 
without  going  further.  The  wolves  had  found  him 
out  and  had  begun  on  his  ribs,  but  had  not  attacked 


KIRGHIZ    CAMEI. 


the  fine  head.  His  horns  measured  50^  inches  along 
the  curve,  18^  inches  in  circumference,  and  34  inches 
between  tips. 

Leaving  the  two  Kalmuks  to  get  home  the  head 
and  some  meat,  much  of  which  was  still  undamaged, 
we  held  on,  the  hunter  and  I,  but  were  not  successful 

19 1 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

in  findinc;-  any  more  sheep  ;  and  at  noon  we  returned  to 
camp. 

On  the  28th  we  moved  about  ten  versts  down  the 
Tarkuta  Pass  and  camped  again  in  Siberia,  With 
our  last  camp  we  had  formed  altogether  ten  camps  in 
Mongolia,  the  camps  themselves  generally  at  about 
7,000  feet   or  more.      I    lent   the   hunter    to   Cattley, 


A   KIRGHIZ 


who,   however,   did   not   score,  though  he   saw    some 
rams. 

On  the  29th  Powar  and  I  went  back  to  pay  a  visit  to 
the  place  of  skulls,  and  took  some  photographs.  Then 
we  crossed  the  Nam  Daba  plateau,  towards  the  place 
where  we  had  got  our  last  ibex,  overlooking  the  Tar- 
kuta valley.  Here  Powar  saw  a  wolf,  lying  asleep  in 
the  open  plain.  We  managed  to  stalk  in  to  200  yards, 
but  he  got  up,  and  as  my  finger  pressed  the  trigger 
he  saw  us,  moved  away,  and  the  shot  missed.      It  was 

192 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


disappointing,  as  I  wished  to  bring  home  a  wolf's  skin. 
I  never  saw  him  again  ;  but  while  looking  for  him  w^e 
came  on  the  freshly  killed  carcase  of  a  ram,  part  of 
which  he  had  eaten.  The  head  and  horns  were  good, 
but  the  head-skin  was  already  spoilt.  This  ram  must 
have  been  killed  two  or  three  days  before. 


WILD    KLOWEKS   ON    THE   SIBERIAN    ALTAI 

On  30th  July  Cattley  and  I  went  out  together  for  a 
last  hunt  on  the  Mongolian  plateau  above,  before 
turning  our  faces  towards   Kosh-Agatch. 

We  made  for  the  place  where  I  had  hit  an  ibex  on 
the  25th ;  and  while  looking  about  there  we  saw  another 
herd  of  ibex,  some  of  them  carrying  very  fine  horns 
2  c  193 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


— quite  42  inches  in  length,  which  is  as  large  as  they 
seem  to  grow  in  these  hills. 

The  ibex  bolted,  but  we  galloped  about  after  them 
round  the  head  of  one  valley  after  another,  only 
to  lose  them  at  last.  We  moved  camp  about  six 
versts  down  the  pass. 

On  the  31st  July  I  tried  the  highest  mountains  to 
the  west  of  camp,  but  meeting  only  with  female  ibex, 
and  the  weather  being  very  bad,  I  came  down  early. 
A  party  of  five  Kirghiz  horsemen  had  lost  one  of 
their  number  on  the  mountain,  and  were  galloping 
about  hallooing  and  screeching  in  a  very  wild  way. 

That  afternoon  we  began  another  march,  which  was 
continued  late  into  the  evening,  when  we  came  on  the 
first  pines  we  had  seen  for  weeks,  clothing  the  sides 
of  the  pass  ;  and  we  also  found  several  Kirghiz 
"  yurtas "  and  horsemen,  and  great  flocks  of  goats, 
yaks,  horses,  and  a  few  double-humped  camels.  The 
dogs  here  were  very  savage,  and  three  of  them, 
running  out  from  a  group  of  yurtas,  attacked  Powar 
when  he  was  quite  a  hundred  yards  or  more  away, 
and  made  his  pony  jump  about  so  that  it  looked  as  if 
he  would  be  off.  We  had  tea  among  the  Kirghiz, 
who  seem  to  be  very  rich  people,  and  far  more  in- 
telligent than  the  Kalmuks ;  and  then  resumed  our 
niarch,  and  camped  under  some  rocks  in  the  moonlight 
by  the  rushing  Tarkuta  stream  at  nine  p.m. 

194 


Among  the  Wild  Sheep 


While  in  this  pass  I  had  been  shown  a  spot  where 
the  Russian  and  Chinese  local  authorities  meet  every 
year  for  business. 

On  the  1st  of  August  we  marched  past  Powar's  own 
Kalmuk  village  of  "yurtas,"  and  then  getting  into 
the  open,  we  crossed  the  very  tedious  Kosh-Agatch 
plain,  and  reached  that  place  at  about  six  p.m.,  having 
done  some  fifty-five  versts  from  our  first  camp  below 
the  top  of  the  Tarkuta  Pass. 


197 


I 


CHAPTER   X 

HOMEWARD 

/' OSH-AGATCH,  which  is  a  most  convenient 
^-  base  from  which  to  set  out  for  sheep-ground, 
is  the  nearest  Russian  village  to  this  part  of  the 
MongoHan  frontier. 

There  is  a  Russian  Customs  official  and  also  some 
half-dozen  Russian  merchants,  notably  Mezentsoff 
and  Co.  and  the  Mongolian  Trading  Company.  The 
chief  trade  is  in  various  kinds  of  wool  (including  that 
from  camels),  which  is  collected  in  parcels  from  the 
Kirghiz  and  Kalmuks,  washed  in  Kosh-Agatch,  and 
exported  to  buyers  in  Bisk,  who  resell  it  to  agents  in 
Russia.  Long  camels'  hair  is  exported  for  the  manu- 
facture of  machine-beltinof  in  Russia.  A  crreat  deal 
of  felt  is  made  by  Kalmuks  and  Kirghiz. 

There  is  also,  I  believe,  a  considerable  trade  in 
brick-tea,  and  there  is  communication  by  road  between 
Kosh-Agatch  and  the  important  Mongolian  town  of 
Kobdo. 

Altogether,  Kosh  -  Agatch,  which  is  now  only  a 
small  collection  of  log-houses  with  a  small  church,  is 

198 


Homeward 

likely  to  grow  in  importance  now  that  the  new  road, 
the  "  Chiiisky  Tract,"  has  completed  the  through 
wheeled  communication  between  Kosh-Agatch  and 
Bisk,  which  is  itself  at  the  limit  of  navigation  on  the 
Obi,  and  in  direct  water  communication  with  the 
Siberian   Railway. 


JM  ilk 


ALPINE    I'ASTORAL   SCENE,    NEAR   THE   CllUVA 

The  Siberian- Mongolian  trade  is  likely  to  increase 
very  considerably  as  time  goes  on.  There  are  firms 
in  Bisk  dealing  extensively  with  Kobdo  in  Mongolia. 
The  Russians  are  supposed  to  be  sending  an  im- 
portant commercial  expedition  in  that  direction  this 
year.     The  Dcbats,  in  an  article  on   Russian  railway 

199 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


extension,  dated  2;th  October  hist  year,  credits 
Russia  with  a  scheme  to  build  a  railway  from  Andijan 
in  Russian  Turkestan,  passing-  by  Kashgar  and  Lob 
Nor,  to  a  point  on  the  Hoangho  ;  that  is,  pointing 
direct  towards  Pekin  and  the  Gulf  of  Pechili,  and 
this,  with  tlie  new  line  from  Orenburg  to  Tashkent, 
which  the  same  article  says  will  be  completed  in 
1904.  would  give  Russian  traders  great  advantages  in 
China  proper.  The  route  looks  difficult  and  expen- 
sive ;  but  if  such  a  line  were  ever  contemplated,  it 
would  run  at  the  back  of  Mongolia,  cutting  that  great 
territory  off  from  the  south  and  throwing  it  into  the 
Russian  sphere.  Mongolia,  with  its  broad,  pasture- 
covered  valleys,  rather  thinly  populated,  and  lighdy 
held  by  a  few  Chinese  officials,  looks  peculiarly 
adapted  to  the  easy  advance  of  Russian  influence 
when  the  time  shall  come. 

Mezentsoff  and  Co.  have  a  very  good  shop  at 
Kosh-Agatch,  stocking  all  general  merchandise,  in- 
cluding such  things  as  clothing,  cooking-pots,  shovels, 
and  all  stores  likely  to  be  useful  to  the  Russian 
peasant  settler  or  his  wife.  The  manager,  Bookin  by 
name,  was  most  friendly  to  us,  lending  us  an  empty 
house  and  taking  charge  of  money  and  superfluous 
kit  during  our  absence. 

While  here  I  took  many  photographs,  and  found  the 


ON    THE    CHUVA 


Homeward 

peasants  not  averse  to  the  process.  They  would 
come  to  me  dressed  in  their  best  clothes,  looking 
sheepishly  tidy,  and  about  as  comfortable  as  if  it  were 
the  dentist  and  not  the  photographer  they  were  going 
to  see  ;  and  they  would  ask  me  the  inevitable  question, 
"  Skolka  stoit  "  (what  will  it  cost?).  They  looked 
disappointed  when  they  heard  it  would  cost  nothing. 

While  we  were  waiting  at  Kosh-Agatch  reorganising 
our  kit,  we  heard  of  another  traveller  coming  up  the 
Chuisky  route,  and  later  this  turned  out  to  be  Lord 
Ronaldshay,  who  arrived  from  Bisk  with  a  small  and 
workmanlike  caravan,  and  went  on  to  the  sheep- 
ground  which  we  had  just  quitted ;  we  gave  him 
some  information,  and  our  hunters  and  cook,  whom 
we  had  just  paid  off,  joined  him.  He  had  just  made 
a  long  journey  through  Persia,  and  had  been  shoot- 
ing in  Turkestan. 

We  ourselves  finally  left  at  noon  on  Tuesday,  the 
4th  August,  and  marched  to  Kouaktenar.  The  river 
gave  no  trouble  this  time. 

On  5th  August  we  spent  the  morning  at  Kouak- 
tenar taking  photographs,  and  at  noon  on  the  same  day 
we  marched  to  Kurai.  On  the  way  we  passed  a  long 
line  of  settlers'  waofSfons  and  mounted  Russians  and 
Kalmuks,  several  hundred  men  in  all.  These  were 
the  workmen  employed  on  the  Chuisky  Tract,  which 

203 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

liad  now  got    thus  far    south.     They   were   trekking 
from  one  centre  of  activity  in  road-making  to  another. 

It  reminded  me  of  the  pictures  of  the  emigrant 
trains  on  the  American  prairie  ;  for  the  Kalmuks  look 
very  like  the  pictures  of  North  American  Indians. 
The  Russian  men  were  lanky,  bearded  peasant  settlers 
in  black,  broad-brimmed  felt  hats.  The  browner 
Kalmuks  were  either  in  their  own  dress  or  in  Russian 
dress,  according  to  the  extent  to  which  they  had 
become   Russianised. 

Both  in  the  Kalmuk  country,  where  the  people  are 
not  rich,  and  among  the  Kirghiz,  who  are,  everybody 
rides  ;  you  see  some  of  the  richer  Kirghiz  or  Kalmuk 
women  going  journeys  with  their  men.  They  pass 
you  at  speed  on  pacing  ponies  ;  the  little  ladies,  who 
are  of  Mongolian  type,  and  who  would  not  be 
particularly  noticeable  when  not  riding,  sit  upright, 
riding  astride  in  their  native  dress  of  furs  and  scraps 
of  silk.  It  is  quite  a  graceful  exhibition  in  its  way, 
they  seem  so  thoroughly  at  home  in  the  saddle. 

We  crossed  the  great  plain  and  reached  the  Kurai 
house  late  in  the  evening. 

On  the  6th  of  August  we  left  at  nine  a.m.  and 
marched  to  Chibit.  W^e  passed  through  beautiful  pine- 
scenery  ;  among  the  principal  kinds  of  trees  I  think  I 
recognised   spruce-firs.      There  were   small   flat  river 

204 


Homeward 

terraces  of  short  lawn -grass,  with  tremendous  red 
cliffs  crowned  by  pines.  Grazing  cows  gave  these 
lawns  a  Swiss  appearance,  and  snow -mountains, 
flaming  white  in  a  blue  sky,  rose  above  all.  We 
crossed  charming  streams,  rippling  over  brown 
pebbles. 

In  one  pass  the  new  road,  with  its  timber  side-posts 
winding  down  through  the  forest,  reminded  me 
forcibly  of  Murree  in  the  Himalayas. 

We  rode  through  valleys  overhung  by  cliffs  which 
were  rotten,  and  pieces  of  which  had  broken  off 
The  fragments  lay  spread  about  below  in  confusion, 
showing  curves  of  incline  and  anticline.  Some  were 
as  much  as  twenty  feet  cube,  and  were  half  buried  in 
the  flat  grassy  surface  of  the  plain.  Sometimes  they 
had  taken  a  succession  of  leaps  across  the  valley,  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  wide,  and  apparently  jumped  the 
river  lying  below  sloping  banks  on  that  side,  from 
which,  owing  to  its  easy  slope,  they  could  not  possibly 
have  come,  and  the  high  cliffs  on  the  side  from  which 
they  had  started  on  their  journey  long  ages  ago  were 
now  too  far  back  to  have  projected  them,  and  must  at 
the  time  when  these  masses  broke  off  have  been  some 
hundreds  of  yards  nearer  the  river  ;  the  denudation 
here  must  be  very  rapid.  We  passed  brilUe  forest 
where  fire  had  destroyed  the  pines  and  they  had  been 

207 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


uprooted  by  the  first  storm.  They  lay  in  hundreds, 
in  all  positions,  in  a  tangle  of  broken  timber.  We 
galloped  at  full  speed  over  the  perfect  sward  of  the 
grass  terraces,  or  made  our  ponies  go  at  a  fast  pacing 


fc> 
trot. 


From  Chibat  we  went,  on  the  same  evening,  to 
Aigulak,  hoping  to  make  a  moonlight  march  forward 
from  there,  as  the  moon  was  full  and  fine  weather 
promised  a  beautiful  scene  ;  but  there  was  a  difficulty 
about  ponies. 

We  started,  however,  on  the  7th  of  August  at  5.30 
a.m.,  marching  to  lyedra  with  one  baggage  cart,  the 
rest  of  the  baggage  on  ponies,  and  ourselves  riding. 

On  this  march  we  continued  near  the  Chuya,  going 
through  gorgeous  scenery.  We  passed  ground  like 
the  bear-nullahs  at  the  mouth  of  the  Sindh  valley  in 
Kashmir.  I  could  see  no  difference  at  all— steep 
pinnacles  of  grey  rock  falling  sheer  for  hundreds  of 
feet  to  pine-slopes. 

There  was  a  little  wheat  cultivation  alternating  with 
alpine  pasture  in  the  valley  bottom. 

At  one  place,  where  the  track  dipped  down  to  the 
marofin  of  the  rushing  Chuya,  we  found  birch  orowinof 
luxuriantly  in  clumps  and  masses  close  to  the  water's 
edge,  not  at  the  top  of  the  timber-line,  as  it  does  in 
Kashmir. 

208 


Homeward 

The  Chuya,  breaking  constantly  throughout  Its 
course  into  tossing,  foaming  cataracts,  lends  itself  to 
fine  scenery,  the  snow-white  rushing  water  contrast- 
ing well  with  the  dark  pines  behind. 

I  passed  the  Ispravnik  (who  would  be  called  a 
District  Superintendent  of  Police  in  India)  some  time 
in  the  afternoon,  in  his  carriage  and  in  white  official 
cap  and  clean  uniform,  following  the  advance  of  the 
road  labourers,  whom  we  had  seen  leaving  Kurai. 
It  was  expected  the  road  would  be  completed  up  to 
Kosh-Agatch  by  the  end  of  August.  Indeed,  one 
could  already  drive  all  the  way. 

Before  reaching  lyedra,  when  I  had  turned  aside  to 
photograph  some  cattle  and  goats  in  the  early  morn- 
ing light,  I  came  upon  Kalmuk  huts  and  the  curious 
sloping  scaffoldings  on  which  are  hung  pony -skins 
with  the  legs  waving  in  the  wind.  Matai,  my  KalmLik 
tent-boy,  told  me  that  a  heathen  Kalmuk  priest  goes 
round  to  the  hamlets,  selecting  at  each  hamlet  for 
sacrifice  the  most  promising  colt.  The  more  treasured 
the  pony  is  by  its  owner  the  better  the  sacrifice.  The 
superstitious  Kalmuk  submits  calmly  to  the  order. 
Matai  said  that  nowadays  the  young  pony  is  thrown 
and  smothered  and  then  skinned. 

At  lyedra  we  had  a  vexatious  delay,  owing  to  the 
Ispravnik    having    been   obliged   to    take   on   all    the 

211 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

available  ponies.  But  our  drivers,  after  some  trouble, 
agreed  to  take  us  the  same  afternoon  to  the  Katun 
with  the  original  ponies  and  the  cart  ;  and  we  got  as  far 
as  the  wild  Chuya  gorge,  just  above  its  junction  with 
the  Katun,  eight  versts  above  the  Katun  ferry.  The 
camping-ground  was  most  difficult  to  choose  by  night 
on  the  stone-strewn  slope.  We  had  ridden  beside 
the  most  beautiful  river-terraces  all  day,  following  the 
Chuya. 

On  the  morning"  of  August  8th  we  marched  up  a 
very  bad  pass,  where  the  road  was  in  a  shocking  state, 
to  Ust-Iniya,  the  Kalmuk  village  opposite  the  ferry. 
Whatever  may  be  said  about  the  speed  with  which 
the  Chuisky  Tract  has  been  made,  there  is  no  doubt 
it  is  insufficiently  drained,  and  much  will  be  washed 
away  by  the  melting  of  the  snows  next  year.  My 
tent- boy,  Matai,  lived  at  Ust-Iniya  ;  and  I  found,  to 
my  surprise,  that  he  was  a  rich  man,  owning  a  large 
house,  where  he  and  his  wife  looked  after  several 
Russian  peasants  and  their  families,  as  paying  guests, 
doino-  their  cookinof  for  them.  The  white  men  worked 
for  him  ;  as  when  he  was  told  to  get  several  rams' 
skulls  cleaned,  it  was  the  Russians  who  did  the  dirty 
work  under  his  superintendence,  which  shows  also  how 
good-natured  they  are.  He  wore  a  gorgeous  purple- 
coloured  shirt,  and  would  not  lift  a  finger  for  us  that 


Homeward 


clay,  posing  as  our 
guide  rather  than 
doing  his  duty  as 
my  tent -boy.  But 
we  were  so  amused 
at  his  vanity  in  his 
own  home  that  we 
did  not  show  him  up. 
His  wife  gave  us 
most  excellent  tea, 
with  bread  and  eoffs 
and  a  young  turkey 
for  dinner.  These 
Russianised  Kalmuks 
were  living  exactly 
as  Russians  do,  in 
the  same  houses  with 
Russians,  dressinof 
the  same,  and  frater- 
nising on  equal  terms. 
They  were  also  what 
are  called  ''  Christian 
Kalmuks."  I  was 
much  impressed  by 
this,  after  having  been 
used      to     the      race 


MATAI,    A    RUSSIANISED    KAI..MUK 


215 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

separation  which  the  caste  system  brings  about  in 
India.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  us  Anglo-Indians 
that  we  do  not  fraternise  with  the  natives.  This  is 
chietly  caused  by  this  caste  system,  which  prevents 
the  ordinary  native  from  being  really  on  intimate 
terms  with  any  caste  but  his  own.  These  Russians 
and  Russianised  Kalmuks  seemed  to  oet  on  excel- 
lentlv  too'ether,  and  I  could  see  no  outward  sion 
of  race  hostility  whatever. 

We  rested  all  day  on  the  8th  of  August  at  Ust-Ini)a, 
and  on  the  9th  we  crossed  the  ferry  and  drove  to 
Kirkuchi,  going  through  some  magnificent  forest  and 
then  over  a  high  pass.  We  found  great  difficulty 
in  getting  on  from  Kirkuchi,  it  being  now  the  season 
for  taking  in  hay  for  the  winter ;  and  men,  carts,  and 
ponies  were  scarce,  as  we  were  to  find  out  all  the  way 
to  Bisk.  We  oot  oft^,  however,  the  same  evening" 
from  Kirkuchi  and  drove  over  the  other  high  pass  to 
Ongudai,  where,  after  numerous  delays  and  a  dis- 
agreeable night  drive,  we  arrived  at  one  a.m.  on  the 
loth  of  August. 

We  started  aoain  at  nine  a.m.  the  same  mornino;- 
and  drove  thirty-five  versts  to  Ust-Tinginsky  ;  thence 
on  twelve  versts  more  to  the  Tinginsky  Lake,  where 
I  got  out  my  Indian  tiffin-basket  and  canteen  and 
cooked  under  the  pines,  while  Cattley  bathed  in  the 

216 


2   F 


Homeward 

lake.  Going  ten  versts  further,  we  reached  Peschan 
at  eight  p.m.  We  passed  two  minor  police  officials 
coming  down  the  road  from  Peschan  and  knew  they 
had  taken  the  available  tarantasses,  so  prepared  to 
camp  in  a  meadow,  the  peasant's  house,  when  we 
arrived  there,  turning  out  to  be  small  and  stuffy,  and 
the  peasant  having  quite  an  unreasonable  number 
of  children  and  other  relatives  with  him  in  the  living- 
room,  while  the  yard  was  deep  in  liquid  black  mud. 

These  were  damp  quarters,  but  it  was  a  fine  day 
and  followed  by  a  fine  night. 

We  had  great  delay  next  morning,  and  I  was  near 
losing  my  patience  with  the  avaricious  Siberiak,  at 
whose  mercy  I  was  in  the  matter  of  hiring  transport. 
He  was  a  big,  handsome,  stiff-backed  fellow,  very  sober 
just  then,  and  inclined  to  be  nasty  over  our  bargain. 
But  at  eight  a.m.  he  condescended,  for  five  times  the 
Government  rate  of  payment,  to  leave  his  numerous 
family,  and  he  drove  us  for  thirty-five  versts  to 
Shebalina,  through  charming  scenery,  ablaze  with 
wild  flowers,  but  over  a  horrible  road,  corduroyed, 
in  the  black  soil  pools  where  it  ran  through  hilly  forest, 
by  rows  of  round  logs — terribly  rough  to  drive  over 
in  an  open  telyeshka,  with  liquid  mud  spattering  one 
from  head  to  foot. 

We    changed    our    horses    and    baggage -carts    at 

219 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Shebalina,  but  retained  the  same  driver  for  our 
telyeshka. 

He  was  not  quite  the  same  though,  for  here  he 
begged  an  advance  of  money,  and  meeting  a  friend, 
came  back  to  us  very  drunk.  This  was  uncomfortable, 
as  we  had  a  lonof  nisfht's  drive  in  front  of  us,  over 
dangerously  rough  roads.  Off  we  started  at  full 
gallop,  past  the  margins  of  torrents  and  along  the 
contours  of  hillsides,  the  two  carts  with  the  baggage 
also  racing  behind  to  keep  up  with  us.  We  drove 
for  several  versts  like  this,  in  fact  all  through  the 
nio^ht.  We  made  matters  a  little  better  after  the  first 
wild  gallop  by  snatching  the  driver's  whip  and  hiding 
it.  Leaving  the  three  horses  to  "rip,"  he  kept 
lookinor  back  at  us  and  talkino^  when  he  was  not 
looking  for  his  whip,  and  becoming  good-humoured, 
he  confided  to  us  that  he  liked  the  English.  "  You 
English,"  he  said,  "  don't  give  me  any  trouble  about 
money  ;  when  you  know  you  have  got  to  pay,  you 
pay,  and  say  no  more  about  it  ;  but  Russians  argue 
with  me  all  day  till  I  get  perfectly  tired,  though  they 
always  have  to  pay  in  the  end." 

We  got  into  a  place  where  a  stream  had  flooded 
some  meadows,  and  as  we  galloped  at  full  speed  down 
to  this,  one  of  the  carts  behind  got  foul  of  a  big  rock 
over  two  feet  cube,  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  track. 

220 


Homeward 

The  clever  ponies  with  quick  vision  opened  out  to  let 
it  through,  but  the  cart  overturned.  After  some  delay 
in  repacking-  the  cart,  we  got  badly  bogged  in  the 
marsh  below,  just  as  our  drunken  driver  was  explain- 
ing how  well  his  beasts  found  the  way  without  a 
touch  of  the  reins.  Here  there  was  a  delay  of  two 
hours,  and  all  hands  had  to  come  to  the  rescue  to  get 
the  poor  animals  out.  Had  they  been  soft  English 
horses  there  would  have  been  strained  sinews  over 
this  work.  Then  we  went  on  till  we  stopped  at 
one  a.m.  on  the  12th,  and  bivouacked  in  the  forest 
to  rest  the  horses,  near  Tapuchne,  after  going  fifteen 
versts.  We  orot  off  aoain  at  five  a.m.  and  drove  to 
Chergi  (thirty-five  versts  from  Shebalina),  where  we 
stopped  for  an  early  tea.  This  will,  I  fancy,  become 
a  fashionable  resort  for  health-seeking  Russians  from 
Siberia.  We  here  met  all  the  peasants  going  out 
to  haymaking,  the  women  and  children  riding  pillion 
fashion  behind  the  men. 

We  went  on  again  at  eight  a.m.  to  Altaiskoe,  forty- 
five  versts  more,  arriving  there  at  3.30  p.m.  Here 
we  parted  with  our  driver,  who  had  now  become 
sober  and  contrite,  and  worked  well  in  getting  new 
carts.  He  insisted  on  shaking  grubby  hands  with  us 
several  times  as  he  left,  saying  he  liked  the  English 
and  that   we  were  his  father  and   mother.      At  least, 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

the  oriental  sentiment  was  there ;  and  this  sort  of 
thing  seemed  funny,  coming  from  a  big,  burly  Mongol 
with  blue  eyes  and  light  tow-hair,  who  was  not  a  bit 
afraid  of  us.  He  had  made  us  pay  five  times  the 
usual  Government  rate  for  the  pleasure  of  his  society, 
and  had  done  his  best  to  break  our  necks,  but  we  were 
sorry  when  he  left.  He  had  never  travelled  further 
north  than  Bisk,  and  was  a  true  Siberiak,  of  splendid 
physique,  born  and  bred  in  the  country,  and  very 
independent  in  manners.  But  he  had  amused  us  so 
much  durino-  the  drive  that  we  foroave  him. 

We  got  off  from  Altaiskoe  at  4.30  a.m.  on  13th 
August  and  had  two  ferries  to  cross  over  the  Katun 
and  the  Bi  respectively  before  we  reached  Bisk,  which 
we  did  at  five  in  the  afternoon  after  going  ninety 
versts. 

Coming  from  Altaiskoe  to  Bisk  we  had  used  a 
track  some  miles  further  east  than  the  one  which  we 
followed  on  the  outward  journey.  Our  return  road 
was  over  a  marshy  plain  which  had  earlier  in  the  year 
been  impassable.  We  left  Bisk  at  eight  a.m.  on 
the  morning  of  the  15th  of  August,  arriving  at  Novo- 
Nicholaewsk  at  five  p.m.  on  the  evening  of  the  17th 
of  August,  making  naturally  better  time  on  the  down- 
stream voyage. 

Here   I   parted  from  my  friends,  the  Cattleys,  and 

224 


•^    s 


\ ''  ■  --^'a 


'fi«} 


Homeward 

steamed  out  of  Ob  station  on  the  morning  of  the 
19th  of  August  in  the  "Grand  International."  The 
train  was  not  crowded,  so  I  got  a  whole  cabin  without 
having  to  pay  for  the  extra  berth. 

There  was  a  Russian  General  in  the  train,  to  whom 
the  Cattleys  introduced  me  ;  but,  to  my  regret,  he  did 
not  speak  French  ;  and  I  thought  I  should  be  alone 
on  the  trip,  when  on  going  into  the  saloon  a  kindly 
voice  from  "  over  yonder "  invited  me  to  be  seated, 
and  I  found  myself  at  table  with  an  Englishman 
coming  home  from  Japan  and  two  Americans  making 
the  long  tour. 

The  two  latter  left  us,  at  Samara  I  think,  to  take 
the  steamboat  on  the  Volga,  as  they  were  going  to 
the  great  annual  fair  at  Nijni-Novgorod.  I  thought 
this  a  good  idea,  and  found  I  should  also  have  two 
days  to  spare  for  a  visit  to  this  noted  place  ;  but  as  I 
had  done  a  river  trip  before  and  wished  to  look  after 
my  baggage,  I  decided  to  go  to  Nijni  from  Moscow 
by  train.  As  it  turned  out,  my  English  companion 
was  delayed  a  day  at  Moscow  waiting  for  permission 
to  leave  Russia  to  be  endorsed  on  his  passport ;  so 
we  went  to  Nijni  and  saw  the  fair  together.  We 
greatly  hoped  to  meet  our  American  fellow-passengers 
when  we  got  there,  but  when  we  arrived  we  inquired 
for  their   steamboat   and   heard  that   it   had    not    yet 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

appeared,    so    to   our   disappointment    we   never    saw 
them  ao^ain. 

We  arrived  at  Moscow  at  2.45  p.m.  on  the  23rd 
of  August  and  left  for  Nijni- Novgorod  by  the  night 
train,  taking  the  hotel  guide  with  us  to  interpret. 
We  occupied  the  following  day  in  seeing  the  sights, 
returning  to  Moscow  on  the  evening  of  the  24th. 

The  fair  at  Nijni-Novgorod  was  interesting  enough. 
But  the  vague  picture  of  the  great  fair  which  I  had 
carried  in  my  mind  had  been  that  of  a  dusty  plain 
with  Tartar  camps  upon  it,  and  long  caravans  of 
merchandise,  and  crowds  of  Russian  country-folk  in 
their  carts — a  sort  of  meeting  of  east  and  west. 

I  am  told  that  things  have  much  chanoed  since  the 
merchandise  has  all  come  by  rail  or  steamboat.  The 
jail  is  not  the  attractive  show  it  used  to  be  before 
the  Siberian   Railway  was  made. 

What  we  actually  saw  was  very  different  to  my 
idea. 

W^e  got  out  at  a  fine  refreshment-room,  worthy  of 
Paris,  and  had  breakfast,  and  then  hired  a  two-horse 
brougham  and  drove  through  a  thoroughly  modern 
city  and  over  a  bridge  across  the  Oka  River.  Here 
we  saw  the  river  fringed  by  busy  wharfs,  and  hundreds 
of  steamers  crowded  the  fairway.  We  were  told  there 
were  many  with  iron  from  Persia. 

228 


Sir.ERiAN  Roe  (Capreolus  pycarous) 


Homeward 

The  Tartar  and  Persian  bazaars  were  in  permanent 
buildings,  very  like  those  of  the  Bombay  bazaars,  but 
the  booths  were  larger  and  better.  We  saw  Persian 
carpets  and  fine  bear-rugs.  The  Persians,  I  dis- 
covered, understood  what  little  Aden  Arabic  I  could 
remember. 

We  found  the  city  to  be  quite  as  modern  as 
Petersburg,  and  more  so  than  Moscow.  There  were 
electric  tramways,  and  asphalte  strips  let  into  the 
cobble-stones.  We  had  lunch  at  a  restaurant  (a  club, 
I  think)  on  a  hill.  We  finished  by  going  to  see  a  ware- 
house and  wharf  where  there  was  a  large  collection  of 
beautifully  wrought  church  bells  of  great  size. 

In  the  evening  we  returned  to  the  railway  station. 

We  spent  the  daylight  hours  of  the  25th  in  the 
shops  at  Moscow  and  in  going  over  the  Kremlin. 
I  was  stopped  when  taking  some  photographs  and 
directed  to  an  office,  where  a  formal  permission  to 
use  the  camera  was  easily  obtained. 

At  INIoscow  I  parted  from  my  companion,  who  was 
going  home  through  Germany,  and  I  left  Moscow  at 
ten  p.m.  on  the  25th  of  August,  arriving  at  Petersburg 
next  morning  and  embarking  on  the  Bailey  Leetham 
Company's  Zai-a  (Captain  Smith)  at  three  p.m.,  on 
the  26th. 

We  came  in  for  some  windy  weather  while  crossing 

231 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


the  North  Sea,  and  passing  Gravesend  and  Mill  wall 
by  night,  we  disembarked  in  the  City  on  the  morning 
of  the  I  St  of  September,  twenty-seven  days  after 
leaving  Kosh-Agatch,  and  three  months  and  one  day 
from  the  date  of  leavino-  Millwall  Dock  on  the  out- 
ward  journey. 


2    H 


APPENDIX 


ON    FITTING   OUT    FOR    MONGOLIA 

WERE  I  starting  for  the  Mongolian  frontier  now,  say 
for  a  month's  stay  on  sheep-ground,  the  kit  I  should 
recommend  would  be  roughly  as  follows : — 

Rifle.  I  should  take  two — a  double  •450-bore  Cordite 
Express,  weighing  ten  and  a  half  or  eleven  pounds,  and  a 
Holland's  •375-bore,  five-shot  Mannlicher  as  a  second  rifle, 
to  rel}'  on  in  case  the  first  should  break  down  in  any  wa}-. 
Do  not  forget  to  have  attachments  and  sling  fitted  to  both 
rifles,  as  you  invariably  ride  with  them,  and  the  sling  is 
indispensable. 

So  far  as  I  remember,  I  fired  off  a  dozen  cartridges  at 
game  during  the  trip,  and  bagged  five  sheep  and  two  ibex. 
I  took  ninety  cartridges  for  each  rifle,  and  fired  off  half  in 
practice  at  Chagan-Burgaza  camp. 

If  the  expense  and  weight  of  the  Express  is  objected  to, 
the  -375  would  do,  with  a  second  similar  rifle  or  a  smaller 
Mannlicher  as  a  second  rifle. 

The  -450  is,  in  my  experience,  the  most  merciful  for  large 
animals  ;  but  on  this  subject  I  hold  a  different  opinion  to 
that  of  other  equally  experienced  sportsmen.  I  still  stick 
to  heavy  metal,  as  it  is  better  not  to  have  to  inflict  a  second 
blow.  There  is  a  considerable  choice  of  good  makers,  but 
I  have  gone  to  Holland  and  Holland  almost  always  since  1 

235 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

took  II {)  my  first  rifle  twenty  years  ago,  and  have  been 
perfectly  satisfied, 

Gim  and  pistol.  I  took  no  gun  on  this  expedition  ;  it 
means  a  weight  of  cartridges,  and  it  frightens  large  game. 
The  country  I  travelled  in  was  quite  safe,  so  I  could  have 
done  without  a  pistol.  In  any  case,  a  rifle  is  good  enough 
for  any  kind  of  protection.  One  hears  of  there  being  bad 
characters  in  the  mining  districts,  but  the  peasant-settler 
community  on  the  Chuisky  Tract  seemed  to  be  very  respect- 
able, and  I  know  nothing  about  the  mining  districts. 

Telescope  and  field-glasses.  Get  a  very  large  telescope — 
mine  was  one  of  thirty-five  magnifying  power — also  two 
twelve-power  field-glasses,  one  for  yourself  and  one  for  the 
Kalmuk  hunter,  whose  eyes  will  probably  be  more  useful 
than  yours  on  the  ground  he  knows,  however  long-sighted 
you  may  be. 

You  carry  your  own  glass  loose  (without  any  case)  round 
your  neck  or  in  your  coat  pocket,  and  stop  to  use  it  every 
five  minutes  or  so  as  you  advance,  even  when  on  horseback  ; 
your  hunter  does  the  same  with  the  second  pair. 

The  telescope  will  be  a  source  of  great  pleasure  to  you 
during  the  long  hours  when  you  lie  watching  the  wild  sheep,, 
waiting  for  them  to  rise  and  graze  into  positions  favourable 
for  stalking.  Its  usefulness  is  slightly  discounted,  when  the 
sun  is  at  high  noon  and  shining  fully,  by  the  heat-quiver. 

The  field-glasses  are  much  less  aflected  by  this,  so  if  you 
wish  to  save  expense  get  two  twelve-power  field-glasses 
only  ;  but  be  sure  and  have  two  glasses  of  some  kind,  for 
Kalmuks  are  as  inquisitive  as  monkeys,  and  mine  unscrewed 
and  lost  one  of  the  object-glasses  of  one  pair,  and  I  should 
have  been  in  a  bad  fix  had  I  not  brought  a  second  pair. 

Camera.  I  have  used  at  various  times,  with  some  success,. 
a  half-plate  hand  and  stand  camera,  either  a  Ross-Duplex 

236 


Appendix 

lens  camera  or  a  Kodak  No.  4  ;  each  double  slide  to  put  in 
separately.     Flat  films  do  very  well  instead  of  glasses. 

I  never  develop  the  exposures  on  a  trip,  but  put  them  in 
a  storage  book  with  numbered  pockets,  entering  the  par- 
ticulars in  an  exposure  note-book,  ready  to  be  developed  in 
England.  This  is  far  less  expensive  and  produces  far  better 
results,  in  my  opinion,  unless  you  are  really  an  expert,  than 
taking  two  trunks  full  of  developing  kit  and  chemicals. 
Further,  you  cannot  get  distilled  water  in  camps,  or  any  of 
the  conveniences  which  the  instruction  manuals  mention  ; 
you  are  usually  too  tired  at  night  for  such  work,  while  you 
are  out  looking  for  game  during  daylight,  and  you  would 
have  no  assistance,  as  Kalmuks  are  wretchedly  lazy  and 
incompetent  servants,  I  found  a  good  way  was  to  expose 
three  or  four  films,  with  widely  different  lengths  of  exposure 
for  each  important  subject. 

Clothing  and  saddlery.  As  you  and  your  hunter  leave 
your  camp  of  a  morning  and  put  your  ponies  to  breast  the 
steep  hills,  not  to  return  to  camp  till  after  dark,  you  will  be 
comfortably  clothed  and  equipped  as  follows : — 

The  hunter,  being  a  light  weight,  will  have  your  heaviest 
rifle  slung  over  his  shoulder ;  and  horizontally,  round  his 
saddle,  so  that  he  sits  upon  it,  he  will  carry  your  thick 
waterproof  coat,  rolled,  in  the  old  German  infantry  fashion, 
into  a  hoop  with  the  two  ends  tied  together. 

If  you  take  out  a  camera,  your  hunter  will  carry  it  slung 
over  his  saddle.  He  will  have  your  spare  field-glass  and  a 
bottle  of  cold  tea  for  himself,  and  some  cold  mutton.  The 
pony  and  saddle  will  probably  be  his  own. 

On  your  own  pony  will  be  a  cheap  European  saddle,  and 
if  you  can  buy  this  of  Russian  manufacture,  and  throw  it 
away  after  the  trip,  you  will  save  both  freight  and  duty. 
There  should  be  large  wallets,  in  one  of  which  you  will  put 

237 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

more  cold  meat,  a  small  tin  of  pate  or  other  delicacy,  a  small 
tin  of  biscuits,  a  flask,  and  water-bottle. 

On  these  hills  you  require  a  breastplate  and  crupper. 
I  don't  care  for  a  Kalmuk  saddle — it  is  not  ver}-  comfortable; 
still,  )-ou  can  make  shift  with  it  if  there  is  nothing  else. 

If  it  is  a  hot  day  your  grey  covert-coat,  which  is  worn 
under  your  waterproof  coat,  may  be  rolled  and  attached  to 
the  D's  at  the  back  of  the  saddle  ;  but  it  is  generally  cold 
enough  for  you  to  wear  the  covert-coat,  and  this  is  sufficient 
protection  for  light  showers  of  rain  or  snow. 

In  the  other  wallet  you  keep  a  knitted  Balaclava  cap  to 
go  over  the  head  and  shoulders,  leaving  only  the  face 
exposed,  a  pair  of  very  warm  knitted  gloves,  and  a  thick 
neckcloth ;  also  a  pair  of  felt  snow-boots,  with  golosh  soles 
to  slip  over  your  boots  and  putties.  All  these  will  be  useful 
if  you  should  have  a  really  bad  snowstorm,  which  is  possible, 
especially  if  it  is  late  in  the  season. 

I  wore  no  furs  ;  they  are  expensive,  and  I  found  a  grey 
covert-coat,  with  a  thick  waterproof  over  it,  and  the  other 
accessories  above  mentioned,  kept  out  the  cold  quite  well 
enough.  Had  I  possessed  good  furs  I  should  have  taken 
them  with  me.  If  you  are  going  to  wait  in  Mongolia  until 
)'ou  can  try  for  the  ver}*  rare  maral  stag  (the  Asiatic  wapiti) 
in  the  calling  season  in  September,  you  will  require  furs. 

The  clothing  }-ou  will  actually  wear,  wet  or  fine,  will  be  as 
follows  :  On  your  head  }'ou  wear,  if  you  have  one,  a  Cawn- 
pore  pig-sticking  hat,  or  a  tweed  deer-stalker  or  rough-rider 
wideawake  will  do  if  )-ou  are  not  afraid  of  the  sun. 

I  always  take  a  Cawnpore  hat  m}-self,  for  the  pith  is  light, 
good  for  heat  or  cold,  and  very  comfortable  in  hail,  rain,  or 
snow,  if  }-ou  put  over  it  the  ver)-  lightest  of  waterproof 
covers  to  save  the  pith.  When  sp)-ing  game  close  by  I  take 
it  off  for  the  moment. 


Appendix 

You  may  require  a  pair  of  dark  spectacles  in  crossing 
snow  patches  on  a  sunn}-,  fine  day,  though  I  did  not  happen 
to  use  mine. 

I  wore  a  very  thick  homespun  Norfolk  jacket  with  plenty 
of  pockets  and  a  patch  down  the  back,  and  a  pair  of  knicker- 
bocker  breeches,  khaki-coloured  Kashmir  putties,  and  brown 
ankle  boots  with  red  rubber  studs  in  the  soles,  which  keep 
firm  and  last  as  long  as  the  leather  round  them,  while 
rubber  soles  come  off  after  two  days'  use.  I  used  to  put  a 
few  football  nails  between  the  studs,  thereby  preventing 
slipping  in  wet  weather.  This  form  of  sole  I  found  excellent 
in  wet  or  fine,  and  not  at  all  noisy  even  on  rocks.  It  is  only 
when  ibex-shooting  that  very  quiet  boots  are  necessary,  as 
the  sheep-ground  is  pretty  well  covered  with  grass  every- 
where, and  it  is  the  exception  to  get  nearer  than  within 
two  hundred  yards  of  sheep. 

I  had  a  Cardigan  waistcoat,  and  for  underclothing  three 
jerseys,  of  different  thicknesses,  two  pairs  of  drawers,  and  two 
pairs  of  socks,  the  thin  ones  being  worn  next  the  skin  and 
the  thick  ones  outside.  Really  you  want  the  choice  of 
several  thicknesses  for  the  whole  journe}-,  for  you  get  tropical 
heat  and  considerable  cold  at  various  stages.  You  need  not 
expect  terrible  cold,  but  you  may  get  two  or  three  degrees 
of  frost  at  any  time  during  the  warmest  months  on  the 
sheep-ground,  and  you  may  experience  the  heat  of  a  Swiss 
summer  in  the  same  spot  on  the  same  day. 

You  should  carry  a  bit  of  rope,  clasp  knife,  about  fifteen 
cartridges,  watch,  and  the  various  small  things  which  you 
would  usually  take  when  shooting. 

Compass  and  map  are  not  very  necessary,  as  you  have  so 
many  snow-peaks  and  valleys  as  landmarks.  Take  a  good 
map  for  camp  use.  The  best  is  the  Russian  forty  versts 
(about  twenty-six   miles)  to  the  inch,  sold   in   sheets,  with 

239 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


index,  by  Stanford,  of  Charing  Cross  ;  but  as  it  is  printed 
in  the  Russian  character,  a  day's  study  of  the  alphabet  and 
a  few  da}'s'  practice  in  reading  Russian  words  arc  necessary; 
this  is  quite  eas}-. 

Get  Kussmn  Sclf-t(X2igJit,  or  any  similar  easy  manual.  It 
is  also  as  well  to  take  a  few  real  lessons  if  you  can,  enough 
to  converse  in  broken  words  with  your  Kalmuks.  You  may 
have  the  best  possible  interpreter  in  camp,  but  you  cannot 
take  him  out  hunting.  You  will  find  that  with  anyone 
beside  yourself  and  your  hunter  you  will  court  detection  by 
the  game. 

A  man  to  hold  ponies  is  quite  unnecessary,  and  does 
infinitel}'  more  harm  than  good.  You  throw  the  bridles  on 
their  necks,  or  tie  the  two  bridles  together,  or  hobble  the 
front  legs ;  it  is  all  the  same,  you  find  the  ponies  where  you 
left  them,  even  after  many  hours.  These  ponies  do  not 
appear  on  the  skyline,  unless  there  is  a  man  to  put  them 
wrong.  If  a  man  is  left  with  them  he  becomes  cold,  lonely, 
and  restless  at  your  long  absence,  or  he  wants  to  get  you 
back  to  camp  so  that  he  can  "  chai  pit "  (drink  tea).  Then 
he  appears  on  the  skjdine  of  a  hill  just  as  you  are  taking 
your  shot,  and  away  goes  the  flock. 

The  country  is  generally  uninhabited ;  or  even  should 
there  be  horse-thieves  about,  the  country  is  big,  and  the 
folds  of  the  ground  are  on  a  large  scale,  and  you  have 
placed  your  ponies  in  some  hollow  where  the  sheep  cannot 
see  them  ;  so  it  is  very  unlikely  that  thieves  would  discover 
them  either. 

I  never  take  white  ponies  out  shooting,  they  are  too  much 
of  an  advertisement  for  the  sheep  to  see.  Your  Kalmuks 
will  laugh  at  this,  but  insist  on  it. 

The  colour  of  the  grass  slopes  is  light  grey-green,  with 
patches  of  snow,  and   the  rocks  are  a  dark  grey ;  so  some 

240 


Appendix 

check  pattern  of  greenish  grey  homespun  is  the  best  kind 
of  material  for  clothes. 

Now  we  come  to  your  camp,  and  the  men  and  kit  you  will 
find  there  on  your  return  from  the  day's  shooting. 

Tents.  I  took  a  double-fly  tent,  made  to  my  own  design 
in  the  jail  at  Jubbulpur,  much  on  General  Kinloch's  pattern. 
It  is  about  five  feet  high,  and  while  in  England  I  had  it 
lined  with  some  Kashmir  puttoo  cloth  which  I  had  taken 
to  England  for  the  purpose.  The  walls,  about  eighteen 
inches  high,  were  provided  with  pockets  which  could  be 
unhooked  and  let  down,  so  that  I  could  turn  them  under 
the  floor-durrie  and  prev'ent  the  cold  air  getting  in.  The 
semicircular  back  is  made  to  unlace,  so  that  this  tent  will 
do  equally  for  the  hottest  and  the  coldest  weather.  I  have 
used  it  in  the  Nerbudda  valley,  in  the  Central  Provinces  in 
May,  and  on  the  Mongolian  sheep-ground  when  it  was 
freezing,  and  in  both  cases  with  perfect  comfort. 

But  you  cannot  get  these  results  without  weight,  and  this 
tent  weighs  nearly  a  hundred  pounds,  including  the  heav}' 
lining.  As  it  turned  out,  the  extra  roof  and  precautions 
against  heat  were  quite  unnecessary,  as  the  weather  was 
more  often  cold  than  hot,  and  my  tent  was  heavier  than 
was  necessary. 

Seton  Karr,  who  has  very  practical  ideas  about  kit,  had 
a  tent  which  answered  the  purpose  of  our  trip  better.  It 
was  a  small  green  canvas  explorer's  tent,  made  by  Benjamin 
Edgington  or  Silver,  I  forget  which.  It  was  a  single  fl}% 
made  all  of  one  piece,  tente  cTabri  shape.  It  weighed,  I 
suppose,  about  thirty  pounds,  and  two  men  could  sleep  in  it. 

If  you  do  not  know  Russian,  you  will  require  a  companion 

who  does,  or  an  interpreter,  and  it  will  be  convenient  if  each 

of  you  have  a  small  tent  of  this  kind.     Calculating  by  what 

I  paid  at  the  Petersburg  custom-house,  the  dut)'  on  each  of 

2  I  241 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


these  tents,  which  is  charged  by  weight,  will  be  about  £2. 
Remember  that  outer  wood  packing  for  tents,  saddlery,  guns 
and  camera,  telescopes,  etc.,  is  a  mistake,  as  these  things 
are  weighed  in  their  cases,  and  when  you  pay  duty  you 
pay  by  weight. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  my  guns  and  camera  were  allowed  to 
go  free  because  I  was  a  bona  fide  sportsman,  and  I  think 
I  owe  this  to  the  good  offices  of  the  British  Embassy 
authorities,  acting  on  my  ordinary  official  application  origin- 
ally sent  to  the  Indian  Government,  which  reached  all  the 
different  authorities  through  the  India  and  Foreign  Offices. 
I  cannot  say  whether  this  would  be  done  again ;  but  I  had 
no  special  introductions  or  advantages,  I  regretted  I  had 
not  entered  the  tents  and  saddles  also  on  the  application,  as 
I  was  charged  over  ;;^I5  for  these. 

The  Kalmuks,  of  whom  one  has  six  or  seven  all  told,  take 
their  own  tent  if  they  require  one. 

Tent  arrangeinciits.  I  took  no  furniture  whatever.  There 
is  the  carpet,  or  durrie,  on  the  floor  of  the  tent,  and  a  folded 
blanket  or  two  to  soften  the  inequalities  of  the  ground,  and 
then  over  these  is  a  sleeping-bag.  I  bought  this  at  the 
Army  and  Navy  Stores,  London.  It  is  roomy,  has  "Jaeger" 
lining  inside  and  waterproof  sheeting  outside.  I  was  never 
the  least  cold  in  this,  and  on  mild  nights  put  it  below  me 
and  used  the  blankets  instead. 

I  had  a  small  horsehair  pillow,  cased  in  Willesden  canvas, 
and  I  put  any  spare  clothing  I  was  likely  to  want  under  the 
pillow.  At  the  back  of  the  tent,  in  the  semicircle,  w^ere 
all  my  other  things — a  bag  for  spare  clothing  and  boots 
(of  which  I  took  four  pairs  for  a  month  and  only  used  two) ; 
a  couple  of  photography  trunks  for  developing,  which  I 
never  had  the  energy  to  use ;  a  small  box  containing  a 
lamp,  candles,  and   matches,  and    a  pair  of   screw  candle- 

242 


Appendix 

sticks ;  a  small  toilet-case ;  a  tiffin-basket,  about  eighteen 
inches  b}-  nine  inches  b}-  one  foot,  which  I  nex'er  let  out 
of  m}'  sight,  but  kept  clean  m}'self,  and  I  used  to  lock  it 
up,  for  the  Kalmuks  are  too  dirty  to  be  trusted  with  table- 
service.     I  had  a  similar  basket  full  of  tinned  stores. 

Outside  the  tent  were  a  couple  of  boxes  containing  spare 
tinned  stores,  and  also  one  basket  of  drinking  and  another 
of  washing  water ;  and  under  the  outer  fly  were  the  two  bags 
into  which  the  tent  packed,  and  spare  ropes  for  storm  guys. 

I  trained  a  Russianised  Kalmuk  as  tent-boy,  but  he  did 
very  little,  and  I  had  to  arrange  it  almost  entirel}'  myself 
and  to  help  pitch  it. 

I  had  a  canteen  of  aluminium  cooking-pots  made  in 
Bombay,  but  the}'  can  be  got  at  Edgington's,  near  London 
Bridge.  They  were  generally  placed  in  the  charge  of  the 
Kalmuk  whom  we  called  cook,  and  he  kept  them  in  a  dirty 
state.  We  were  able  now  and  then,  when  in  Mongolia,  to 
buy  a  sheep  from  stray  Mongols,  but  we  lived  principally  on 
our  stores,  and  on  wild  mutton  after  my  success  began.  The 
cook  had  to  produce  some  cold  meat  every  morning  to  put 
into  my  pocket  for  the  day's  outing.  For  literature  I  had 
some  miniature  editions  of  Thackeray  and  Dickens  and  a 
small  Arabian  NigJits.  You  want  a  great  deal  of  reading 
in  the  least  compass.  The  sheets  of  the  forty-verst  Russian 
map  (Stanford  and  Co.)  were  cut  to  the  size  I  wanted,  pasted 
together  and  mounted  on  canvas.  I  had  three  or  four  note- 
books for  accounts  and  journal  writing. 

The  Kalmuks  have  a  certain  amount  of  kit  and  food 
which  they  bring  themselves.  You  pay  them  a  small  sum, 
but  the  Kalmuk  ponies  only  graze,  and  no  grain  is  carried 
for  them.  Always  inspect  the  men's  food  before  starting 
from  Kosh-Agatch,  and  see  that  they  have  taken  enough. 
One  does  not  worry  about  the  ingredients  of  their  dinner, 

243 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

but  I  imagine  brick-tea,  wild  mutton,  brown  bread  rusks 
(which  )-ou  get  in  Kosh-Agatch),  and  full  toll  of  anything 
we  had  ourselves,  about  represents  their  diet.  Not  only 
inspect  the  food,  but  also  see  that  you  have  enough  pack- 
saddles  for  the  loads  before  starting.  There  are  plenty  of 
ponies,  but  pack-saddles  are  scarce.  They  should  be  part 
of  the  equipment  of  the  ponies  when  hired. 

A  few  pairs  of  leather  saddle-bags,  the  same  which  they 
use  for  collecting  tezek  fuel,  are  always  hired  at  the  same 
time  as  the  ponies  to  take  your  small  things,  but  you  pay 
extra  for  them. 

Seton  Karr  brought  some  Willesden  canvas  saddle-bags 
from  London  for  his  spare  clothing  and  kit,  which  were 
very  useful.  But  I  had  some  empty  canvas  tent-salitas 
which  answered  the  same  purpose,  A  pony  takes  about 
five  puds,  say  i8o  pounds  English,  when  fully  loaded,  which 
is  twenty  pounds  more  than  our  Indian  pack-mules  will 
carry.  It  does  not  seem  to  distress  them  at  all.  They 
march  at  a  jog-trot,  about  five  miles  an  hour,  and  arrive 
at  the  end  of  a  thirty-verst  march  clear-eyed  and  fresh. 
But  I  should  calculate  i6o  pounds  per  pony,  as  in  India. 
The  Kalmuk  followers,  who  all  ride,  will  willingly  carry  some 
of  your  kit  on  their  riding-saddles. 

As  regards  the  composition  of  your  caravan,  you  will 
have,  with  rigid  economy,  for  a  month  about  five  pack-ponies, 
and  say  three  drivers,  a  cook,  tent-boy,  and  hunter.  Were 
I  going  again  I  should  take  two  hunters,  working  on  alter- 
nate days  ;  one  to  look  after  and  clean  specimens,  and  one 
to  go  out  with  me. 

There  are  two  good  ones,  to  my  knowledge,  to  be  had  by 
applying  to  the  Zaissan,  or  Kalmuks'  magistrate  at  Kosh- 
Agatch,  namely,  Omak,  who  was  Seton  Karr's  hunter,  and 
Powar,  who  was  mine.      They  are  equally  good,  I    should 

244 


Appendix 

say.  The  tent -boy,  Matai,  I  heard  of  in  Ongudai,  and 
picked  him  up  at  Chibit. 

There  is  a  Russian,  Drushinka  by  name,  who  lives  at 
Ongudai,  and  has  done  camp-service  for  more  than  one 
traveller,  and  works  well  ;  I  have  seen  him  working.  He 
could  "  rough  it"  nearly  as  well  as  a  Kalmuk. 

The  journey  from  Bisk  to  Kosh-Agatch,  which  will  in 
future,  now  that  the  road  is  finished,  be  all  on  wheels,  re- 
quires special  consideration.  The  stages  on  the  road  are 
some  fifteen  or  twenty  miles  apart,  at  small  hamlets  occupied 
by  peasant  settlers,  and  you  change  horses  and  carriages 
about  once  in  the  daytime  and  at  the  night  halting-place. 
The  route  is  a  post-road  for  officials,  who  are  charged  one 
and  a  half  kopeks  (farthings)  per  pony  per  verst.  The 
peasant  whose  house  is  selected  as  a  staying-house  has  to 
keep  up  telyeshkas  (basket  carts)  and  ponies.  He  has  to 
pass  all  travellers  on,  sooner  or  later  ;  but  he  can  charge 
what  he  likes  to  non-officials.  For  instance,  several  times 
I  was  charged  six  times  the  Government  rate.  You  are 
absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  the  peasant.  Of  course,  charges 
beyond  all  reason  or  excuse  would  call  down  trouble  on  him 
if  complaint  were  made.  But  he  finds  excuses  for  high 
charges,  and  short  of  complaining,  which  would  cause  delay, 
there  is  no  remedy. 

There  is  another  defect  in  this  road  as  a  post-road.  The 
peasant  seldom  has  more  than  two  carriages  of  any  sort, 
whether  tarantass,  telyeshka,  or  telega,  standing  in  his  yard 
when  you  arrive.  If  you  require  so  many  as  three  carriages, 
there  is  almost  certain  to  be  delay.  If  you  have  much  kit 
and  the  road  is  bad,  you  may  even  require  three  troikas — 
that  is,  three  conveyances  with  three  horses  to  each.  I  had 
always  nine  ponies  where  the  roads  were  bad,  and  so  many 
are  not  always  forthcoming  at  once. 

245 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Not  onl}'  at  every  night's  halting-place,  but  at  every 
changing-place,  perhaps  twice  in  the  day,  there  is  the  same 
worr}',  haggling,  and  uncertainty  as  to  when  you  will  get  on. 

The  accommodation  and  the  food  give  no  trouble  at  all. 
You  ha\'e  all  j-our  baggage-carts  (which  go  the  same  pace  as 
the  one  you  ride  in),  and  you  therefore  have  your  stores  and 
tiffin-basket  with  you.  All  the  peasants  have  brown  bread 
or  rusks  (which  are  crisp  dried  bread),  eggs,  fowls,  and  the 
invariable  samovar,  which  they  are  most  good-natured  about, 
and  will  bring  you,  full  of  boiling  water  for  tea,  any  time  of 
the  day,  and  renew  it  whenever  you  call  for  it.  In  this  way 
there  is  no  farmer  more  pleasant  and  hospitable  than  the 
Russian.  He  gives  you  a  living-room  in  a  good  well-built 
log  bungalow  ;  there  is  a  cushioned  settee  next  the  wall,  with 
thick  winter  clothes  of  men,  women,  and  children  hung  on 
the  wall  above  it  —  not  very  inviting  to  those  who  are 
squeamish,  but  it  is  the  best  he  knows,  and  he  offers  it 
freely,  and  will  let  you  fix  up  camp  beds  at  a  safe  distance 
from  the  wall.  I  took  these  with  me  for  the  period  of  the 
carriage  journey,  and  found  them  invaluable,  but  I  discarded 
them  while  shooting  in  Mongolia. 

Take  plenty  of  Keating's  insect-powder.  I  had  heard 
many  complaints  of  the  dirty  ways  of  the  mouzhik  in 
Russia,  but  I  am  bound  to  say  that  in  the  houses  of  the 
Siberian  settler  I  cannot  remember  anything  special  in  this 
way,  the  chief  discomfort  experienced  being  in  the  exceed- 
ingly rough  washing  and  sanitary  arrangements,  which 
scarcely  exist.  To  set  against  this,  in  each  large  village 
there  is  a  bath-house  which  is  used  periodically,  there  being 
a  heater  which  produces  as  much  warm  water  as  you  like. 

Remember  there  will  be  a  shop  at  Altaiskoe,  Shebalina, 
Ongudai,  and  Kosh-Agatch,  and  at  Bisk  there  are  doctors 
and    a  telegraph   wire  to   Europe.     The    post    from   Kosh- 

246 


Appendix 

Agatch  to  Bisk  is  very  irregular,  supposed  to  be  once  a 
month. 

It  is  a  good  thing  to  take  plenty  of  cheap  waterproof 
sheeting  or  oilcloth  to  cover  yourself  and  your  baggage, 
in  case  you  should  have  to  face  splashing  mud  in  open 
telyeshkas.  These  carriages  give  more  freedom,  but  are  not 
so  weather-proof  as  the  hooded  tarantass. 

The  "  cup-and-ball  "  treatment  in  these  springless  carriages 
on  the  un metalled  roads,  about  which  I  had  heard  so  much, 
did  not  prevent  my  enjoying  the  driving  very  much  indeed. 
The  splendid  work  of  the  three  little  horses,  which  are  in 
good  condition  and  seldom  become  distressed  ;  the  jingling 
bells  suspended  from  the  "  dougah "  hoop  over  the  shaft- 
horse  ;  the  rapid,  cantering  movement  and  the  freedom  to 
look  about  at  the  scenery  make  transit  by  troika  much 
more  interesting  than  transit  by  tonga  in  India,  with  the 
overworked,  underfed  ponies,  and  the  cramped  position  and 
awning  completely  shutting  out  the  view. 

You  will  probably  take  one  man  with  you,  a  Russianised 
Kalmuk,  to  help  you  and  the  drivers  handle  your  kit  in 
changing  carriages  and  to  assist  generally.  We  had  no 
one  at  first ;  but  at  Ongudai  the  chief  of  police,  on  whom 
we  called,  gave  us  a  man — Stipan  (Stephen)  by  name — who 
proved  a  treasure,  and  took  us  as  far  as  Kosh -Agatch. 
Unfortunately  he  was  suffering  from  an  old  wound  in  the 
leg  caused  by  the  kick  of  a  pony,  and  as  it  was  taking  a 
dangerous  turn  he  was  obliged  to  leave  us.  He  was  the 
only  really  helpful  Kalmuk  we  met  in  all  this  journey,  and 
worked  splendidly. 

To  sum  up,  as  regards  the  driving  journey,  try  and  reduce 
your  kit  so  as  to  have  only  two  telyeshkas.  You  can  carry 
yourself  and  interpreter  and  about  two  hundred  pounds  of 
kit  (including  a  tent  to  sit  on)  in  one,  and  a  servant  and 

247 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

some  four  hundred  pounds  or  more  in  the  other,  provided 
}"ou  have  three  horses  to  each  conveyance.  You  and  your 
companion  sit  in  one,  with  small  baggage  ;  while  the  heavy 
baggage  goes  in  the  other — two  horses  for  each  telyeshka 
on  easy  stages,  a  troika  each  for  bad  ones.  Sometimes  you 
must  not  be  surprised  at  having  to  take  to  a  saddle-pony 
and  pack-ponies  instead  of  wheeled  conveyance,  and  when 
}-ou  do  you  will  only  be  able  to  travel  about  twenty-five 
miles  a  da}',  while  you  will  cover  seventy  English  miles 
a  day  (say  105  versts)  with  wheeled  conveyance. 

Kit — Londo7i  to  Bisk.  From  London  to  Bisk,  whether 
}'ou  go  to  Moscow  by  rail,  via  Paris,  or  by  sea,  via  Peters- 
burg, you  will  have  civilised  railways  and  steamers  and 
civilised  passengers  all  the  way,  all  food  and  every  accom- 
modation being  satisfactory. 

Take  ordinary  tweed  clothes  and  a  dress  suit,  which  latter 
you  may  need  anywhere,  including  Bisk.  On  leaving  Bisk 
you  may  leave  dress  clothes,  tweed  suits,  and  all  civilisation 
behind,  and  get  into  shooting  kit. 

Time  estiniate.  If  you  are  going  only  after  wild  sheep 
for  three  weeks,  as  I  did,  the  right  time  to  arrive  in  Kosh- 
Agatch  is  about  ist  July;  but  if  you  want  to  try  new 
shooting  grounds  in  Mongolia,  say  for  two  months,  en- 
deavour to  arrive  at  Kosh-Agatch  by  15th  June,  or  earlier, 
though  the  earlier  you  travel  the  more  muddy  and  difficult 
will  be  the  roads  and  steamers.  I  know  nothing  about 
winter  arrangements.  By  arriving  so  early  you  will  get  two 
clear  months  to  work  in.  Early  in  August  the  weather 
begins  to  break  up.  There  is  likely  to  be  some  competition 
of  sportsmen  in  the  future,  but  there  is  plenty  of  room  if 
each  man  has  a  separate  camp. 

The  Tarkuta  Pass,  I  believe,  presents  no  great  obstacle, 
but  the  other  passes  close  and  are  more  or  less  snowed  up 

248 


Appendix 

and  if  you  stay  too  late  you  may  have  a  difficulty  in  getting 
back. 

From  London  to  Moscow  takes  about  three  days  by 
train  ;  you  can  find  out  about  this  at  the  International 
Sleeping  Car  Company's  offices  in  Pall  Mall.  If  you  go  by 
Petersburg  the  voyage  will  take  about  five  and  a  half  da}\s, 
and  from  there  to  Moscow  one  night ;  but  it  is  as  well  to 
allow  a  whole  day  for  the  custom-house  at  Petersburg. 

On  reaching  Moscow  you  will  find  that  express  trains 
leave  about  three  times  per  week,  or  oftener,  for  Siberia, 
and  it  will  take  five  days  to  get  to  Ob  station  (Novo- 
Nicholaewsk).  The  Obi  steamers  pass  that  place,  going  to 
and  fro,  every  two  or  three  days,  and  from  Novo-Nicholaewsk 
to  Bisk  is  four  days'  voyage,  changing  steamers  at  Barnaul 
without  any  delay,  as  the  two  vessels  lie  side  by  side,  and 
in  changing  you  walk  along  a  gangway  between  them.  The 
return  voyage  from  Bisk  to  Novo-Nicholaewsk,  being  with 
the  current,  occupies  only  two  and  a  half  days. 

A  day  should  be  allowed  in  Bisk  for  making  purchases 
at  the  shops  and  arrangements  for  the  drive,  and  under 
present  conditions,  till  the  staging  stations  are  improved,  it 
will  take  about  ten  days  to  get  from  Bisk  to  Kosh-Agatch. 
If  this  were  a  properly  constituted  post  -  road  for  non- 
officials,  which  it  is  not,  the  journey  should  not  occupy 
more  than  six  days  for  the  distance,  which  is  some  521 
versts  (about  347  miles). 

Thus  if  you  go  by  Paris  you  may  take  the  journey  from 
London  to  Kosh-Agatch  to  occupy  twenty-eight  days,  in- 
cluding necessary  halts. 

I  started  from  London  at  the  end  of  May,  1903,  but  by 

1st  August  of  the  previous  year,  being  then  in  India,  and 

serving  under  the  Indian  Government,  I  had  already  made 

my  first   arrangements  for    passports,  sending   in   a  formal 

2  K  249 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 

application,  through  the  military  authorities,  to  the  Foreign 
Department  at  Calcutta,  This  letter  stated  exactly  the 
route  by  which  I  meant  to  travel,  and  in  what  countries 
it  would  lie,  the  names  and  composition  of  my  party, 
giving  a  rough  idea  of  the  composition  of  the  caravan  in 
men  and  pack-ponies.  I  also  stated  my  age,  nationality, 
full  name,  and  such  information  as  would  be  required  for 
passports.  In  due  time  I  received  a  reply  that  my  applica- 
tion had  been  sent  on  to  the  authorities  in  England. 

By  November  I  was  on  my  way  to  England  on  a  year's 
furlough,  and  lost  no  time  in  applying  personally  to  the 
authorities  at  the  Foreign  Office,  who  had  my  Indian  appli- 
cation, for  the  Chinese  and  Russian  passports ;  the  latter 
required  a  visee  at  the  Russian  Consulate-General  in  Great 
Winchester  Street,  London,  E.C.  The  Chinese  passport 
(which  was  made  out  for  self  and  party)  required  no  visce^ 
being  issued  by  the  Chinese  Department  at  the  Foreign 
Office.  In  connection  with  my  official  application  I  received 
a  request  from  Petersburg  to  detail  exactly  the  guns  and 
ammunition  I  proposed  to  take. 

I  know  nothing  about  Customs  on  going  overland,  as  my 
Customs  experience  was  only  on  landing  in  Petersburg. 
My  guns  and  camera  were  exempted  from  duty,  as  1  had 
come  for  sport.  But  whether  this  is  invariably  done  I  do 
not  know. 

I  asked  the  gunmaker  in  London  to  send  a  few  cartridges 
to  another  gunmaker  in  Petersburg,  as  an  extra  precaution 
in  case  mine  should  be  delayed  in  the  Customs,  but  I  never 
used  these. 

With  regard  to  interpreters,  I  took  none,  as  I  had  English 
friends  in  Siberia ;  but  interpreters  are  to  be  had  in  Omsk. 
The  best  way,  failing  introductions,  would,  I    fancy,  be  to 


Appendix 

stay  a  few  daj^s  in  Moscow  and  call  on  the  British  Consul 
there,  and  ask  for  his  advice  on  the  matter,  and  tr}-  to  get 
into  communication  with  someone  at  Omsk  who  would  have 
an  interpreter  waiting  there.  Interpreters  ask  from  two  to 
five  roubles  a  day  (take  95  roubles  to  equal  ^10),  I  doubt  if 
a  hotel  interpreter  or  guide  from  Petersburg  or  Moscow  would 
be  of  any  use  for  a  shooting  trip.  This  business  of  engaging 
an  interpreter  is  the  great  difficulty  of  the  trip.  There  are 
some  at  Tiflis — Caucasus  men — but  mostly  bad,  I  hear. 
Prince  Demidoff  mentions  having  taken  Joseph  Abbas,  who 
lives,  I  think,  in  Limehouse,  London  ;  my  acquaintance  with 
him  is  limited  to  a  few  hours  at  Kosh-Agatch.  He  seemed 
capable  and  to  know  his  business. 

Messrs.  Thomas  Cook,  of  Ludgate  Circus,  the  well-known 
Tourists'  Agents,  who  have  no  office  of  their  own  in  Russia, 
were  very  courteous  and  helpful  in  giving  me  information 
about  the  railways  and  hotels  and  the  tarantass  driving 
rates. 

Social  arrangements.  I  think  you  may  dismiss  from  your 
mind  the  necessity  of  getting  private  help  other  than  the 
official  help  your  application  would  naturally  obtain  ;  your 
application  must  be  very  clear,  simple,  and  explicit  as  to  the 
route  and  the  approximate  dates,  and  what  you  mean  to  do 
when  you  get  there. 

I  presented  myself  at  the  British  Embassy  at  Petersburg 
and  later  to  the  chief  official  of  the  Imperial  Cabinet  for  the 
Altai  at  Barnaul.  For  Petersburg  official  calls  it  is  safest 
to  dress  as  in  London  ;  but  at  Barnaul  I  called  in  a  tweed 
suit,  and  the  General  was  good  enough  to  excuse  me.  The 
really  proper  and  punctilious  way,  I  believe,  would  be  to 
call  in  evening  dress,  even  in  the  morning,  and  as  you  may 
be  dining  out  in  Bisk  )-ou  will  probably  have  one  with  you. 

251 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Also  I  called  everywhere  else  in  tweeds,  that  is,  on  the 
Cabinet  and  I'olice  officials  in  Novo-Nicholaewsk,  and  the 
head  of  police,  Ongudai,  The  Barnaul  call  I  should  consider 
indispensable.  It  is  very  necessary  that  your  journey  and 
identity  should  be  known  by  the  chief  authority,  who  would 
then  be  able  to  look  after  your  safety  in  any  way  that  may 
be  required.  It  is  not  fair  on  the  authorities  to  keep  them 
in  ignorance.  The  call  was  easily  made  between  steamers, 
there  being  an  interval  of  a  few  hours  between  the  arrival 
from  Novo-Nicholaewsk  and  the  departure  for  Bisk. 

The  persons  to  apply  to  for  help  in  organising  a  Kalmuk 
caravan  at  Kosh-Agatch  is  the  Zaissan,  or  Kalmuks'  magis- 
trate ;  but  the  Russian  Custom-house  officials  there  w^ould 
probably  help,  or  the  manager  of  Mezentsoff  and  Company. 

As  regards  hotels,  the  following  may  be  named.  At 
Petersburg,  the  Hotel  de  France  and  Hotel  de  I'Europe  ; 
at  Moscow,  the  Hotel  de  Berlin  (which  I  think  rather  the 
cheaper)  and  the  Hotel  Slaviansky  Bazaar  ;  at  Novo- 
Nicholaewsk  there  w^as  a  small  inn,  the  name  of  which  I 
forget,  but  I  think  it  was  the  Gastinitza  Nomera ;  at  Bisk 
there  is  the  Gastinitza  Feodorova  ;  at  Kosh-Agatch  it  is 
necessary  to  camp  on  the  plain  or  borrow  an  empty  house 
from  one  of  the  traders  there. 

You  can  get  guides  who  know  English,  to  show  you 
Petersburg  or  Moscow,  by  writing  beforehand  to  the  hotels, 
at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  roubles  per  diem. 

Expenses.  We  will  suppose  a  trip  of  one  month  on  the 
shooting  ground.  Take  ist  June  as  starting  date  (though  it 
is  possible  to  go  somewhat  earlier).  Ascertain  dates  of 
weekly  steamers  from  Messrs.  Bailey,  Leetham,  and  Com- 
pany, Milwall  Dock,  London  ;  and  if  you  go  early  find  out 
what  are  the  arrangements  if  Petersburg  is  ice-bound. 

252 


Appendix 


Your  dates  will  be  approximately  as  follows 

Leave  London 

Arrive  Petersburg 

Leave  ,, 

Arrive  Moscow  (leaving  same  evening) 

Arrive  Ob  Station,  Novo-Nicholaewsk 

Leave  ,,  (by  steamer) 

Arrive  Bisk 

Leave     „     (by  tarantass) 

Arrive  Kosh-Agatch    . 

Leave  „  (for  shooting  trip) 

Return  „ 

Leave  (for  homeward  journey)    . 

Arrive  Bisk 

Leave     ,, 

Arrive  Novo-Nicholaewsk 

Leave  ,, 

Arrive  Petersburg  (allowing  a  day  at  Moscow 

to  get  passports  endorsed  for  leaving  Russia, 

which  is  done  from  the  hotel) 
Leave  Petersburg        .  ... 

Arrive  London  .  ... 

N.B. — I  have  allowed  nothing  for  failure  to  connect  trains 
there  will  not  be  much  delay  on  this  account. 


I  St 

June. 

6th 

ij 

7th 

)) 

8th 

)> 

14th 

)) 

1 6th 

!5 

20th 

)5 

23rd 

J> 

2nd 

July. 

4th 

)) 

4th 

Aug. 

6th 

5J 

15th 

5> 

17th 

5> 

20th 

)5 

22nd 

)J 

29th    „ 
30th    „ 

5th  Sept. 
and  steamers  ;  but 


The  following  are  the  expenses  of  such  a  trip,  based  on 
what  I  paid  ;  but  I  had  no  interpreter.  They  can  be  obtained, 
I  believe,  at  Omsk  for  from  three  to  five  roubles  per  day. 
German  is  very  useful  nowadays,  and  more  so  than  French  : — 


Fee  for  Russian  and  Chinese  passports  at  the  Foreign 
Office,  London,  and  visce  of  former  at  Russian  Con- 
sulate, London        .  .  ... 

Dock  dues  and  cartage,  London 

One  first  return  for  voyage  between  London  and  Peters- 
burg       .  .  .  ... 


£ 


253 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Purchase  in  London   of  a   month's  tinned  stores  and      /;      j-.    d. 

liquors  for  self  and  interpreter  .  .         .      15     o     o 

Two  sheets  Russian  40-verst  map  at  Stanford's,  Pall  Mall       o     G     o 
Excess  baggage,  London  to  Petersburg,  15^.,  and  return 

journey    .  .... 

Expenses  on  steamer,  messing,  etc.,  both  ways 


Equivalent  in  roubles 


I    10     o 
600 

322.00 


N.B. — There  are  about  95  roubles  in  ^10,  and  100  kopeks  (farthings)  in  a 
rouble. 

R.  K. 
Customs  duty  at  Petersburg  on — 

;^  1 5  worth  tinned  stores  ..  .  .         .  42.00 

Tents  .....     say  50-00 

First-class  fare  for  one  person  going  and  coming  between 

Petersburg  and  INIoscow  .  .  ..  50.24 

N.B. — Tickets   obtainable   at    International    Sleeping   Car    Office, 
Nevsky  Prospekt,  Petersburg. 

Hotel  and  petty  e.xpenses  in  Petersburg,  about  two  days, 

including  a  guide  at  5  R.  daily    .  ...       45.00 

Excess  baggage,  say  15  puds,  Petersburg  to  Moscow  and 

back,   at   R.   1.53  per  pud  of  36  lbs.  English   (40  lbs. 

Russian)       .  .  .  ...       45-9o 

First-class  fare  for  one  person  going  and  coming  between 

Moscow  and  Ob  station  (Novo-Nicholaewsk),  obtainable 

at  Sleeping  Car  Company,  Moscow  .  .         .168.00 

Excess  baggage,  Moscow  to  Ob,  for  15  puds  at  5  R.,  75.00 ; 

and  for  return  journey  .  .  .         .150.00 

Food  on  train  and  petty  expenses,  Petersburg  to  Ob,  and 

return  journey — total,  eleven  days  .  .         .       28. 00 

Hotel  expenses  at  Moscow,  one  person  for  about  two  days, 

including  guide,  etc.     .  .  ...       30.00 

Hotel  and  petty  expenses  in  Novo-Nicholaewsk  and  Bisk 

on  various  halts,  say  six  days  at  12  R.         .  .         .       72.00 

First-class  ticket,  one  person,  Novo-Nicholaewsk  to  Bisk, 

and  return  voyage         .  .  .  ..       38.00 


254 


Appendix 

Food  and  expenses  on  steamer,  two  persons  to  and  fro,  say       A'.  A'. 
six  days        .  .  .  .  ..       50.00 

Excess  baggage  on  these  voyages    .  .  .         .12.00 

Caravan  kit  purchased  at  Bisk  and  Kosh-Agatch,  and  rent 

for  house  at  latter  place  .  ...       68.00 

Interpreter  (if  engaged  at  Omsk)  for  second-class  rail  and 

steamer  both  ways  between  Omsk  and  Bisk  (roughly)      .        70.00 
Conveyance  of  two  persons,  one  servant,  and  baggage  by 
tarantasses  or  pack-ponies   (say  three  carts  with   three 
ponies  each,  or  nine  pack  and  riding  ponies),  521  versts 
(roughly  347  miles)      .  .  ...     380.00 

Ferries,  outward  journey,  over  the  Ob  at  Bisk  and  over  the 
Katun  at  Iniya ;  homeward  journey,  one  over  the  Ob  at 
Bisk  and  two  over   the   Katun  at   Iniya  and  Bisk  re- 
spectively    .  .  .  .  .         .         4.00 

Food  for  followers  for  shooting  trip  purchased  at  Kosh- 
Agatch  .  .  .  .  .         .         9.00 

Pay  of  servant  from  Bisk  to  Kosh-Agatch  and  back    .         .      100.00 
Shooting  presents  (say  six  wild  sheep  and  two  ibex)    .         .       20.00 
Mutton  and  milk  on  shooting  trip  (say  3  to  6  R.  per  sheep)       20.00 
Messengers,  transport  of  trophies,  and  other  petty  expenses 

on  shooting  trip  .  .  ...        10.00 

Paying  off  shooting  caravan — 

Ten  ponies  for  pack  and  riding,  with  three  drivers  who 

are  thrown  in,  for  one  month  .  .  .         .100.00 

Three  drivers'  gratuities  .  .  .         .         6.00 

One  extra  driver,  pay  .  .  .  ..       20.00 

Felt  for  sewing  round  trophies  for  cart  and  rail  transport 

and  expenses  connected  with  cleaning         .  .         .        10.00 

Pay  of  cook  and  hunter  one  month  at  20  R.  each  (10  R. 

more  each  if  they  bring  their  own  ponies)   .  .         .       40.00 

Pay  of  tent-boy  or  Kalmuk  interpreter  one  month       .         .       30.00 

Interpreter's  pay  (if  one  is  taken),  sixty-nine  days  at,  say, 

5  R.  a  day  (13th  June  to  21st  August)        .  .         .     345.00 

Grand  total      .         .2,335.14 
Roughly      ^256 

255 


INDEX 


Aigulak,  99 
Altai  district,  12 

,,     highlands,  83 
Altaietz,  98 

Altaiskoe,  89,  233,  246 
Antelopes,  loS 
Ardenski,  71 
Asiatic  Wapiti,  176 

Barnaul,  75 

Bazaars  at  Nijni-Novgorod,  231 

Bersk,  72 

Birds,  107 

Bisk,  81,  199 

Brick-tea  trade,  11,  198 

Butterflies,  49 

Buck  (Sulti),  170 

Cameras,  237 

Camel,  Kirghiz,  191 

Camel-wool  trade,  198 

Canteen,  245 

Caravan  composition,  244 

Cattley,  J.  O.,  65,  82,  95,  109,  167, 

224 
Chagan-Burgaza  stream,  107,  126 

„  pass,  135 

Chelyabinsk,  49 
Chergi,  90 
Chibit,  100,  208 
Chinese  Mongolia,  12 
„       soldiers,  137 
Chuisky  Tract,  83,  198,  212 
Chuya,  208 
Clothing,  237 

2   L 


Cook,  Thomas,  and  Son,  7,  251 
Cumberland,  Major,  4,  9 
Customs  difficulties,  14 
Czar,  portraits  of,  75 

Demidofif,  Prince,  4,  114,  151,  251 
Dyosh-tugol  peak,  102 

Expenses  of  the  trip,  253 

Hagenbeck,  Mr.,  10 
Happy  Valley,  1 14 
Houses,  description  of,  89 

Ibex,  7 
,,     ground,  105,  1 18 
„      the  first  shot,  141 
„     small  herd,  169 
„      a  tedious  stalk,  172 
,,     a  forty-two-inch  head,  194 

lyedra,  97,  211 

Kalmuks,  10,  97,  154,  204,  215 
„         their  horses,  94 

„     huts,  94,  9^ 
,,  ,,     country,  98 

,,  ,,     priests,  210 

Katun  River,  96,  97,  211 

Kirghiz  camel,  191 
„        horseman,  194 

Kirkuchi,  96,  97,  216 

Kit,  248 

Kobdo,  198 

Kosh-Agatch,  11,  106,  198 


=  57 


Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia 


Kouaktenar,  203 
Kremlin,  21,  35 
Kiirai,  102,  203 

Lace,  3S 
Littledale,  Mr.,  4,  9 

Maral  stags,  6 

Matai,  a  Russianised  Kalmuk,  109, 

215 
Measurement  of  07'/s  ram,  132 
„  ibex  horns,  141 

„  sheep  horns,  147, 

167,  191 
Mongolian  sport,  1 1 
Mongol  soldier's  dress,  138 
Moscow,  8 

,,         arrived  at,  29,  251 
Mosquitoes,  151 

Nam  Daba  plateau,  192 
Nijni-Novgorod  fair,  228 
Novo-Nicholaewsk,  63,  224 

Ob,  12,  63 

Obi  River,  63 

Ongudai,  1 1 

Outfit,  hints  on,  235 

Ov/s  amnion^  i 

„  theram'stactics,  2, 181 

„  skulls,  112 

„  stalks,   115,   117,  122, 

124,  128 
„  first  ram,  132 

„  his  measurements,  1 32 

,,  derelict  skulls,  134 

„  large  herd,  135 

„  another  large  herd  of 

eighteen  rams,  143 
„  a  colossal  ram,  160 

„  three  herds,  162 

„  killed  by  wolf,  193 


Peschan,  93,  219 
Petersburg,  14 

,,  Museum,  26 

Photographing,  200 
Political  question,  58 
Powar  sees  sheep,  121,  124 

„      good  points,  154 
Priest  at  Kosh-Agatch,  33 
Przewalski's  gazelle,  168 

Reval,  14 

Religious  observances,  2 1 
Rhubarb,  wild,  109 
Rifle,    "450    Cordite    Express,    147, 
165,  183,  242 
„     hints  on  selection,  235 
,,     Mannlicher,  165 
Roebuck  hunt,  10 1 
Ronaldshay,  Lord,  203 
Russia's  war  chest,  61 
Russian  public  buildings,  22 
,,        types,  22 

,,        settlers  in  Siberia, 43, 57,67 
„        cattle,  94 
„        merchants,  198 
,,        Customs  officials,  198 
,,        railway  extensions,  12,  199, 
200 


Saddlery  outfit,  238 

Samara,  227 

Saw-mills,  72 

Seton  Karr,  Mr.  H.  \V.,  65,  95,  106, 
109 
,,  his  sheep,  1 13 

Sheualina,  90 

Sheep.     See  Ovis 

Siberian  argali,  i 
,,       roe,  6 

,,       railway  terminus,  40 
,,       butter  exports,  65 


Index 


Siberian-Mongolian  trade,  199 
Somaliland  pioneering,  3 

Tarantass  road  from  Ongudai,  1 1 

,,  Bisk,  83 

Tarkuta  pass,  6,  192,  197 

,,       stream,  194 
Tartars,  42 

Tenginsky  lake,  93,  216 
Tents,  241 
Tibetan  argali,  i 
Tomsk,  53 
Trade  of  Siberian-Mongolia,  199 

„      in  tea  and  wool,  1 1 

,,      in  butter,  65 

„      in  horns,  6 
Trees  in  Siberia,  53 

Ural  Mountains,  49 


Ust-Iniya,  96 
Ust-Tinginsky,  216 

Van  der  Byl,  Mr.,  9 

Wapiti,  177 

Ward's,  Rowland,  Records  of  liig 

Game,  4 
Wild  sheep  (see  also  Ov/s),  107,  1 10 

„  horns,  108 

Wolf  kills  sheep,  193 
Wolves,  148,  170 

„        hunting,  184 
Wool  trade,  198 

Yaks  of  the  Kirghiz,  194 
Yemba  the  cook,  153 

Zamok,  136 

Zara,  s.s.,  231 


^59 


PLYMOUTH 

WILLIA.M    BKENDON    AND   SON 

PRINTERS 


n 


o 


ROUGH      SKETCH 

SHOWING  AUTHORS 
ROUTE  THUS 


SCALE40  VERST5  ISAV  26  MILESj 


#         # 


a> 


ROWLAND  WARD,  Limited 

DAaturali^tt?  to  the  Court 

By  Special  Appointment  to  the  Courts  of  Europe 

"THE   JUNGLE,"  i66,  PICCADILLY,  LONDON,  W. 

Practical  and  Artistic  Taxidermists,  Designers  of  Trophies 
of  Natural  History,  Preservers  and  Adapters  of  all 
Specimens  of  Animal  Life.  Natural  P'catures  of 
Animals  adapted  in  Original  Designs  for  Decorative 
Purposes  and  every-day  uses.  Furriers  and  Plumas- 
siers,  and  Collectors  in  Natural  History.  Booksellers 
and    Publishers. 


MEDALS  AND  DIPLOMAS  OF  HONOUR  FOR  ARTISTIC  WORK: 

London      Inlernational      ]".xliil)ilion,  '  London  International  Health  ExJiibi- 

1862.  I  lion,  1S84. 

Paris  International  Exhibition,  1862.  London  Colonial  and  Indian  Exhibi- 

Vienna      International       I'.xhibition,  lion,  1886. 

1873.  The  Anglo-Danish  Exhibition,  South 

London  International  Fisheries,  1883.  |  Kensington,  1888. 

Calcutta     International      Exhibition,  |  The  Royal  Military  Exhibition,  Army 

1883-4.  '  Medical  Department,  1890. 


ROWLAND    WARD'S 

PUBLICATIONS  FOR  SPORTSMEN 

AND    NATURALISTS 


i'rUe  ;^5  5^.   net 

THE  DEER  OF  ALL  LANDS 

Rv  R.   LYDEKKER 

Illustrated  by  Twenty-four  Hand-coloured   Plates  and  a  number  of 
Photographic  Reproductions  of  Living  Deer 


Price  £^  5^.   net 

WILD   OXEN,   SHEEP,   AND   GOATS 
OF  ALL  LANDS 

Bv    R.    LYDEKKER 

Companion  volume  to    "  Deer  of  all    Lands."       Illustrated   by 
Twenty-seven  Hand-coloured  Plates  and  other  Illustrations 

Price  £i,  4^.  net 

THE  GREAT  AND   SMALL  GAME  OF  INDIA, 
BURMA3  AND  TIBET 

By  R.  LYDEKKER 

With  Nine  Hand-coloured  Plates  and  other  Illustrations 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,    limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"  166,   PICCADILLY 


Pri(e  £i,  i,s.  net 

THE  GREAT  AND  SMALL  GAME  OF  EUROPE, 

WESTERN  AND  NORTHERN  ASIA, 

AND  AMERICA 

Bv  R.  LYDEKKER 

With  Eis;ht  Hand-coloured  Plates  and  other  Illustrations 


Price  £^   5J.  net 

THE  GREAT  AND  SMALL  GAME  OF  AFRICA 

With  Fifteen  Hand-coloured  Plates  of  Heads  and  Fifty-seven 
other  Illustrations 

By  various   AUTHORS 


Out  of  Pn'ul 

SPORT  IN  SOMALILAND 

Bv    COUNT    JOSEPH    POTOCKI 

With  a  Coloured   Frontispiece,  Fifty-eight    Coloured    Illustrations, 
Eighteen  Page  Photogravures,  Seven  Text  Figures,  and  Map 


London:    ROWLAND    WARD,    limited 

"THE   JUNGLE,"    i66,    PICCADILLY 


Price  255.   net 

TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE  IN  SOUTH-EAST 

AFRICA 

Bv   F.   C.   SELOUS 
With  numerous  Illustrations  and    Map 


Price  \os.  dd.  net 

SUNSHINE  AND  STORM  IN  RHODESIA 

Bv  F.  C.  SELOUS 

Fully    Illustrated    with    Map 


Price  30\'.  7jet.     Fourth  edition 

RECORDS  OF  BIG  GAME 

WITH    THE   DISTRIBUTION,    CHARACTERISTICS,    DIMEN- 
SIONS, WEIGHTS,  AND 

HORN  AND  TUSK  MEASUREMENTS  OF  THE 
DIFFERENT  SPECIES 

Bv   ROWLAND   WARD,  F.Z.S. 

With  253  Illustrations 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,    limited 

"THE   JUXC.LE,"    166,    PICCADILLY 


Friie  2l.f.  net 

ELEPHANT-HUNTING 
IN   EAST   EQUATORIAL  AFRICA 

By   ARTHUR    H.   NEUMANN 
With  Illustrations  and  Map 


Price  "js.  6ci.  net.      Third  edition 

SEVENTEEN  TRIPS  THROUGH  SOMALILAND 

AND  A  VISIT  TO  ABYSSINIA 

WITH    SUPPLEMENTARY   PREFACE   ON   THE    "MAD 
MULLAH^'    RISINGS 

By   major    H.   G.   C.    SWAYNE,   R.E. 

With  Illustrations  and  ^laps 


Pme  2 1  J.   net 

SPORT  IN  THE  HIGHLANDS  OF  KASHMIR 

BEING   A   NARRATIVE    OF 
AN    EIGHT    MONTHS'   TRIP    IN    BALTISTAN    AND    LADAK 

By   henry   ZOUCH    DARRAH 

With  Illustrations  and  ISIap 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,   limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"   i66,   PICCADILLY 


Price  2U.  net 

HUNTING  TRIPS  IN  THE  CAUCASUS 

By    E.    DEMIDOFF    (Prince  San  Donato) 
^\'ith  Ninety-six  Illustrations  and  Map 


Price  lis.    net 

AFTER  WILD  SHEEP  IN  THE  ALTAI 
AND  MONGOLIA 

Bv  E.  DEMIDOFF   (Prince  San  Donato) 
With  Eighty-two  Illustrations,  Map,  and  Coloured  Frontispiece 


^vo.     Price  %s.   6d.  net 

SPORT  IN  EAST  CENTRAL  AFRICA 

BEING   AN    ACCOUNT   OF 

HUNTING   TRIPS    IN   PORTUGUESE   AND    OTHER 

DISTRICTS    OF   EAST   CENTRAL   AFRICA 

Bv  R  V.  KIRBY,  F.Z.S. 

With  Illustrations 


London  :    ROWLAND   WARD,    limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"   i66,   PICCADILLY 


Price  "Js.   6d.   net 

THE  ENGLISH  ANGLER  IN  FLORIDA 

WITH    SOME    DESCRIPTIVE    NOTES    OF   THE   GAME 
ANIMALS   AND    BIRDS 

By   ROWLAND   WARD,   F.Z.S. 

With  numerous  Illustrations 


Price  y.  6d.  net 

THE  SPORTSMAN'S  HANDBOOK 

TO 

PRACTICAL  COLLECTING,  PRESERVING,  AND  ARTISTIC 

SETTING-UP  OF  TROPHIES  AND  SPECIMENS 
Mitb  a  Synoptical  OuiDc  to  tbc  Haunting  ©rouuDs  of  tbe  inorl& 

By  ROWLAND   WARD,  F.Z.S. 


Price  21  s.   net 

A  SPORTING  TRIP  THROUGH  ABYSSINIA 

WITH  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  GAME,  FROM  ELEPHANT 

TO  IBEX,  AND  NOTES  ON  THE  MANNERS  AND 

CUSTOMS  OF  THE  NATIVES 

By  p.  H.  G,  POWELL-COTTON,  F.Z.S.,  F.R.G.S. 

With  Ninety-two  Illustrations  and  ]Map 


London:    ROWLAND   WARD,  limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"   166,   PICCADILLY 


Price  21  s.   net 

NATURE  PORTRAITS 

STUDIES  WITH  PEN  AND  CAMERA  OF  OUR  WILD  BIRDS, 
ANIMALS,  FISH,  AND   INSECTS 

TEXT  BY  THE  EDITOR  OF    "COUNTRY  LIFE  IN  AMERICA" 

With  Fifteen  Large  Plates  and  many  Illustrations  by  the  best  Nature 

Photographers 


Price  \2S.   6d.   net 

AMERICAN  ANIMALS 

A  POPULAR  GUIDE  TO  THE  MAMMALS  OF  NORTH 
AMERICA,  NORTH  OF  MEXICO,  WITH  INTIMATE 
BIOGRAPHIES   OF  THE   MORE    FAMILIAR  SPECIES 

Bv  WITMER  STONE  and  WILLIAM   EVERETT  CRAM 

With  numerous  Illustrations 


Price  30.r.   net 

CAMERA  SHOTS  AT  BIC  GAME 

By  a.  G.  WALLIHAN 
With  an  Introduction  by  THEODORE  ROOSE\'ELT 


London  :  ROWLAND  WARD,  limited 

"THE  JUNGLE,"  166,  PICCADILLY 


I^ii^ 


^^PHhL 


UK 

-9 


THE  LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Santa  Barbara 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW. 


AVAILABLE   FOR 

CIRCULATION  AI-TER 

DISPLAY   PERIOD 


(I0V2  2'81 


^ 


1  /I 


l:\':s 


^\.  v^ 


3  1205  02703  3941 


ml     III  III  >iii  ml  nil 


■^'v^O^C^x^-^^ 


KNjt^ 


^\ 


\ 


X, 


"-^V:^ 


s\^ 


^> 


^ 


^^  x^<^^. 


i^ 


>^ 


s.'^*^ 


>.^^^c^-^\^ 


/--    '^    \   .s"^-  ■ 


V^ 


^^i\^"^\  ,^- 


