UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  DIEGO 


3  1822  02624  7171 


£v  jw|r  •^<'\ 


-,         r  ,  1^.1 


*<'.».'  .. 


<  . 


-V  '■ 


:.-.  f' 


7  *m  'n^f. 


\^     ;'^r-:'-2f 


.  iv.  -  -•♦  A  ♦^ 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA^^ 


3  1822  02624  7171 


/ 


Br   THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


SPOKT  AND  POLITICS  UNDER  A 
EASTERN   SKY. 

Demv  8vo,  21s.  net. 


Athenaeum. — "A  useful  contribution  to  our  somewhat  scanty  sources  of  informa- 
tion about  tracts  of  country  invested  at  this  moment  with  peculiar  interest." 

St  James's  Gazette. — "A  very  varied  and  fascinating  stor^  of  travel  in  some  of 

the  most  interesting  quarters  of  Asia The  picture  of  the  capital  of  Seistan,  where, 

within  the  last  couple  of  years,  a  British  Agent  has  been  established,  and  of  the  covert 
conflict  of  Russian  and  British  interests  in  this  important  strategic  province  are  very 
interesting  to  the  student  of  international  politics,  as  well  as  for  the  sake  of  the 
entertaining  narrative  itself.  Excellent,  too,  is  the  account  of  the  big-game  shoot- 
ing in  the  Himalayan  highlands." 

Pall  Mall  Gazette.—"  We  hope  Lord  Ronaldshay's  book  will  help  sluggish  thinkers 
at  home  to  realise  how  deeply  we  are  involved,  and  how  little  we  can  afford  to  relax 
our  influence  on  the  region  that  lies  between  the  Afghan  frontier  and  the  Persian 
Gulf." 

Civil  and  Military  Gazette. — "A  bright   and   amusing   book   of   travel The 

style  is  chatty  and  unpretentious,  and  the  volume  will  be  welcome  to  those  who  are 
wearied  of  the  rigmarole  of  political  theses  which  constitutes  the  stock-in-trade  of 
the  present  day  magazine-article  writer  when  he  discourses  upon  the  affairs  of  foreign 
countries.  The  photographs — the  author's  own— with  which  the  book  is  illustrated 
are  excellent  throughout." 

Times.  —  "  Two  themes  there  are  which  have  justified  the  existence  of  many  books 
of  travel  and  seldom  fail  to  wake  a  sympathetic  echo  in  the  mind  of  the  Englishman. 
A  passion  for  sport  and  a  taste  for  politics  are  innate  in  him,  and  a  book  which 
reminds  him  of  either  fact  or  both  does  not  generally  make  its  appeal  in  vain.  Lord 
Ronaldshay's  book,  as  its  title  declares,  avowedly  makes  this  appeal ;  and  by  a  grati- 
fying simplicity  of  arrangement  sport  and  politics  are  relegated  to  distinct  halves  of 
it,  so  that  in  perusing  it  neither  the  sportsman  nor  the  politician  need,  unless  he 
chooses,  enter  upon  alien  ground His  story  is  an  efifective,  if  involuntary,  testi- 
mony to  his  pluck  and  powers  of  endurance,  which,  on  the  whole,  were  very  well 
rewarded.  It  will  probably  attract  others  besides  sportsmen,  for  the  wild  regions 
above  Kashmir  and  on  the  confines  of  Chinese  Tibet  always  fascinate  the  reader,  and 
Lord  Ronaldshay's  narrative,  while  making  no  pretentions  to  literary  adornment, 
shows  that  he  felt  a  delighted  sympathy  with  the  spirit  of  the  vast  solitudes  through 
which  he  wandered,  and— more  essential  still— that  he  really  describes  things  as  he 
saw  them." 

Westminster  Gazette. — "Lord  Ronaldshay's  volume  stands  out  from  the  average 
sportsman's  record.  First  of  all,  there  is  a  ring  of  enthusiasm  for  the  lonely  heights 
and  the  beauty  of  the  wilderness  throughout  the  whole  book,  which  is  very  refreshing 
in  its  boyishness  and  candour.  Next,  the  roads  chosen,  first  ou  Asiatic  hill-tops,  and 
afterwards  from  Simla  through  Beluchistan  and  the  Caspian  by  land  to  London,  are 
almost  entirely  off  what  is  now  becoming  the  beaten  track  of  the  hunter  of  big  game  ; 
and  last,  but  not  least,  the  author's  dauntless  and  cheerful  perseverance  in  excep- 
tional hardships  and  trials  of  patience,  lend  a  peculiar  interest  to  every  page." 

Spectator. — "  Lord  Ronaldshay  has  achieved  a  rare  success  ;  he  has  written  a  good 
book  of  travels.  The  style  is  simple  and  well  suited  to  the  matter ;  the  interest  is 
not  sacrificed  to  a  pretence  of  fine  writing  ;  and  the  author  has  sufificient  literary 
sense  to  produce  the  eflect  at  which  he  aims,  whether  he  writes  as  a  sportsman  or  a 
politician." 

WILLIAM  BLACKWOOD  &  SONS,  Edinburgh  and  London. 


>^^p 


GEISEL  LIBRARY 


GEISEL  LIBRAKT  ,^j-p 


ON   THE    OUTSKIETS   OF  EMPIKE 
IN   ASIA 


VIEW    IN    THE    THIAN    SHAN, 


WAYNE  S.  VUCINICH 


ON  THE  OUTSKIRTS  OF  EMPIRE 
IN  ASIA 


BY 

THE   EARL   OF   RONALDSHAY 

F.R.G.S. 

AUTHOR    OF    '  SPORT    AND    POLITICS    UNDER    AN    EASTERN    SKY ' 


"  It  is  in  Asia  once  again  that  will  be  decided  the  destinies  of  the  world. 
In  Asia  will  be  founded  and  will  increase  great  empires,  and  whoever 
succeeds  in  making  his  voice  heeded  in  the  Far  East  will  be  able  also  to 
speak  in  dominating  accents  to  Europe." —  Prince  Henri  d'Orleans  : 
Around  Tonkin. 


WILLIAM    BLACKWOOD    AND    SONS 

EDINBURGH    AND    LONDON 

MCMIV 


AU  Eights  reserved 


PREFACE. 


The  object  and  scope  of  the  present  volume  are  set 
forth  at  sufficient  length  in  the  opening  chapter, 
and  no  further  explanation  on  this  score  is  required 
from  me  here.  With  regard  to  arrangement,  it  has 
been  my  endeavour  to  place  before  the  public  an 
account  of  some  of  the  less  accessible  countries  of 
Asia  and  of  the  problems  to  which  their  existence 
and  present  position  give  rise,  which  may  appeal 
equally  to  the  general  reader  and  to  the  student  of 
Eastern  questions.  With  this  object  in  view  I  have 
caused  to  be  inserted  a  number  of  illustrations, 
reproductions  in  every  case  of  photographs  taken  by 
myself,  in  the  hope  that  they  may  prove  of  assistance 
to  the  reader  in  forming  a  mental  picture  of  the 
countries  and  peoples  that  I  describe.  The  countries 
through  which  I  passed  being  many  and  various,  I 
have  divided  the  volume  into  sections,  each  one  of 
which  may  be  read  without  reference  to  the  others. 
In  Section  I.  will  be  found  a  synopsis  of  the  chapters 
that  follow ;  in  Sections  II. -YI.  a  description  of  a 
journey   the  length    of  an    ancient  continent ;   and  in 


PREFACE. 


the  concluding  section  some  account  of  the  political 
situation  in  the  East  with  which  this  country  is  con- 
fronted at  the  present  time.  Sections  II. -VI.  may  be 
said  to  consist  in  the  main  of  a  narrative  of  travel, 
and,  since  my  wanderings  led  me  at  one  time  through 
an  unrivalled  sporting  country,  I  have  not  hesitated 
to  include  among  them  a  section  upon  sport ;  but 
though  devoted  largely  to  a  description  of  travel, 
some  political  questions — the  Baghdad  railway  problem 
to  wit — are  discussed  in  them,  something  of  history 
is  recalled,  and  such  information  as  my  inquiries  in 
various  directions  elicited  is  adduced  for  the  benefit 
of  all  who  take  a  close  interest  in  the  peoples  and 
politics  of  Asia.  It  has  been  said  of  travellers — not 
altogether  without  reason  perhaps — that  they  forget 
much  that  they  have  seen,  and  remember  much  that 
they  have  not !  If  I  plead  guilty  to  the  former 
charge,  I  may,  I  hope,  in  my  own  case  conscientiously 
take  exception  to  the  latter,  since  it  has  been  my 
practice,  whenever  seeing  anything  of  interest  or  learn- 
ing anything  of  importance  from  reliable  sources,  to 
take  instant  note  of  it  upon  the  spot. 

It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  add  that 
I  am  indebted  to  many  for  much  willing  help  and 
sympathetic  interest  shown  to  me  by  my  own  country- 
men and  by  foreigners  alike,  whether  ojB&cial  or  other- 
v/ise,  whenever  my  wanderings  have  brought  me  in 
contact  with  them  in  the  remote  corners  of  the  East. 
In  this  connection  it  is  also  my  pleasant  duty  to 
acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  the  proprietors  of 
'  The   Times '   for   the   ready  assent  which    they  gave 


PREFACE. 


to  my  request  to  be  permitted  to  make  use  in  the 
present  volume  of  articles  from  my  pen  which  have 
already  appeared  in  their  columns. 

In  conclusion,  may  I  express  the  hope  that  there 
may  be  found  in  the  following  pages  sufficient  of 
interest  to  evoke  from  the  reading  public  the  same 
indulgent  reception  for  this,  my  second  and  more 
ambitious  volume,  that  they  so  readily  accorded  to 
my  first. 

RONALDSHAY. 


Av^ust  1904. 


CONTENTS. 


ACEOSS  A  CONTINENT. 
CHAPTER  I. 

ACROSS    A    CONTINENT. 

Object  of  the  book — Length  of  journey  and  method  of  travel — The 
desert — A  site  of  ancient  monarchies — Discomfort  of  travel — The 
spell  of  the  East — To  the  heart  of  Asia  by  rail — Performance  at 
a  mosque — Monuments  of  the  past — Central  Asian  post-roads — 
Beyond  the  bounds  of  Russia — A  great  trans-continental  railway 
— -The  political  aspect — The  return  of  the  West  to  the  East — The 
remnants  of  Portuguese  supremacy — The  awakening  of  Russia — 
The  Powers  in  Asia — The  objects  of  Great  Britain  and  of  Russia 
— The  policy  of  Tsar  Nicholas  1.— Failure  of  the  same — Ineptitude 
of  British  policy  in  the  past — Importance  of  British  interests  in 
the  East — Lord  Curzon's  views — The  necessity  of  looking  Asiatic 
problems  in  the  face   ....... 


TURKEY    IN    ASIA. 
CHAPTER   II. 

THE    GATEWAY    OP    THE    EAST. 

Constantinople — The  romance  of  the  city  on  the  Golden  Horn — The 
reality — Monuments  of  interest — The  gulf  between  Europe  and 
Asia — Peculiarities  of  the  East — The  Haider- Pasha  Ismid  railway 
— A  climb  to  the  Anatolian  plateau  —  Lack  of  comfort  on  the 
present  Anatolian  railway — Probabilities  of  the  future — Konia — 
Its  streets — Improvement  in  the  district  under  the  adminstration 
of  Ferhit  Pasha  .......       27 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER   III. 

ACROSS     THE     TAURUS. 

Difficulties  of  travel  iu  the  winter— An  Eastern  road—Th^  Axylon 
plateau— Off  the  road  at  night— Eregli— Through  the  Taurus 
mountains— The  defile  at  Bozanti— A  pleasant  Christmas !— A 
silver  mine — Death  of  a  Icaimakam—Bdidi  weather — The  Cilician 
Gates— An  ancient  highway  of  nations— The  trac^  of  the  future 
railway  not  through  the  Gates— Reach  the  Cilician  plain  and 
Mersina  ,...••••      34 

CHAPTER    IV. 

CILICIA. 

Cilicia,  ancient  and  modern— Mersina,  a  typical  seaport  of  the  Near 
East— Natural  disadvantages  as  a  port— The  ancient  harbour  of 
Tarsus— The  ruins  at  Soli  Pompeiopolis— St  Paul's  Institute  at 
Tarsus— Course  of  the  Cydnus  diverted  by  Justinian— The  Dinek 
Tash— Fallacy  of  the  legend  that  it  is  the  tomb  of  Sardanapalus 
—Relics  at  Tarsus— The  site  of  the  ancient  capital— Adana, 
capital  of  Cilicia— Description  of— Population  of— The  American 
mission  —  Turkish  rule  — Want  of  public  works  —  Instances  of 
official  corruption— The  cotton  industry— Climate— Leave  Adana 
— Ruined  castles — A  gorgeous  sunset — Nature  of  Eastern  Cilicia 
—  Across  the  Giaour  Dagh  —  Excavations  at  Zingerli  —  Reach 
Aleppo  .....•••       *^ 

CHAPTER    V. 

ALEPPO    TO    DEIR-EL-ZOR. 

Aleppo  — Its  bazaars  —  Population  —  Importance  as  a  distributing 
centre— More  tales  of  Turkish  administration— Routes  between 
Aleppo  and  Mossul— The  northern  route— The  southern  route— 
The  proposed  railway  route  —  Internal  disorder  —  Reason  for 
travelling  by  southern  route  — Start  from  Aleppo  —  Nature  of 
country— A  long  march  and  a  scanty  dinner— Meskineh— The 
lands  of  the  Euphrates— Historical  interest  of  the  river  banks— 
Deir  — A  visit  from  a  Turkish  colonel  — I  secure  an  escort— 
Road-making— The  disadvantages  of  an  absence  of  road  .       53 

CHAPTER    VL 

THE    DESERT. 

Crossing  the  Euphrates — The  monotonous  desolation  of  the  country 
—A  surprise— A  band  of  Arab  marauders— A  peaceful  conclusion 


CONTENTS. 


— Arab  propensities — The  river  Gozan  of  the  Old  Testament — 
Crossing  the  Khabur  river — The  Mesopotamian  steppe — A  well 
in  the  desert— Reach  the  Jebel  Sinjar — The  Yezidis — A  punitive 
expedition — An  uncomfortable  night — The  country  between  Jebel 
Sinjar  and  the  Tigris — The  aspect  of  Mesopotamia  in  spring  and 
in  summer — Description  by  Sir  Henry  Layard        .  .  .62 


CHAPTER    VII. 


THE    LANDS    OP    THE   TIGRIS. 


Curiosity  concerning  the  past — Collections  of  ancient  records — Time 
the  destroyer — Koyunjik  and  Nebi  Yunus— Nimrud — The  Ger- 
mans at  Babylon— Mossul — Down  the  Tigris  on  a  raft — A  useful 
escort ! — Samara  and  its  objects  of  pilgrimage — The  Malwiyeh — 
Latent  wealth  of  the  lands  of  the  Tigris— Sir  William  Willcock's 
scheme — British  Government  must  interest  themselves — Chaldsea 
described  by  Herodotus— Reach  Baghdad — The  romance  of  Bagh- 
dad is  of  the  past — A  gufa — Described  by  Herodotus — Baghdad 
a  commercial  centre — Shortcomings  of  the  Turkish  Government 
— Fate  of  a  public  benefactor — Trade  of  Baghdad — Lack  of  trans- 
port— Extraordinary  rates  of  freight — Great  Britain  must  control 
the  country  from  Baghdad  to  the  Persian  Gulf        .  .  .70 

CHAPTER   YIII. 

THE    BAGHDAD    RAILWAY. 

Railway  projects  in  the  past — The  success  of  Germany— Lack  of 
interest  of  British  Government  in  the  past — English  concessions 
pass  to  other  countries — The  prophecy  of  the  deputation  of  1857 
— The  German  Commission  of  1899 — The  concession  of  1902 — 
Proposed  route  of  the  line — Branch  lines — Description  of  the 
country  through  which  the  line  will  pass — The  Taurus  barrier — 
Possibilities  of  Asia  Minor — Lawlessness  of  Mesopotamia — Im- 
portant towns  all  lie  to  the  north— The  right  bank  of  the  Tigris 
preferred  to  the  left — Centres  of  pilgrimage — Points  to  be  re- 
membered in  criticising  the  line — The  financial  prospect— Inter- 
national complications — Germanophobia  in  England — The  line  as 
an  alternative  route  for  the  Indian  mails — The  conditions  upon 
which  Great  Britain  must  insist  as  essential  to  her  co-operation — 
The  position  of  Great  Britain  with  regard  to  the  railway— The 
state  of  affairs  at  the  present  time  .  .  .  .84 


CONTENTS. 


PEESIA. 
CHAPTER    IX. 

BAGHDAD    TO    KBRMANSHAH. 

Persian  characteristics  —  Methods  of  travel  in  Persia  —  Interesting 
monuments  of  Western  Persia  —  Nature  of  country  on  the 
Turkish  border — The  legends  of  Shirin — Man  walled  up  alive — 
The  Darcy  concession — A  strange  dinner-party — The  ascent  to 
the  Persian  highlands  —  A  late  winter  —  Reach  Kermanshah — 
Strategic  position  of  —  Population  —  Persian  amenities  !  —  The 
nakarreh  khaneh — The  rock  sculptures  of  Bostan — Description  of 
— Inscriptions  —  Disfigurement  of  panels  — •  Opinion  of  the  late 
Shah  concerning — Other  remains      .  .  .  .  .107 

CHAPTER   X. 

KERMANSHAH    TO    TEHERAN. 

E«mains  at  Kangavar — The  inscriptions  at  Bisitun — Deciphered  by 
Sir  H.  Eawlinson — Description  of  the  tablet  above  the  inscrip- 
tions— Ker  Porter's  surmise — Names  and  identities — Another  in- 
scription— The  country  between  Kermanshah  and  Hamadan — 
Hamadan — Population — Trade — The  tombs  of  Esther  and  Mor- 
decai — The  tomb  of  Avicenna — A  beautiful  mosque — The  Ganj- 
nameh  —  A  stone  lion  —  The  key  to  the  decipherment  of  the 
cuneiform  alphabet — Gold — The  question  of  the  site  of  Ecbatana 
of  Deioces — The  debauches  of  Alexander  the  Great — The  decay 
of  Hamadan — The  country  between  Hamadan  and  Teheran — 
Execrable  weather — Discomforts  of  travel — Reach  Teher§,n  .     121 


CHAPTER   XI. 

TEHERAN. 

Recent  improvements  at  Teherfin — The  city  gates — Days  of  mourn- 
ing— Interview  with  the  Shah  and  with  the  Prime  Minister — A 
visit  to  the  palace — A  motley  collection  ! — The  picture-gallery — 
An  extraordinary  ceremony  —  Religious  plays  —  Nature  of  the 
country  round  the  capital      .  .  .  .  .  .132 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEE     XII. 

PERSIA    IN    1903. 

"Tariffs" — Negotiations  leading  to  a  revision  of  the  Custom  duties 
—  Adverse  effects  upon  British  trade  over-estimated  —  Present 
state  of  affairs  due  to  British  insouciance  in  the  past — The  treaty 
of  Erzerum — Provisions  of  the  new  tariff — Effect  upon  Indian 
trade — Great  Britain's  reply — Events  on  the  Afghan  border — 
The  MacMahon  mission — Russian  intrigue — Ways  and  communi- 
cations^— The  situation  in  the  capital — The  fall  of  the  Prime 
Minister — A  tribute  to  the  British  Minister         .  .  .137 

CHAPTER   XIII. 

THROUGH    THE    PORTALS    OF    PERSIA. 

The  highroad  to  Persia — A  contrast  in  scenery — Cost  of  the  chausse 
— Disadvantages  of — The  object  of  Russia — A  huge  advertisement 
— What  the  Persian  thinks — Leave  Teheran — Persian  methods 
— Teherdn  to  Resht — The  silk  industry — Obstacles  encountered 
between  Resht  and  Enzeli — A  false  start — Off  at  last      .  .147 


CENTRAL    ASIA. 
CHAPTER    XIV. 


Civilisation  again — The  commercial  aspect  of  Baku — A  weird  sight — 
Natural  fire — An  ancient  fire-temple — The  boilers  of  Balakhani — 
A  hundred  tons  of  oil  a-day — "  Spouters  " — The  interior  of  a  der- 
rick— A  calamity  at  an  oil-well — Statistics  of  the  oil  trade — A 
high  excise  duty — Price  of  oil  in  London  and  in  Russia  .     155 

CHAPTER   XV. 

THE    TRANSCASPIAN    RAILWAY    IN    1903. 

Origin  of  the  idea  of  railway  communication  with  Central  Asia — 
The  chimerical  conception  of  M.  de  Lesseps — With  the  defeat 
of  Lomakin,  railway  schemes  are  revived — Lack  of  suitable  trans- 
port— General  Annenkoff's  line — England  suspicious — The  Pend- 
jeh  incident — Renewal  of  work  on  the  Transcaspian  railway — 
Completion  of  the   line — Leave  Baku — Krasnovodsk — On  board 


xiv  CONTENTS. 


the  train— Geok  Teppe— A  false  report— The  steppe  in  spring— 
Khiva— Merve— The  Murgab  branch  to  the  Afghan  frontier— A 
desert  of  sand— The  bridge  over  the  Oxus— Reach  Bokhara  .     163 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

BOKHARA     THE     NOBLE. 

New  Bokhara— The  fascination  of  Old  Bokhara— Its  bazaars— A 
picture  for  an  artist's  brush— A  scourge  of  the  East— Monu- 
ments of  the  past— The  power  of  the  King  of  Bokhara— The 
citadel— Its  ancient  clock— A  piteous  tale— Violent  death— The 
State  prison— Its  jailer— The  scene  inside— Khanikoffs  descrip- 
tion of  the  lower  dungeon— The  story  of  Stoddart  and  ConoUy- 
Nasrullah,  King  of  Bokhara— The  journey  of  Dr  WolflF— The 
notorious  vermin  pit— Bokhara  described  as  it  is  to-day— Authori- 
tative writers  on  Bokhara  .  .  .  .  .  .178 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

SAMARKAND. 

Samarkand  one  of  the  great  cities  of  Central  Asia— The  vicissitudes 
through  which  it  has  passed— Timur's  capital— Description  of 
Timur— Samarkand  taken  by  the  Russians— A  brilliant  episode 
—The  buildings  of  Samarkand— The  market  square— A  meal 
in  the  bazaar— The  tomb  of  Tamerlane— The  mosque  of  Bibi 
Khauum— The  mosque  of  "the  living  king"— Ishak  Khan— The 
end  of  the  railway       .......     192 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 

ACROSS    THE    STEPPES    OP    TURKESTAN. 

Russian  capital  in  Asia  — Old  Tashkent  — Its  capture  by  the 
Russians— Railway  projects— The  Tashkent-Orenburg  line— The 
Tomsk-Tashkent  line— Advantages  of  post-roads— Carriages  pur- 
chased—Method of  travelling— A  post-house— Rate  of  speed  at- 
tainable—The steppes  of  Turkestan— The  life  of  the  steppe— 
Tchimkent  — The  Chinese  frontier  —  Through  Semirechensk — 
The  Siberian  frontier  —  Monotony  of  travel  — The  character  of 
the  steppe  borderland— Semipalatinsk— From  Semipalatinsk  to 
Barnaul — Reach  Barnaul        ......     199 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEK   XIX. 


KULJA. 


Yakub  Khan— Internal  disorder  in  Kulja  in  the  'Sixties— Eussian 
interference— A  ghastly  holocaust— Report  of  a  Chinese  oflScial— 
Russian  assurances— Tso-Chungt-'ang,  a  Chinee  of  "great  stead- 
fastness of  purpose"— The  reconquest  of  Turkestan  by  China- 
Difficulties  with  Russia— Gordon  summoned— The  treaty  of  St 
Petersburg— What  Russia  gained— The  position  of  Kulja  to-day 
—  Suidon  —  Kulja  —  Mineral  wealth  of  the  province  —  Tribes, 
sedentary  and  nomadic  —  Kirgiz  and  Kalmuk  —  The  Chinese 
quarter— A  visit  to  the  Taotai— The  future  of  Kulja— Russian 
intrigue  with  Tibet   .  .  .  •  •  •  .211 


SPOET. 
CHAPTER  XX. 

AMONG    THE    IBEX    OF    TURKESTAN. 

A  sportman's  paradise— The  way  there— A  lengthy  bargain— To  the 
Oriyaas  valley— Magnificent  scenery— A  Kalmuk  Nimrod— A 
48-inch  ibex  shot— Stormy  weather— An  evil  beast— Vengeance— 
A  successful  right-and-left— Marmots— The  disappearance  of  an 
ibex— Its  head  secured— Extremes  of  temperature— The  luck  of 
ibex-shooting  —  A  51|-inch  trophy  —  Kalmuk  characteristics  — 
Another  50-inch  head— Flooded  rivers— Back  to  Kulja— Horn 
measurements  .......     225 

CHAPTER   XXI. 

AFTER    WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    SIBERIAN    ALTAI. 

The  Altai— Mr  Ney  Elias  observes  numbers  of  large  horns— Major 
Cumberland's  expedition— The  way  to  the  Altai— Time  occupied 
by  the  journey— Expense— Kosh-Agach— Nature  of  the  country 
—My  Kalmuk  hunter— The  "Happy  Valley"— A  depressing 
day— Rams  sighted— A  wounded  ram— My  first  head— A  move 
into  Mongolia— A  big  ram  in  view— Officious  females— Nature's 
spell — A  desperate  race — A  terrible  disappointment         .  .     24 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER   XXII. 


SPORT     IN     MONGOLIA. 


A  gazelle  shot — Pombo's  obtuseneas — A  long  stalk — A  flat  crawl — 
An  anxious  wait — A  big  ram  wounded — Pombo's  jubilation — A 
57-inch  horn  secured — A  long  ride  in  the  dark — Ammon  plentiful 
— A  pack  of  wolves — Cold — A  55  inch  ram  shot — A  right-and- 
left — Chase  after  a  wounded  ram — Stupidity  of  Kalmuks — The 
wounded  ram  brought  to  bag — Preparations  for  leaving  the 
country — Horn  measurements — Smuggling — Reach  the  Siberian 
railway  ........     255 


SIBERIA  AND   ITS   RAILWAY. 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 


CENTRAL    SIBERIA. 


The  Government  of  Tomsk — The  Altai  mining  district — Nature  of 
the  country — An  agricultural  land — Three  years'  famine — The 
fallow-land  system — Absence  of  English-made  goods — The  reason 
— The  Siberian  village — The  Siberian  peasant — The  vodka  curse 
— The  Government  vodka  monopoly — Vodka  statistics — Barnaul 
— A  general  store — The  Altai  highlands — Kosh-Agach — Eusso- 
Mongol  trade— The  city  of  Tomsk — The  mystery  of  Tomsk — 
Feodor  Kuzmitch  —  The  mysterious  death  of  Alexander  I. — 
"Alexander's  House"  at  Tomsk — The  university  and  techno- 
logical institute — Population  and  position  ....     267 

CHAPTER   XXIV. 

THE    GREAT    SIBERIAN    RAILWAY. 

The  spirit  of  discovery  of  the  sixteenth  century — Yermak — The  con- 
quest of  Siberia — The  treaty  of  Nertchinsk — Count  Muravieff — 
Need  of  communications  in  Siberia — Early  railway  schemes — 
The  Perm-Tiumen  line  built — The  imperial  rescript  of  March 
1891 — The  cost  of  the  Siberian  railway — The  price  of  a  ticket 
—  Western  Siberia  —  The  settlement  of  Novo  Nicholaewsk  — 
Dairy-farming  —  The  junction  for  Tomsk  —  Deficiencies  of  the 
railway  track  —  The  monotony  of  the  journey  —  Irkutsk  —  Its 
origin  —  Its  present  position  —  Its  chief  buildings  —  The  gold- 
smelting  laboratory    .......     282 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEE   XXV. 

THE    EAST    CHINESE    KAILWAT. 

Eussia's  coup — The  line  to  pass  through  Manchuria — Great  Britain's 
reply — The  Manchurian  railway  agreement — A  journey  over  the 
Manchurian  railway  in  the  autumn  of  1903 — Across  Lake  Baikal 
—The  frontier  of  Manchuria — Calibre  of  the  line — Kharbin— 
Military  occupation — Article  II.  of  the  Manchurian  Convention 
of  1902 — The  ambitions  of  Kharbin — Magnificent  crops — Dalni — 
Port  Arthur — Russia's  outlay  in  Manchuria — Niuchwang — The 
Boxer  outbreak  Russia's  opportunity^The  situation  at  Niuch- 
wang at  the  outbreak  of  hostilities — Mukden  and  Antung  opened 
to  foreign  trade — Peking  the  end  of  the  journey      .  .  .     299 


ENGLAND   IN   ASIA. 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

THE    NEAR    EAST. 

England  and  Russia  in  the  East — The  point  of  view  from  which 
Asiatic  questions  must  be  regarded — "  Without  India  the  British 
Empire  could  not  exist " — The  value  of  prestige — The  commercial 
and  strategic  aspects  of  the  Near  Eastern  and  the  Par  Eastern 
questions  —  Turkey  —  The  long-standing  antagonism  between 
Russia  and  Turkey — Enter  Germany — A  novel  solution  of  the 
Turkish  imbroglio — The  Baghdad  railway — Persia — Resemblance 
between  the  Persian  and  Turkish  problems — Indifference  of  Great 
Britain  in  the  past — The  financial  blunder  of  1900— The  Russo- 
Persian  railway  agreement  of  1890 — A  policy  adopted— The  Vice- 
roy's visit  to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  Garter  Mission  to  TeherS,n 
— The  Koweit  incident — Ways  and  communications — Activity  in 
the  field  of  commerce — The  Nushki-Sistan  route— The  British 
Government  should  become  shareholders  in  the  Imperial  Bank 
of  Persia — The  recrudescence  of  British  power    .  .  .     319 


CHAPTEE    XXVII. 

A   TIBETAN    EPISODE. 

A  mystery-enshrouded  land — Europeans  who  have  seen  Lhassa — The 
Sikkim  Convention  of  1893— Waddell's  definition  of  Lamaism— 


CONTENTS. 


Sarat  Chandra  Das — Decision  of  the  India  Office — Failure  of  the 
negotiations  for  sending  an  official  mission  to  Tibet — Tibetan 
aggression — Fatuous  policy  of  the  British  Government — The  Cal- 
cutta Convention  of  1890— Tibetan  disregard  of  the  Convention 
of  1890 — The  sham  of  Chinese  suzerainty — The  views  of  the 
Government  of  India  in  1899— The  Viceroy's  letter  to  the  Dalai 
Lama  returned  unopened — The  appearance  of  Russia — A  supposed 
Russo-Chinese  convention — Negotiations  at  Khamba  Jong — An 
advance  to  Gyangtse  sanctioned — Tibetan  belief  in  the  support  of 
Russia  —  Gyangtse  occupied  —  The  advance  to  Lhassa  begun — 
The  policy  of  the  Government  of  India— A  possible  solution  of 
the  Tibetan  puzzle  —  The  case  of  Bokhara  an  analogy  —  The 
Tibetan  dispute  must  be  settled  without  reference  to  other 
Powers  ......••     344 


CHAPTER   XXVIII. 


THE    FAK    EAST. 

Commerce  of  the  Far  East— Great  Britain's  ideal  "  the  open  door  "— 
Russia's  first  mouthful  of  Manchurian  ten-itory — The  second 
phase  of  the  Manchurian  question— Events  following  upon  the 
conclusion  of  the  treaty  of  Shimonoseki — England's  isolation — 
Action  of  Russia,  Germany,  and  France— The  Port  Arthur  in- 
cident— British  ignorance  of  Far  Eastern  conditions  and  affairs 
—The  Intelligence  Department— The  duty  of  British  statesmen 
to  stay  the  disintegration  of  the  Chinese  Empire  .  .     365 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THE  FAR  EAST — Continued. 

The  British  awakening  at  Peking— The  present  value  of  Wei-hai-Wei 
— Germany  at  Kiao  Chau — The  reform  movement — A  dramatic 
coup  d'etat— The  Boxer  outbreak  of  1900— A  colossal  scheme  of 
regeneration — Russia's  demands  as  the  price  of  the  evacuation  of 
Manchuria— The  Manchurian  Convention  of  1902— Manchuria 
seen  once  more  under  the  searching  light  of  war — Points  to  be 
borne  in  mind  in  weighing  the  chances  of  Russia  and  Japan — 
Russian  lack  of  organisation — Official  corruption — Capabilities  of 
the  Siberian  railway — The  Russian  army — The  soldiers  of  the 
Mikado— Buskido— The  patriotism  of  the  people— Victory  in  the 
field  likely  to  attend  the  Japanese  forces— The  fate  of  Russia  rests 
with  the  Russian  people         ...•••     377 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER   XXX. 

LAST    WORDS. 

The  object  of  British  policy— General  Chapman  quoted— Present  con- 
ditions cannot  be  permanent— Professor  Vambery  quoted— India 
the  fulcrum  of  British  rule  in  Asia — Lord  Curzon  on  the  internal 
condition  of  India       .......     394 


Index        .....••••     399 


ILLTJSTEATIONS. 


■VIEW  IN  THE  THIAN  SHAN  ....       Frontispiece 

THE   RUINS   OF   ANCIENT   BABYLON 

RUSSIAN   EMIGRANTS   FOR   THE   FAR   EAST 

A   TURKISH    ROAD 

THROUGH   THE   TAURUS   MOUNTAINS 

THE   RUINS   OF   POMPEIOPOLIS 

THE   RIVER   JIHUN 

A   WELL   IN   THE   DESERT 

EXCAVATIONS   AT   BABYLON 

THE  TOMB  OF  JONAH  (NEBI  YUNUS)  ON  THE  MOUND  OF  THE  SAME  NAME 

BAGHDAD 

BRIDGE   OVER   THE   DIALA 

KERMANSHAH 

THE   HARD-WORKED   BAGGAGE   PONT 

THE   OIL-WELLS   OF   BAKU 

KRASNOVODSK        ... 

GEOK   TEPPE 

BOKHARA 

THE   CITADEL   OF   BOKHARA 

THE    PRISON,    BOKHARA    . 

IN   THE   RIGISTAN,   SAMARKAND  . 

A   STREET    IN    OLD   TASHKENT 

A   RUSSIAN   POST-ROAD   IN    ASIA  . 

A   BROKEN   BRIDUE   ON    THE   POST-ROAD 

KIRGIZ   YURTS 


4 

18 
34 
36 

44 

50 

66 

72 

74 

80 

110 

116 

130 

156 

168 

170 

180 

182 

184 

196 

200 

204 

208 

216 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


BUDDHISTS   OF   CENTRAL  ASIA      . 

CROSSING   THE   ILI   RIVER 

A   VIEW   IN   THE   ORIYAAS   VALLEY 

IN   THE   ORIYAAS   VALLEY 

CAMPED   IN   THE   THIAN   SHAN      . 

CROSSING   A   MOUNTAIN   TORRENT 

VIEW   IN   THE   SIBERIAN   ALTAI     . 

CAMPED   IN   THE   ALTAI     . 

LOADING   UP   THE   AMMON 

PACKING   A   PONY 

A   FINE   OVIS   AMMON 

KALMUK   BRINGING   HOME   AN   AMMON     . 

IN   THE   SIBERIAN   ALTAI 

A   SIBERIAN   VILLAGE 

THE   NEW  RUSSIAN   ROAD   TO   MONGOLIA 

CROSSING  A   RIVER   IN   SIBERIA  . 

THE   CATHEDRAL,   IRKUTSK 

STATION   ON    LAKE    BAIKAL 

THE   GREAT    SIBERIAN    RAILWAY 

MANCHURIAN   AGRICULTURISTS     . 

PEKING       ..... 

NATIVES   OP   CENTRAL   ASIA 

A  WATCH-TOWER   ON   THE   WALLS   OF   PEKING 

A   STREET   OP   CHIFU 

CHIPU   HARBOUR  .... 

VIEW   IN   THE   THIAN    SHAN,   WESTERN   CHINA 

THE  TEMPLE   OF   HEAVEN,    PEKING 

THE   ANGLO-CHINESE   REGIMENT   AT   WEI-HAI-WEI 

THE  WHARF   AT   TIENTSIN 

THE   ALTAR   OF   HEAVEN,    PEKING 

THE  WALLS   OF   PEKING    . 


220 
228 
230 
232 
236 
240 
242 
246 
250 
256 
258 
262 
268 
270 
276 
286 
296 
302 
304 
308 
314 
320 
324 
346 
356 
366 
372 
378 
382 
386 
390 


MAP    TO    ILLUSTRATE     AUTHORS     ROUTE 


o 


r\ 


ACROSS   A   CONTINENT 


"  Let  US  (since  life  can  little  more  supply 
Than  just  to  look  about  us,  and  to  die) 
Expatiate  free  o'er  all  this  scene  of  man  ; 
A  mighty  maze  !  but  not  without  a  plan." 

— Alexander  Pope,  Essay  on  Man. 


CHAPTEE    L 

ACROSS   A   CONTINENT. 

Object  of  the  book — Length  of  journey  and  method  of  travel — The  desert 
— A  site  of  ancient  monaixhies — Discomfort  of  travel — The  spell  of 
the  East — To  the  heart  of  Asia  by  rail — Performance  at  a  mosque — 
Monuments  of  the  past  —  Central  Asian  jiost-roads  —  Beyond  the 
bounds  of  Eussia — A  great  trans-continental  railway — The  political 
aspect  —  The  return  of  the  West  to  the  East  —  The  remnants  of 
Portuguese  supremacy— The  awakening  of  Russia — The  Powers  in 
Asia — The  objects  of  Great  Britain  and  of  Russia — The  policy  of 
Tsar  Nicholas  I. — Failure  of  the  same — Ineptitude  of  British  policy 
in  the  past  —  Importance  of  British  interests  in  the  East  —  Lord 
Curzon's  views — The  necessity  of  looking  Asiatic  problems  in  the  face. 

Look  how  ivide  also  the  East  is  from  the  West !  The 
feverish  throbbing  centres  of  the  West  take  small 
stock  of  those  things  which  lie  not  to  their  hand : 
the  call  of  the  East  comes  for  the  most  part  un- 
heeded across  the  waste.  Yet  to  those  who  listen  is 
borne  that  hum  which  tells  of  mighty  workings. 

The  East,  indeed, — the  real  East,  that  is,  and  by 
the  real  East  I  mean  more  especially  those  kingdoms 
of  Asia  which  can  still  lay  claim,  theoretically  at  any 
rate,  to  political  independence  of  the  West, — is  known 
by  personal  experience  to  comparatively  speaking  so 
small  a  portion  of  the  English  public  that  I  make 
no  apology,  however  humble  be  my  credentials,  for 
trying  to  arouse  an  increased  interest  therein,  or  for 
taking  up  my  pen  once  again  in  an  endeavour  to  lay 


ACROSS  A   CONTINENT. 


before  the  public  mind  some  idea  of  those  countries 
of  which  I  speak,  and  to  call  attention  to  some  of 
those  problems  to  which  their  existence  has  given  rise. 
And  I  do  so  with  all  the  more  willingness  because  of 
my  firm  belief  in  the  truth  of  those  lines  which  I 
have  caused  to  be  inscribed  on  the  title-page  of  this 
book,  that  it  is  in  Asia  once  again  that  will  be 
decided  the  destinies  of  the  world  ;  that  that  nation 
which  succeeds  in  making  its  voice  heeded  in  the 
East  will  be  able  also  to  speak  in  dominating  accents 
to  Europe.  If  a  further  excuse  for  these  pages  is 
demanded,  it  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  it  is 
comparatively  few  to  whom  is  given  either  the  time 
or  the  opportunity,  or  perhaps  even  the  inclination, 
to  put  away  for  a  prolonged  period  the  ties  which 
bind  them  to  their  own  country  and,  leaving  the 
highroad  of  convention,  to  strike  deep  along  the 
devious  pathways  of  alien  and  not  always  hospitable 
lands. 

I  have  never  attempted  to  deny  that  the  countries 
of  Asia  have  for  me  an  extreme  fascination,  but  at 
the  same  time  it  would  be  absurd  to  suggest  that 
a  journey  such  as  that  which  forms  the  thread  upon 
which  the  following  chapters  are  strung — a  journey, 
that  is,  of  upwards  of  10,000  miles  by  railway,  steam- 
boat, raft,  wheeled  conveyance  of  many  kinds,  and 
pack-pony,  through  such  countries  as  Asiatic  Turkey, 
Persia,  Transcaspia,  Turkestan,  Siberia,  and  Manchuria 
— is  by  any  means  one  which  is  productive  of  unal- 
loyed pleasure  and  amusement.  There  is  nothing  even 
remotely  amusing  in  long  hours  in  the  saddle  at 
caravan  pace  across  the  desert  steppe  of  Mesopotamia. 
On  the  contrary,  there  is  a  grim  reality  about  the 
limitless  and  forbidding  expanse  of  an  Asian  desert 
which    inspires    feelings   of  anything   but    merriment. 


KINGDOMS  OF  THE  PAST. 


The  vastness  of  it  lills  you  with  awe,  the  silence 
and  absence  of  life  weigh  heavily  upon  you,  the 
hovering  vulture  and  the  staring  white  skeleton  of 
pony  or  camel  speak  only  of  death.  Everything  is 
so  real  and  so  stern,  you  feel  that  to  smile  or  to 
laugh  would  be  impossible  in  these  surroundings ;  the 
inexorable  reality  of  life  and  death  is  on  all  sides 
forced  upon  you.     These  are  the  lands  where  you 

"  Fold  your  tents  like  the  Arabs, 
And  as  silently  steal  away." 

But  even  the  desert  has  an  end,  and  haltingly  at 
first  and  then  with  more  confidence  signs  of  humanity 
reappear.  The  waters  of  a  great  river  roll  placidly 
by,  the  most  priceless  blessing  in  a  thirsty  and  dry 
land.  The  bleak  steppe-land  is  behind,  and  before 
you  rise  the  remnants  of  mighty  nations.  The  glory 
and  magnificence,  it  is  true,  are  of  the  past ;  the 
present  is  squalid  in  comparison  with  what  was. 
But  the  mounds  beneath  which  lie  buried  all  that 
remains  of  a  remote  antiquity  stand  imperishable  wit- 
nesses of  the  splendour  of  a  bygone  age.  Two  thou- 
sand five  hundred  years  ago  Nineveh,  the  gorgeous 
capital  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  fell  never  to  rise 
again ;  but  the  vast  mass  of  debris  which  is  to  be 
seen  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris  to-day  is  an 
object  far  more  imposing  than  the  collection  of  high- 
walled  houses  and  narrow  tortuous  alleys,  which  make 
Mossul  on  the  right  bank  a  city  of  the  unregenerate 
East.  To  the  south  the  ruins  of  ancient  Babylon  tell 
of  an  age  so  remote  as  to  bewilder  the  brain  as  it 
tries  to  gaze  down  the  dim  vistas  of  time  at  the 
achievements  of  a  highly  civilised  race  six  thousand 
years  ago,  or  peers  uncertainly  into  that  earlier  period 
which  hovers  darkly  through  a  legendary  haze,  when 


ACROSS  A   CONTINENT. 


Oannes,  the  fish  god,  came  up  from  the  sea  to  teach 
wisdom  to  the  children  of  men.  Bac^hdad  remains  now 
as  the  counterpart  of  the  old  capitals  of  Shumir  and 
Accad,  but  modern  Baghdad  is  not  the  Baghdad  of 
the  '  Arabian  Nights '  or  of  the  golden  days  of  the 
Kalifate.  It  is,  in  fact,  hopelessly  commonplace, 
and  is  of  chief  interest  to  the  traveller  as  affording 
him  an  excuse  for  a  rest  and  the  congenial  society 
of  his  fellow-countrymen.  The  halo  of  romance  over 
the  Baghdad  of  our  imagination  has  been  dimmed 
by  the  exigencies  of  modern  trade  and  commerce. 

As  you  journey  eastward  into  Persia  along  the  old 
highway  from  Media  to  Babylonia,  you  rise  at  one 
bound  from  the  level  plains  of  Assyria  and  Chaldsea 
to  the  elevated  tableland  of  the  Iranian  plateau, 
ascending  the  rock  walls  of  the  historic  "  Zagros 
Gates."  Here,  on  the  western  extremity  of  the  Per- 
sian highlands,  a  series  of  gorges,  mountain -ranges, 
and  elevated  plateaux  confront  you,  forming  a  barrier 
as  it  were  between  the  level  stretches  of  Mesopotamia 
on  the  one  side  and  the  vast  inhospitable  reaches  of 
Central  Persia  on  the  other.  No  difference  will  be 
found  by  the  traveller  in  his  mode  of  procedure, 
and  as  you  ride  slowly  along  on  your  daily  march 
you  agree  with  the  sapient  remark  of  the  seven- 
teenth-century traveller,  Tavernier,  that  "the  best 
inns  are  the  tents  which  you  carry  along  with  you, 
and  your  hosts  are  your  servants  that  get  ready 
those  victuals  which  you  have  bought  in  good 
towns."  There  is,  however,  one  great  drawback  to 
a  tent,  —  you  cannot  always  use  it.  You  cannot 
pitch  your  tent  in  two  feet  of  snow,  and  even 
hoisting  it  in  six  inches  of  mud  is  a  doubtful  ex- 
periment ;  and  then  you  must  seek  what  accommo- 
dation  is   to   be   had   in   the    serai,    if  there   is  one, 


THE  SPELL   OF  THE  EAST. 


or  the  shelter  of  some  village  hut  if  there  is  not, 
where  you  will  probably  have  to  put  up  with  the 
supreme  discomfort  of  having  nothing  but  "  the  un- 
divided twentieth  of  a  shed  to  sleep  under "  ! 

One  of  the  chief  causes  wherein  lies  the  extra- 
ordinary fascination  of  the  Near  East  is  perhaps  its 
associations  with  the  peoples  and  the  deeds  so  familiar 
to  us  from  our  earliest  days,  and  the  changelessness  of 
the  East  which  enables  one  to  realise  so  forcibly  the 
conditions  of  life  as  depicted  in  the  graphic  pages  of 
the  Old  Testament.  As  you  journey  across  the  country 
in  the  region  of  the  two  great  rivers,  Tigris  and 
Euphrates,  whole  chapters  of  Genesis  assume  a  new 
meaning  for  you,  and  you  realise  how  it  was  that 
"  as  they  journeyed  in  the  East  they  came  to  a 
plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  dwelt  there."  ^  You 
too  have  journeyed  in  the  East  and  found  a  plain — 
the  same  plain — in  the  land  of  Shinar,  for  the  land 
of  Shinar  is  the  Shumir  of  the  inscriptions  and  the 
Chaldsea  of  to-day. 

As  you  journey  over  this  plain  you  see  spread  out  on 
every  side  the  great  stage  on  which  was  enacted  the 
story  told  in  the  historical  books  of  the  Bible.  Whether 
you  pass  by  the  river  of  Gozan,  where  Israel  remained 
in  captivity,  or  walk  in  the  city  of  Sennacherib,  or 
stand  among  the  ruined  halls  and  temples  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, or  sit  by  the  waters  of  Babylon,  some  portion  of 
the  great  story  is  brought  vividly  before  your  eyes. 
You  recognise,  too,  the  local  colouring  which  so  sym- 
pathetically tinges  the  language  of  the  Old  Testament 
writers.  It  is  only  after  you  have  toiled  from  dawn  to 
sunset  over  the  sand-strewn  waste  of  an  eastern  desert 
that  you  appreciate  the  poetic  beauty  of  such  verses  as 
"  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place,  the  shadow  of  a  great 

1  Gen.  xi.  2. 


ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 


rock  in  a  weary  land,"  ^  or  that  the  vivid  reality  of  that 
description  which  tells  of  "  a  land  of  deserts  and  of 
pits,  a  land  of  droughts  and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  a 
land  that  no  man  passed  through  and  where  no  man 
dwelt,"  ^  or  of  "  the  parched  places  in  the  wilderness,  a 
salt  land  and  not  inhabited,"  ^  is  brought  home  to  you. 

For  when  recalling  a  picture  of  the  lands  of  the  Near 
East,  the  prevailing  tint  is  always  that  produced  by 
vast  unbounded  stony  wastes,  staring  stretches  of 
yellow  sand,  leprous  patches  of  saline  efflorescence,  and 
gaunt  ranges  of  barren  mountains.  The  awful  aridity 
of  Arabia  is  only  too  prevalent  throughout  the  thirsty 
East.  But  it  is  because  of  this  intense  sterility  that 
verdure  when  it  does  appear  appeals  with  a  force  unfelt 
perhaps  elsewhere.  The  land  is,  in  fact,  a  land  of  con- 
trasts which  are  startling,  almost  aggressive,  in  their 
suddenness.  I  know  of  no  sensation  which  is  quite 
equal  to  that  caused  by  coming  suddenly  and  un- 
expectedly, after  a  long  da}^  over  a  sea  of  sand  under 
the  rays  of  a  burning  sun,  upon  a  vision  of  runlets  of  bub- 
bling water,  terraces  of  bright  green  barley,  and  clumps 
of  shady  trees.  There  is  no  other  contrast  that  I  know 
of  which  strikes  quite  such  divergent  chords  or  excites 
quite  such  a  revulsion  of  feeling.  It  is  in  such  moments 
as  these  that  you  learn  whence  sprang  the  muse  that 
stirred  the  Persian  poets  to  give  expression  to  their 
thoughts,  that  you  understand  why  it  is  that  gardens 
in  the  East  are  not  beds  of  flowers  and  ornamental 
rockeries,  but  orchards  of  shady  trees  and  rivulets  of 
crystal  water,  and  that  you  cease  to  wonder  why  it  is 
that  fountains  of  plashing  water  adorn  the  courts  of 
princes  and  the  palaces  of  kings.  But  proceed  a  few 
hundred  yards  on  your  way  and  the  scene  is  changed  ; 
go  but  a  step  beyond  the  influence  of  the  water  brought 

^  Isa.  xxxii.  2.  2  jgj.^  n  g,  3  jej..  xvii.  6. 


THE  NOTE   OF  PATHOS. 


SO  laboriously  by  the  hand  of  man,  and  you  have  passed 
in  a  moment  from  life  to  death.  The  line  is  drawn  as 
with  a  ruler,  and  until  you  stumble  upon  just  such 
another  oasis,  you  journey  on  through  a  lifeless  wilder- 
ness. The  oasis  may  be  smaller  or  larger,  but  where 
water  fails  the  result  is  for  ever  the  same.  Verily,  as 
Lord  Curzon  has  so  aptly  remarked,  it  is  a  land  where 
"  Nature  seems  to  revel  in  striking  the  extreme  chords 
upon  her  miraculous  and  inexhaustible  gamut  of  sound." 

But  there  is  still  another  note  which  is  struck  by 
a  sojourn  in  the  East — the  note  of  pathos.  The  sight 
of  failing  vitality  where  once  was  power  and  strength  is 
always  a  sad  one,  and  here  in  the  lands  of  the  Near 
East  time  broods  heavily  over  her  cities.  They  look 
back  with  the  dimmed  sight  of  old  age  at  a  youth 
which  has  long  since  fled,  and  as  they  peer  drowsily 
into  the  future  they  see  nought  but  death  hovering 
near,  attendant  on  life  which  is  all  but  spent.  The 
heyday  of  youth  is  far  past,  and  decay,  indecorously 
encroaching  ere  life  is  yet  extinct,  warns  them  that 
they  stand  trembling  on  the  brink  of  the  grave.  When 
power  sits  once  more  on  the  thrones  where  Xerxes  and 
Darius  ruled,  it  will  not  be  the  power  of  the  East,  but 
an  intruder  from  the  more  youthful  West. 

Passing  from  the  Near  East  into  the  heart  of  Asia,  so 
adaptable  do  you  become  under  stress  of  the  vicissitudes 
of  travel  you  scarcely  feel  surprise  to  find  that  you  are 
travelling  by  the  aid  of  steam.  Incongruous  or  not,  the 
train  is  there,  and  you  accept  it  as  a  matter  of  course 
and  are  thankful.  In  reality,  when  you  come  to  think 
it  over,  it  is  hopelessly  out  of  place.  You  may  travel 
all  over  India  by  rail  and  think  nothing  of  it.  There 
there  stretch  vast  networks  of  iron  ways  connecting 
populous  towns  alive  with  modern  life,  where  you  per- 
ceive the  spirit  of  the  twentieth  century  in  unquestioned 


10  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 

dominion.  But  here  you  have  but  a  single,  long, 
isolated  arm  stretching  from  the  confines  of  Europe 
into  the  very  heart  of  an  ancient  continent.  Far  more 
even  than  the  plains  of  Asiatic  Turkey  or  the  plateaux 
of  Iran,  the  vast  solitudes  of  Turkomania  or  the  steppes 
of  Turkestan  seem  to  you  a  world  apart.  As  you  are 
borne  rapidly  along  you  might,  indeed,  be  travelling  on 
some  witch's  broomstick  in  a  fairy  tale.  Merve,  Queen 
of  the  World  ;  Bokhara,  the  Noble  ;  Samarkand,  the 
capital  of  Timur,  pass  before  you  in  quick  succession, 
overwhelming  you  with  the  magnitude  of  their  asso- 
ciations. You  gaze  upon  their  sights  and  marvel  at 
the  strange  stories  which  they  tell,  and  you  mix  with 
their  peoples  for  a  while,  and  then  pass  on.  And  when 
you  have  passed  on  and  they  are  no  longer  before  you, 
you  look  back  upon  them  as  upon  the  figures  of  a 
dream.  You  may  have  mixed  with  them  and  talked 
with  them,  but  you  are  not  of  them  ;  their  world  is  not 
your  world,  nor  yours  theirs. 

I  remember  strolling  through  the  bazaar  of  a  town  in 
the  heart  of  Turkestan,  loitering  among  the  shops  and 
talking  to  their  occupants.  I  thought  after  all  that 
they  seemed  very  ordinary  people,  and  not  so  very 
different  from  myself  The  same  night  I  was  present 
at  a  mosque,  and  before  I  left  I  knew  that  I  was  wrong. 
It  was  no  pretentious  building, — a  plain  structure  en- 
closed on  three  sides  by  severely  simple  walls,  and 
open  on  the  fourth  to  the  night.  No  objection  was 
made  to  our  presence — two  Russian  gentlemen  and 
myself:  we  were,  in  fact,  to  all  intents  and  purposes, 
ignored.  When  a  sufficient  number  had  arrived — they 
were  members  of  a  peculiar  sect  of  dervishes — prayers 
were  first  intoned,  the  ends  of  their  white  turbans, 
emblem  of  the  shroud,  hanging  down,  and  then  a  score 
or  more  knelt  in  a  circle  on  the  floor.     The  scene  which 


A    WEIRD  SPECTACLE.  11 

followed  was  absolutely  weird.  Swaying  their  bodies 
frantically  backwards  and  forwards  to  a  common  centre, 
they  gasped  out  the  words  of  some  sacred  formula. 
The  hands  of  the  clock  moved  slowly  round,  but  the 
movement  and  refrain  of  that  weird  circle  never  ceased. 
From  time  to  time  fresh  figures  appeared  mysteriously 
out  of  the  night  to  enlarge  the  circle.  Their  arrival 
was  hardly  noticeable  ;  one  only  saw  from  time  to  time 
that  the  circle  had  increased.  Seated  in  one  corner  of 
the  mosque,  I  became  hypnotised  as  I  gazed  fascinated 
at  the  ceaseless  movement  and  listened  to  the  mono- 
tonous refrain  gasped  out  in  jerks  by  its  frenzied 
utterers.  So  great  was  the  effect  it  had  upon  one's 
senses  that  when  at  length,  with  no  word  of  warning, 
both  sound  and  movement  suddenly  ceased,  it  seemed  as 
though  the  world  itself  must  have  suddenly  halted  in 
its  course.  An  interval  followed,  during  which  ex- 
hortations were  read,  rich  in  the  flowery  hyperbole  of 
the  East,  until  stalwart  bearded  men  sobbed  and 
groaned  aloud  under  stress  of  their  emotion.  For 
an  hour  or  more  full  play  was  given  them,  and  then 
as  the  last  speaker  ceased  the  mysterious  circle  was 
formed  once  more. 

Looking  back  as  I  left  towards  midnight,  it  was  to 
see  the  devotees  working  themselves  up  with  the  same 
monotonous  repetition  to  a  state  of  ecstatic  exaltation 
once  again.  I  have  seen  the  howling  dervishes  at 
Cairo,  and  realised  as  I  watched  that  their  performance 
was  for  show.  This  was  something  different — it  was 
real.  As  far  as  we  knew,  no  European  had  been 
present  there  before.  Our  presence  was  tolerated,  but 
considered  of  no  account.  We  were  given  a  glimpse  of 
the  strange  soul  of  a  people,  and  as  I  drove  home  in  the 
starlight  and  pondered  on  what  I  had  seen,  I  thought  I 
understood  why  it  was  that  there  were  even  now  those 


12  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 


among  them  who  had  never  set  foot  in  the  Russian 
town,  though  that  town  had  stood  side  by  side  with 
their  own  for  upwards  of  thirty  years. 

But  apart  from  the  fascination  of  the  people  them- 
selves, there  is  an  indescribable  interest  in  gazing  upon 
the  vast  store  of  monuments  which  abound,  and  which, 
if  good  use  has  been  made  of  the  counsel  of  Francis 
Bacon  to  the  traveller  to  "  carry  with  him  also  some 
card  or  booke  describing  the  country  where  he  travelleth ; 
which  will  be  a  good  key  to  his  enquiry,"  will  each  tell 
some  strange  story  of  the  past.  The  mouldering  walls 
of  Geok  Teppe  tell  of  the  ghastly  horror  of  bloody  war  ; 
the  prison  of  Bokhara  recalls  the  cold  brutality  of  the 
inhuman  tyrants  who  once  reigned ;  the  unrivalled 
ruins  of  Samarkand  tell  of  the  greatness  of  a  Tartar 
king,  while  the  very  streets  seem  to  whisper  faintly  of 
a  magnificence  now  gone.  And  to  the  student  of 
modern  history  the  whole  country  repeats  a  tale  of 
the  overwhelming  advance  of  a  mighty  Power  from 
the  north. 

Arrived  at  Tashkent,  the  Eussian  capital  of  Turke- 
stan, and  finding  no  railway  to  take  you  any  farther, 
you  cast  about  in  your  mind  for  some  other  means 
of  progress,  and  you  learn  that  the  post-road  awaits 
you.  Very  good.  This  suggests  at  any  rate  speed, 
and  remembering  always  the  part  of  the  world  in 
which  you  are  travelling,  perhaps  a  certain  degree 
of  comfort.  But  I  doubt  if  the  reality  altogether 
corresponds  to  your  expectation.  The  best  class  of 
vehicle  that  is  known  on  the  Russian  post-road  in 
Asia  is  the  tarantass,  and  it  has  no  seats,  neither  has 
it  any  springs.  The  first  deficiency  is  in  reality  an 
advantage,  because  it  enables  you  to  wedge  yourself 
in  with  cushions  and  rugs  between  portions  of  your 
baggage   in    a   more  or  less  recumbent  position;   but 


A    VAST  DOMINION.  13 

the  second  is  a  palpable  defect  which  never  ceases  to 
force  itself  upon  your  attention,  more  especially  since 
the  road  for  nearly  the  whole  of  its  length  is  not  a 
road  at  all,  but  merely  a  track  across  the  steppe :  and 
after  you  have  driven  close  upon  2500  miles  by  this 
means,  as  I  did,  it  is  probable  that  you  will  be  careful 
not  to  repeat  the  experiment,  if  by  any  possible  means 
you  can  avoid  doing  so.  Let  it  be  at  once  admitted 
that  travelling  on  Russian  post  -  roads  in  Asia  is  a 
trial  to  both  mind  and  body. 

Still  you  must  be  thankful  even  for  this  small  mercy, 
for  Russia,  unlike  our  own  country,  is  not  small — 
Siberia  alone  would  comfortably  take  in  the  whole 
of  Europe,  with  a  few  of  its  countries  thrown  in 
twice  over — and  there  is  no  danger  of  your  running 
over  the  edge  in  your  haste.  You  may  start  driving 
in  Russia  and  go  on  doing  so  in  a  straight  line  for 
days,  and  still  find  that  you  are  in  Russia  at  the  end 
of  them  ;  so  I  say,  be  thankful  for  these  same  post-roads 
in  that  they  make  travelling  possible. 

And  when  you  have  driven  day  after  day  towards 
the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  have  at  last  reached  the 
bounds  of  the  dominions  of  the  Great  White  Tsar,  what 
lies  before  you  then?  Four  million  square  miles  of 
territory,  the  home  of  four  hundred  million  souls,  whose 
delight  it  is  to  believe  that  "  there  is  only  one  sun  in 
the  heavens  and  only  one  emperor  beneath  the  sky." 
A  nation  with  a  recorded  history  of  close  upon  four 
thousand  years ;  a  people  that  can  boast  of  the  oldest 
civilisation  of  the  world,  of  an  exclusiveness  that  even 
now  baffles  the  enterprise  of  the  West,  of  the  distinc- 
tion of  having  been  responsible  for  that  greatest 
phantasm  of  modern  times,  the  Yellow  Peril ;  an  empire, 
finally,  which  may  yet,  by  involving  the  Powers  of  the 
twentieth  -  century  civilisation    in  an  Armageddon    of 


14  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 


nations,  be  the  cause  of  the  greatest  cataclysm  which 
the  world  has  known. 

I  only  peeped  at  the  mysteries  which  lie  behind  that 
veil, — to  probe  them  would  exhaust  a  lifetime, — gazed 
curiously  for  a  moment  at  the  Chinaman  and  his  works, 
enjoyed  some  of  the  sport  which  his  country  so  gener- 
ously provides,  and  then  hurried  north  to  see  some- 
thing of  the  surprising  railway  which  the  will  of  a 
single  man  caused  to  be  built  across  a  continent.  An 
imperial  pen  traced  a  memorandum  on  the  report  of  a 
vice-governor-general,^  a  special  conference  of  ministers 
was  summoned,  a  special  commission  received  orders  to 
make  surveys,  and  the  great  Trans-Siberian  railway 
came  into  being.  In  May  1891  his  Imperial  Highness 
the  Grand  Duke  Tsesarievitch  emptied  a  wheelbarrow 
of  earth  on  the  embankment  of  the  future  Ussuri  line 
and  laid  the  first  stone  for  the  construction  of  the 
Siberian  railway :  at  the  present  time  (1904)  the 
traveller  may  step  into  his  carriage  at  Moscow,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  short  break  at  present  neces- 
sitated by  the  passage  of  the  Baikal,  travel  by  rail, 
amid  a  luxury  unsurpassed  in  any  other  portion  of  the 
globe,  the  whole  way  to  Vladivostok,  Port  Arthur,  or 
Peking.  With  a  stroke  of  the  pen  the  terrors  of  Siberia 
have  been  swept  aside,  and  the  capital  of  the  Celestial 
Empire  has  been  brought  within  nineteen  days  of 
London. 

Such  is  the  aspect  which  Asia  wears  for  the  traveller. 

1  On  a  report  drawn  up  in  1885-1886  by  Count  IgnatieflF,  the  late  Tsar 
traced  with  his  own  hand  the  following  resolution  :  "  I  have  read  many 
reports  of  the  governors-general  of  Siberia,  and  must  own  with  grief  and 
shame  that  until  now  the  CTOvernment  has  done  scarcely  anything  towards 
satisfying  the  needs  of  this  rich  but  neglected  country.  It  is  time,  high 
time  ! "  For  details  of  the  preliminary  steps  to  the  construction  of  the 
i-ailway  see  the  '  Official  Guide  to  the  Crreat  Siberian  Railway,'  published  by 
the  Ministry  of  Ways  and  Communications. 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE   WEST.  15 

But  it  can  show  another  face.  Those  strange  agglo- 
merations of  sterile  wastes  and  smiling  oases,  with  their 
mouldering  cities  and  unfathomable  peoples, — Turkey, 
Persia,  Afghanistan,  Transcaspia,  Turkestan,  China,  and 
Tibet, — familiar  to  a  large  majority  but  in  name,  pos- 
sess for  a  few  a  deep  significance,  and  I  have  no  hesi- 
tation in  admitting  that  it  is  in  the  part  which  each 
is  playing,  or  is  destined  to  play,  in  the  great  silent 
struggle  for  supremacy  in  Asia  which  is  even  at  the 
present  moment  engaging  a  far  greater  share  of  the 
attention  and  of  the  resource  of  the  statesmen  of  the 
world  than  is  apparent  on  the  surface,  that  I  find  an 
interest  far  surpassing  all  other. 

For  it  is  hither,  to  the  promising  theatre  where  still 
survive  on  doubtful  equilibrium  the  decaying  kingdoms 
of  the  East,  that  the  Powers  of  the  West  are  driven 
by  forces  altogether  beyond  control,  for  the  furtherance 
of  their  ambitions,  and  it  is  here  in  the  end  that  the 
fierce  struggle  for  supremacy  between  representatives 
of  two  of  the  great  divisions  of  mankind — the  Slavonic 
and  the  Teutonic — must  find  its  issue.  The  progress 
of  events  and  the  march  of  time  serve  only  to  make 
it  daily  more  apparent  to  the  observant,  that  in  the 
continent  of  Asia  lies  the  stage  whereon  the  fate  of 
empires  will  be  sealed  and  their  destinies  fulfilled. 

The  story  of  the  return  of  the  peoples  of  the  West 
to  those  lands  wherein  was  situated  the  first  home  and 
cradle  of  their  race  is  one  of  absorbing  interest,  and  may 
be  said  to  have  had  its  origin  with  the  rise  of  a  man 
who,  born  in  a  little  kingdom  occupying  the  south-west 
corner  of  Europe,  was  destined  to  set  in  motion  a  move- 
ment which  even  at  the  present  day  can  scarce  be  said 
to  have  run  its  course,  and  which  has  already  played 
a  determining  part  in  the  destinies  of  the  world.  For 
it  is  to  Prince  Henry  of  Portugal,  known  to  ^history 


16  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 


as  Prince  Henry  the  Navigator,  that  must  be  assigned 
the  responsibiUty  for  the  great  movement  of  discovery 
of  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries, 
as  a  result  of  which,  to  use  the  words  of  his  biographer,^ 
"  India  has  been  conquered,  America  repeopled,  the 
world  made  clear,  and  the  civilisation  which  the  Roman 
Empire  left  behind  has  conquered  or  utterly  over- 
shadowed every  one  of  its  old  rivals  and  superiors — 
Islam,  India,  China,  Tartary." 

So   it    happens   that  it  was  the   little   kingdom  of 
Portugal  that  first  set  rolling  the  ball  of  conquest  from 
Europe  to  Asia,  when  her  intrepid  mariner  Vasco  da 
Gama  rounded  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  sailed  into 
the  eastern  seas;  and  it  was  the  same  kingdom  that 
planted    the   first    seeds    of    the    future    expansion    of 
modern  Europe   in  the   Orient,   when  her  conquering 
genius  Albuquerque  the  Great  laid  hold  of  the  out- 
posts of  the  East  and  raised  his  standards  in  Hindu- 
stan.    Upwards  of  four  centuries  have  rolled  by  since 
Bartholomew  Diaz  first  showed  to  Vasco  da  Gama  and 
his  successors  the  way  round  the  Southern  Cape,  and 
with   them  the   brilliant   though   transitory  period  of 
Portuguese    supremacy.     The  ever-revolving  wheel  of 
fortune  has  played  truant  to  her  former  love,  and  all 
that  now  remain  to  mark  the  prowess  of  the  pioneers 
are  the  crippled  forts  which  frown  down  from  the  for- 
bidding heights  of  Muscat,   and  that  "monument  of 
Chinese  toleration   and  Portuguese    tenacity,"  Macao, 
which  for  three  hundred  years  was  for  foreigners  the 
gate  of  the  Chinese  Empire,  but  which  has  been  de- 
scribed   at   the   present    time    as    being   not   even    an 
inspiring  monument  to  the  memory  of  a  glory  which 
is  gone. 

The  scene  is  changed ;  the  actors  are  not  the  same ; 

1  C.  R.  Beazley  in  his  '  Henry  the  Navigator.' 


THE  AWAKENING   OF  RUSSIA.  17 


but  the  drama  which  is  being  played  to-day  is  the 
evolution  of  the  curtain  -  raiser  which  heralded  the 
entrance  of  modern  players  on  an  ancient  stage,  and 
the  stage,  albeit  adapted  somewhat  to  the  requirements 
of  altered  conditions,  is  the  same  stage  upon  which 
the  grandees  of  Portugal  rang  up  the  curtain  to  an 
applauding  and  astonished  world  four  centuries  ago. 

The  actors,  I  have  said,  are  not  the  same.  Not 
even  the  innate  inertia  and  lethargy  of  the  Slav 
proved  proof  against  the  ambitious  spirit  of  unrest 
awaked  in  Europe,  and  slowly,  though  for  this  very 
reason  perhaps  the  more  surely,  the  growing  Power 
of  Moscow  bestirred  itself,  and  looked  out  with  inquir- 
ing gaze  across  the  vast  and  unknown  lands  that  rolled 
away  from  the  threshold  of  its  own  domain  into  the 
dim  distance  of  the  mysterious  East.  Less  than  a 
century  after  the  first  exploits  of  the  Portuguese 
discoverers,  Eussia  had  set  out  upon  that  path 
which  has  since  led  her  the  length  of  a  continent. 
The  trail  of  the  Slav  across  Asia  from  the  west  is  the 
natural  complement  of  the  fiery  invasions  of  Jengis 
Khan  and  Timur  from  the  East ;  the  results  of  the 
former  are  likely  to  prove  equal,  if  not  to  surpass,  in 
importance  —  certainly  in  permanency  —  those  of  the 
latter,  though  the  methods  employed  to  obtain  them 
have  been  different.  For  while  the  thundering  tread 
of  armies  and  the  smell  of  battle  and  of  fire,  the  wail 
of  the  widow  and  the  cry  of  anguish  of  the  vanquished, 
are  the  dominating  features  of  the  one,  the  slow  and 
irresistible  advance  of  a  j^^oj^le  is  the  leading  aspect 
of  the  other.  Episodes  of  violence  there  have  been, 
as  the  records  of  the  holocaust  of  Geok  Teppe,  or  of 
the  frenzied  garrison  who  rang  a  bloody  tocsin  so 
lately  as  1900  at  Blagoveschensk,  proclaim ;  but 
episodes  such  as  these,  though    casting  a  lurid  light 

B 


18  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 

across  the  path  of  the  Russian  advance,  appear  but 
details  when  examined  in  true  perspective  in  a  correct 
presentation  of  the  achievements  of  three  centuries. 
Russian  soldiers,  Russian  sappers,  and  Russian  engin- 
eers have  moved  forward,  it  is  true,  but  more  than  this, 
the  Russian  peasant  has  moved  forward  too ;  and  it 
should  never  be  forgotten  in  dealing  with  the  Russian 
advance  across  Asia  that  whereas  it  is  only  "  diplomats 
and  statesmen,  who  must  deal  with  temporary  situa- 
tions, that  need  be  deeply  concerned  with  the  purely 
military  advance  of  any  nation,  when  a  people  move 
forward  it  is  a  circumstance  of  world-wide  significance, 
and  it  is  of  especial  and  practical  concern  to  every 
people  upon  whose  interests  that  advance  impinges,  or 
whose  future  in  any  direction  that  advance  affects."  ^ 
Russia  has  come  to  the  Pacific,  and  she  has  come  to 
stay. 

It  is  Russia,  then,  whom  we  see  in  the  title-7"o^e  in 
Northern  Asia.  It  should  be  hardly  necessary  to  add, 
even  for  the  benefit  of  the  most  casual  Englishman, 
that  ever  since  the  days  of  "  the  Great  Commoner  "  it 
is  the  star  of  Britain  that  has  been  in  the  ascendant 
throughout  the  south.  A  strong  cast,  it  must  be 
admitted,  with  England  and  Russia  in  the  leading 
parts,  and  America,  Japan,  Germany,  and  France 
(with  Belgium  understudying  one  of  the  two  lead- 
ing performers)  starred  as  the  lesser  lights  upon  the 
bill.  And  the  denotiment  will  be  in  every  way  worthy 
of  the  players. 

How  is  it  with  the  two  leading  lights  ?  Is  it  com- 
munity of  interest  or  irreconcilable  antagonism  that 
characterises  their  mutual  progress  ?  It  would  be 
absurd  to  attempt  to  deny  that  the  two  forces 
which   are  of  chief  account   in  shaping  the  course  of 

1  The  Russian  Advance.     A.  J.  Beveridee. 


THE  OPINION  OF  KING   GEORGE  IIL  19 

events  in  Asia  are  actuated  by  motives  diametrically 
opposed.  The  policy  of  the  one  has  for  its  object  the 
opening  of  fields  to  the  commerce  of  the  world,  and 
political  and  strategic  supremacy  in  such  parts  as  are 
of  vital  importance  to  the  safeguarding  of  her  exist- 
ing dominions  and  those  lines  of  communication  which 
stretch  from  one  part  of  the  empire  to  another ;  that 
of  the  other  territorial  aggrandisement,  closed  markets, 
and  political  prestige. 

It  may  be  perfectly  true  that  a  century  ago  his 
most  gracious  Majesty  King  George  III.  remarked,  on 
bidding  farewell  to  the  E^ussian  ambassador  Count 
Worontzoff,  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  take  leave 
of  common  -  sense,  and  to  enter  into  the  world  of 
chimeras,  to  suppose  that  there  could  exist  any 
alliance  in  the  world  more  natural  or  more  solid 
than  that  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain ;  that  as 
their  geographical  position,  which  was  the  basis  of 
their  union,  could  not  change,  their  union  should  be 
eternal.  But  if  so,  it  is  equally  true  that  in  this 
instance,  at  any  rate,  his  Majesty  showed  a  serious 
deficiency  of  foresight,  for  the  very  thing  which  he 
supposed  impossible  has  come  to  pass  —  their  geo- 
graphical position  has  changed.  Great  Britain  in 
India  has  become  a  Continental  nation.  Russia  has 
since  that  day  annexed  a  whole  series  of  territories, 
which  may  without  exaggeration  be  described  as  the 
heart  of  a  continent.  A  whole  congeries  of  independ- 
ent states  have  one  after  another  been  absorbed,  until 
at  the  present  time  the  thousands  of  square  miles 
which,  in  the  days  of  King  George,  separated  Russian 
and  British  dominion  have  been  reduced  to  a  mere 
strip  in  comparison,  comprising  the  kingdoms  of 
Persia  and  Afghanistan  and  the  Chinese  dependency 
of   Tibet.      At    one    point,    indeed,    in    the    shadowy 


20  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 

region  of  the  Pamirs,  Kussian  territory  may  be  said 
to  be  coterminous  with  our  own,  though  here,  thanks 
to  natural  physical  causes,  we  can  afford  to  regard 
with  equanimity  the  presence  even  of  so  powerful  a 
neighbour  as  Russia,  for,  as  Sir  Thomas  Holdich  so 
pertinently  puts  it,  "an  independent  untouched  Kafir- 
stan  is  about  as  solid  an  obstacle  between  ourselves 
and  the  Oxus  basin  as  could  well  have  been  devised, 
as  indeed  Tamerlane  found  and  recorded  for  the 
benefit  of  his  successors."  ^ 

If  the  policy  as  laid  down  by  Tsar  Nicholas  I.  had 
been  carried  out,  a  policy  which  had  for  its  object  the 
prevention  of  the  possibility  of  conflict  between  two 
Powers  "  who  to  remain  united  require  to  remain 
separated,"  by  scrupulously  preserving  the  peaceful 
condition  of  the  intermediate  countries,  by  consolidat- 
ing the  tranquillity  of  these  countries,  by  confining  the 
rivalry  to  commerce,  and  by  refraining  from  engag- 
ing in  a  struggle  for  political  influence,  —  above  all, 
by  respecting  the  independence  of  the  intervening 
countries,  then  the  whole  question  of  Anglo-E-ussian 
relations  might  have  presented  an  entirely  different 
aspect  to  what  it  does  to-day.  But  the  policy  was 
doomed  from  the  first.  Russia,  defeated  in  her 
endeavour  to  become  possessed  of  the  keys  of  the 
Bosphorus,  turned  her  eyes  eastward,  for  there, 
through  the  little-considered  kingdoms  of  the  Near 
East,  might  she  not  find  a  backway  that  would  lead 
to  the  goal  upon  which  her  heart  was  set? 

Incidentally  a  great  field  presented  itself  for  the 
civilising  influence  of  a  Christian  Power ;  law  and 
order  were  held  in  defiance  in  the  countries  which 
bordered  on  her  own,  each  step  forward  necessitated 
another  to   teach   a  lesson   to   the  wild   peoples  who 

1  The  Indian  Borderland. 


THE  POSITION  OF  RUSSIA.  21 

successively  became  her  neighbours,  and  so  Transcaspia, 
Turkomania,  Merve,  Bokhara,  Ferghana,  and  Zerafshan 
— the  countries  whose  independence  was  to  be  so 
scrupulously  respected — fell  before  the  armies  or  the 
diplomatists  of  the  Great  White  Tsar.  At  the  same 
time  there  arose  a  man  who  breathed  new  life  into  the 
dry  bones  of  Russian  expansion  and  colonisation  in  the 
Far  East,  and  from  the  day  when  Count  Muravieff 
pricked  the  bubble  of  Chinese  greatness,  which  had 
so  dazzled  the  timid  parties  to  the  treaty  of 
Nertchinsk,  the  forward  trend  of  her  policy  has  con- 
tinued unchecked,  till  now  at  the  present  day  she 
frowns  haughtily  across  the  waters  of  the  China  Seas, 
and  stands  menacingly  with  fixed  bayonet  within 
striking  distance  of  Peking  itself 

On  whom  lies  the  blame  ?  Hardly  upon  Russia, 
whose  chief  crime  is  repeated  success.  Indeed  I  shall 
be  the  first  to  pay  tribute  to  the  great  work  which  she 
has  done  in  the  interests  of  civilisation  wherever  she 
has  come  in  contact  with  the  uncultured  and  barbarous 
hordes  of  Central  Asia.  Rather,  if  we  have  allowed 
another  Power  to  acquire  a  position  and  a  prestige  which 
is  harmful  to  ourselves,  or  to  usurp  a  preponderating 
influence  in  the  aff'airs  of  those  States  which  still  enjoy 
a  precarious  independence  as  buflers  between  the  two 
nations,  should  we  not  look  to  our  own  inaction  in  the 
past  ?  And  if  we  do,  we  are  bound  to  admit  that  it 
is  the  fruits  of  the  much-vaunted  policy  of  masterly 
inactivity, — a  synonym  for  pitiable  neglect, — which 
held  so  long  and  so  disastrous  a  term  of  power,  that 
we  are  reaping  at  the  present  day. 

There  is  little  to  be  gained  by  indulging  in  useless 
lamentation  for  the  past.  We  cannot  undo  what  is 
already  an  accomplished  fact,  but  we  may  learn  wisdom 
from  the  lessons  of  history,  and  benefit  therefrom  as  we 


ACROSS  A   CONTINENT. 


set  our  faces  to  the  future.  What  has  to  be  faced  by 
the  present  generation  is  the  fact  that  Russia  is  there ; 
what  has  to  be  reahsed  is  that  "the  poUcy  of  masterly 
inactivity,  admirably  well  adapted  to  the  circumstances 
of  an  Asiatic  kingdom  standing  alone,  remote  from 
Russia,  and  far  apparently  beyond  the  zone  of  Russian 
ambition,  becomes  inarticulate  folly  when  applied  to 
an  Asiatic  kingdom  contiguous  to  and  leaning  on 
Russia."  1  The  all-important  question  which  sooner  or 
later  must  be  answered  is,  How  long  can  Turkey,  Persia, 
Afghanistan,  Tibet,  and,  if  we  take  the  broadest  view 
of  the  whole  question,  China,  maintain  even  the 
precarious  title  to  independence  to  which  they  can  at 
the  present  time  lay  claim  ? 

The  rapidly  increasing  importance  of  the  problem  of 
Asia  to  the  British  people  was  painted  in  vivid  colours 
by  the  present  Viceroy  of  India  in  the  course  of  a 
speech  delivered  at  Calcutta  on  March  25,  1903. 
"Europe,"  he  pointed  out,  "has  woke  up,  and  is 
beginning  to  take  a  revived  interest  in  Asia.  Russia, 
with  her  vast  territories,  her  great  ambitions,  and  her 
unarrested  advance,  has  been  the  pioneer  of  this 
movement,  and  with  her,  or  after  her,  have  come  her 
competitors,  rivals,  and  allies.  Thus,  as  all  these 
foreigners  arrive  upon  the  scene,  and  push  forward  into 
the  vacant  spots,  we  are  slowly  having  a  European 
situation  created  in  Asia  with  the  same  figures  upon 
the  stage.  ...  In  Europe  we  are  a  maritime  Power, 
who  are  merely  called  upon  to  defend  our  own  shores 
from  invasion,  and  who  are  confronted  by  no  land 
dangers  or  foes.  In  Asia  we  have  both  a  seaboard 
and  a  land  frontier  many  thousands  of  miles  in  length, 
and   though    Providence    has    presented   us   on    some 

1  Malleson's  '  History  of  Afghanistan.'  I  have  substituted  the  words  "  an 
Asiatic  kingdom  "  for  the  "  Afghanistan  "  of  the  original. 


INDIA'S  IMPORTANT  POSITION.  23 

portion  of  our  land  frontiers  with  the  most  splendid 
natural  defences  in  the  world,  yet  the  situation  must 
become  more,  and  not  less,  anxious  as  rival  or  hostile 
influences  creep  up  to  these  ramparts,  and  as  the 
ground  outside  them  becomes  the  arena  of  new  com- 
binations, and  the  field  of  unforeseen  ambitions." 

Is  the  true  significance  of  the  situation,  thus  set 
forth,  realised  by  the  English  public  ?  Is  the  vital 
importance  of  preserving  India  from  attack  even  dimly 
felt  by  the  people  of  Great  Britain  ?  And  still  more, 
is  the  importance  of  her  position  on  the  line  of  these 
communications,  which  are  the  binding  links  not  only 
between  Great  Britain  and  her  vast  commercial 
interests  in  the  Far  East,  but  also  between  Great 
Britain  and  her  colonies  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand, 
adequately  appreciated  ?  There  are  Powers  who  would 
give  much  to  occupy  positions  of  advantage  on  the 
flank  of  these  same  lines  of  communication,  these 
throbbing  nerves  of  empire. 

I  have  ventured  to  express  the  opinion — an  opinion 
based  upon  personal  investigation  on  the  scene  of 
action  itself,  as  well  as  upon  the  writings  of  others 
competent  to  pronounce  upon  such  questions — that  an 
undefined  and  vacillating  policy  in  Asia  is  detrimental 
to  our  position  throughout  the  world,  and  inconsonant 
with  our  high  place  in  the  councils  of  the  nations ; 
and  if  the  hope  which  I  entertain,  that  a  perusal  of 
these  pages  may,  in  however  small  a  degree,  incite  the 
reader  to  an  increased  interest  in  the  problems  which 
confront  our  country  in  the  East,  and  may  help,  how- 
ever imperfectly,  to  expose  the  fatuity  of  the  policy  of 
those  who  are  perpetually  belittling  the  consequences 
of  a  precipitate  flight  before  the  aggressive  advance  of 
other  nations,  and  who,  with  no  doubt  the  best  inten- 
tions, would  have  us  give  way  at  all  costs  before  the 


24  ACROSS  A    CONTINENT. 

ambitions,  both  expressed  and  implied,  of  those  who 
are,  and  must  remain,  our  rivals  in  Asia,  be  in  any  way 
fulfilled,  my  object  in  writing  them  will  have  been 
obtained. 

Let  the  people  of  this  country — and  by  the  people  of 
this  country  I  do  not  mean  the  select  few  who  have 
made  a  study  of  such  questions — understand  that  a 
policy  of  unsupported  diplomatic  protest  will  not 
always  prove  efficient  in  retaining  that  position  of 
supremacy  in  Southern  Asia  which  is  vital  to  our 
being,  and  let  them  be  prepared,  should  it  ever  be 
asked  of  them,  to  enforce  respect  for  their  legitimate 
demands  by  a  display  of  unmistakable  intention. 
There  is  a  fund  of  wisdom  in  the  five  short  words,  si 
vis  pacem,  loara  helium,  and  it  is  a  wisdom  which  we 
shall  do  well  to  recognise. 


TUEKEY  IN  ASIA 


A  laud  without  any  order, — 

Day  even  as  night  (one  saith), 
Where  who  lieth  down  ariseth  not, 

Nor  the  sleeper  awakeneth  ; 
A  land  of  darkness  as  darkness  itself 

And  of  the  shadow  of  death." 

— Dante  Gabriel  Rossetti. 


'  My  name  is  Ozymandias,  king  of  kings  : 
Look  on  my  works,  ye  Mighty,  and  despair  !  " 

— Percy  Bysshe  Shelley. 


CHAPTER    11. 

THE    GATEWAY    OF    THE    EAST. 

Constantinople — The  romance  of  the  city  on  the  Golden  Horn — The  reality 
— Monuments  of  interest — The  gulf  between  Europe  and  Asia — Pecu- 
liarities of  the  East— The  Haider-Pasha  Ismid  railway — A  climb  to 
the  Anatolian  plateau — Lack  of  comfort  on  the  present  Anatolian 
railway — Probabilities  of  the  future — Konia — Its  streets — Improve- 
ment in  the  district  under  the  administration  of  Ferhit  Pasha. 

Constantinople  1 

What  a  whirl  of  thought  the  word  awakens ! 
What  stirring  scenes  it  conjures  up  of  wild  romance 
and  strange  vicissitude  !  It  would  indeed  be  strange 
if  imagination  were  not  fired  or  the  pulses  quickened 
on  approaching  the  far-famed  Turkish  capital.  For 
from  the  day,  two  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty - 
nine  years  ago,  when  the  enterprising  little  band  of 
Greeks  propelled  their  galleys  up  the  Hellespont  and 
landed  on  the  shores  of  the  Golden  Horn  to  build 
their  town,  in  obedience  to  the  Delphic  oracle,  "over 
against  the  city  of  the  blind,"  up  to  the  present 
time,  when  an  Eastern  potentate  sits  on  the  throne 
of  the  emperors  of  Byzantium,  the  stronghold  of 
the  gateway  of  two  continents,  whether  as  Byzan- 
tium, New  Bome,  or  Constantinople,  has  at  all  times 
woven  a  spell  of  fascination  over  the  minds  of  men, 
and  burned  for  itself  in  the  scroll  of  history — as  no 


28  THE   GATEWAY  OF  THE  EAST. 

doubt  the  Emperor  Constantine  Intended  that  it  should 
when  he  erected  the  golden  milestone  from  which  all 
the  distances  of  the  eastern  world  were  in  future  to 
be  measured — an  indelible  reputation  as  the  very  eye 
and  centre  of  the  world. 

There  is  no  need  for  apology,  then,  in  admitting 
that,  as  I  was  borne  rapidly  towards  the  city  on  the 
Bosphorus,  of  which  with  far  more  reason  than  of 
Venice  might  it  be  said  that — 

"  Once  did  she  hold  the  gorgeous  East  iu  fee, 
And  was  the  safeguard  of  the  West " — 

the  views  presented  by  the  frost  -  bound  lands  of 
Central  Europe  and  the  rugged  mountains  of  the 
Turkish  highlands  sank  into  insignificance  before  the 
varying  scenes  of  the  ever-changing  mental  picture 
which  unrolled  itself  before  me.  Visions  of  the  early 
days  of  splendour  of  a  city  standing  proud  and  alone, 
"  with  all  Europe  behind  and  all  Asia  before,"  a  home 
of  prodigal  magnificence  and  luxury,  despite  disastrous 
inroads  from  time  to  time  of  the  legions  of  Persia, 
Greece,  and  Macedon ;  of  the  gloomy  days  of  depres- 
sion when  the  dark  shadow  of  the  great  Power  which 
had  arisen  in  the  West  stole  over  the  kingdoms  of 
the  East ;  of  the  rise  of  a  fallen  city  to  a  height  of 
power  and  magnificence  hitherto  unknown,  as  the 
capital  of  the  east  Koman  empire  under  Constantine 
and  his  successors  ;  of  gradual  decay  with  the  decline 
and  fall  of  the  power  of  Kome,  passing  into  the  final 
collapse  of  the  longest  lived  empire  that  Christendom 
has  known  when  the  Emperor  Constantine  XIV.  fell 
gallantly  fighting  in  the  breach  of  the  walls  of  his 
city ;  and  of  a  new  era  of  barbaric  splendour  ushered 
in  from  the  time  when  an  Osmanli  Sultan  seized 
upon    the    city,    and    the    cry    "  God    is    great    and 


A   CITY  IN  MOURNFUL   GUISE.  29 


Mohammed  is  His  prophet  I "  rang  through  the  dome 
of  the  great  church  which  had  stood  for  thirty 
generations  a  monument  of  the  greatness  and  piety 
of  its  founder,  Justinian, — passed  in  bewildering  suc- 
cession before  me,  till  at  length,  as  we  drew  up 
alongside  of  the  platform  of  the  station  of  Stambul, 
I  was  ready  to  exclaim,  in  the  words  of  the  old  king 
Athanarich,  "Now  do  I  at  last  behold  what  I  had 
often  heard  and  deemed  incredible." 

Alas  for  all  our  dreams  !  The  glitter  of  my  mental 
picture  was  not  there  :  the  reality  M^as  depressing  in 
comparison.  Dull  grey-looking  buildings  loomed  in- 
distinctly through  mist  as  I  was  driven  over  execrable 
streets  to  the  European  quarter  of  the  town.  The 
rock  walls  of  the  Bosphorus,  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
most  striking  water  passages  in  the  world,  were  but 
faintly  outlined  through  falling  rain.  Even  in  the 
faces  of  its  people  was  to  be  seen  a  reflex  of  the 
city's  mournful  guise,  for  there  was  apparent  in 
them  that  gloom  which  is  begotten  of  a  long  and 
strenuous  fast.  E-amazan  was  at  its  height.  Of 
course  it  was  all  my  own  fault,  as  every  fresh 
acquaintance  took  good  care  to  impress  upon  me, 
and  I  listened  patiently  to  the  reiterated  assertion 
that  December  was  not  the  time  of  year  to  see 
the  beauties  of  Constantinople.  The  worst  of  bad 
weather,  however,  is  powerless  to  divest  the  Hippo- 
drome, with  its  bronze  pillar  celebrating  the  victory 
of  Platsea,  of  its  historic  interest,  or  the  burnt 
column  on  whose  continued  existence  depends  accord- 
ing to  popular  superstition  the  life  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire,  or  the  museum  which  guards  the  relics  of 
some  of  the  earliest  known  races  of  mankind,  or  the 
great  arches  of  massive  masonry  which  sustain  a 
water- channel  enumerated  by  the  versatile  anatomist 


30  THE   GATE JF AY  OF  THE  EAST. 


of  Melancholy  among  the  aqueducts  of  the  world/ 
and  till  lately  the  sole  water-supply  of  the  capital. 
Nor  could  cold  and  damp  check  the  flood  of  admiration 
which  swept  over  me  at  sight  of  the  noble  propor- 
tions and  unadorned  magnificence  of  the  Mosque  of 
St  Sophia,  or  stifle  the  half-involuntary  thrill  which 
assailed  me  as  I  saw  here,  in  the  great  church  of 
Justinian,  a  multitude  now  bow  down  as  one  man  at 
the  word  of  a  priest  of  Islam. 

But  it  was  not  with  a  view  to  studying  Con- 
stantinople, still  less  to  writing  about  it,  that  I  left 
England  early  in  December  1902  and  travelled  with 
all  the  speed  and  comfort  afforded  by  the  "  Orient 
Express "  from  one  extremity  of  Europe  to  the  other. 
The  object  which  I  had  in  view  was  destined  to 
carry  me  farther  afield  than  the  tourist  -  trodden 
streets  of  Stambul,  and  after  a  short  stay  beneath 
the  hospitable  roof  of  the  British  embassy,  I  turned 
my  back  upon  the  West  and  passed  through  the  great 
gateway  of  the  East. 

Landing  on  the  farther  shore  of  the  Bosphorus,  your 
first  reflection  is  probably  that  a  few  minutes  have 
sufliced  to  transfer  you  from  one  continent  to  another, 
and  your  second  that  Asia  here  differs  in  no  way  from 
Europe  there.  The  reason  is  simple.  For  centuries 
the  tide  of  conquest  flowed  ever  backward  and  for- 
ward between  East  and  West,  each  wave  leaving  its 
mark  ere  it  receded  from  the  shore.  The  armies  of 
the  turbid  races  of  the  East — Persians,  Arabs,  Seljuks, 
Mongols,  Tartars,  and  Turkomans — followers  of  men 
whose  names  are  writ  large  in  a  momentous  page  of 
history, — Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Xerxes ;  Harun-al-Eas- 
chid,  Moslemah,  and  Motassem ;  Toghrul  Bey,  Alp 
Arslan,    and    Suleiman ;     Timur   the    Tartar    and   the 

1  In  '  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,'  by  E.  Burton. 


ACROSS  THE  BOSPHORUS.  31 

Turkoman  Uzun  Hassan, — rolled  in  successive  waves 
from  the  East  to  be  hurled  tumultuously  against  the 
portals  of  the  west ;  while  from  time  to  time  and 
with  varying  success  the  colonies  or  legions  of  Athens, 
Sparta,  Macedon,  Gaul,  Rome,  and  Byzantium,  the 
fervid  bands  of  the  crusaders,  and  the  enterprising 
traders  of  Genoa  and  Venice,  streamed  across  the 
dividing  gulf,  and  raised  the  standards  of  the  West 
among  the  empires  of  the  East.  Finally,  fate  and 
the  conquering  genius  of  the  Osmanli  Muhammed  II. 
set  up  on  the  threshold  of  Europe  the  stronghold  of 
an  Asian  power,  which  endures  unto  this  day,  and 
which,  ignoring  the  arbitrary  line  of  map-makers, 
confronts  you  with  the  East  before  you  are  well 
quit  of  the  West.  So  there  are  bazaars,  and  mosques, 
and  swarthy-visaged  easterns  on  the  western  shore ; 
but  there  are  also  telegraphs  and  railways  —  and 
Germans — to  remind  you  of  Europe  on  the  East. 

But  despite  all  signs  of  prosy  Western  commerce, 
the  atmosphere  is  perceptibly  of  the  East.  You  look 
at  your  watch ;  it  is  mid-day.  You  glance  at  the 
station  clock — if  there  is  one — and  you  observe  that 
the  hands  point  to  7.30.  You  ask  for  an  explanation, 
and  you  learn  that  in  Turkey  sunset  is  twelve  o'clock, 
that  the  sun  set  at  4.30  (European  time)  the  day  before, 
that  it  is  now  nineteen  and  a  half  hours  after  sunset, 
and  that  the  hands  of  the  clock  therefore  point  to  7.30  ! 
You  digest  this  as  soon  as  you  can,  make  a  note  of  it 
for  future  occasion,  and  w^onder  vaguely  if  you  will  ever 
remember  to  make  the  necessary  daily  alteration  to 
keep  time  with  the  sun. 

I  looked  at  my  watch  after  an  early  crossing  of  the 
Bosphorus  on  the  morning  of  December  17,  and  found 
that  it  wanted  a  few  minutes  to  six,  so  that  if  the  in- 
formation I  had  received  in  Constantinople  to  the  effect 


32  THE   GATEWAY   OF  THE  EAST. 


that  the  train  was  clue  to  leave  at  1.30  was  correct,  we 
were  due  to  start  almost  immediately.  But  it  was  not 
— which  fact  reminded  me  that  I  was  in  the  East. 
Making  my  way  through  the  deserted  station,  dimly 
lit  by  a  flickering  oil -lamp,  I  knocked  up  a  sleepy 
official,  who  indignantly  informed  me  that  the  train 
would  leave  at  2.30  (7  a.m.).  He  was  quite  wrong; 
it  did  not  leave  until  3.30  (8  a.m.),  though  this  was 
admittedly  an  hour  after  the  advertised  time.  Punc- 
tuality is  at  a  discount  when  the  world  of  Islam  keeps 
high  fast. 

For  the  first  four  hours  the  train  steams  gaily  along 
the  coast  to  Ismid,  after  which  it  plunges  desperately 
into  a  labyrinth  of  mountain  glens  and  sullen  defiles, 
to  emerge  panting  later  on,  3000  feet  higher  than  when 
it  started,  on  the  edge  of  a  highland  plateau.  The 
remaining  distance  to  Konia  lies  across  as  uninteresting 
an  expanse  as  you  can  well  wish  to  see,  which  presents 
no  greater  feature  in  Anatolia  than  barren  plateaux  do 
in  any  other  part  of  the  world  —  Tibet  for  instance. 
Little  need  be  said  of  the  existing  arrangements  on 
the  line  except  that  consideration  for  the  comfort  of 
passengers  played  no  part  in  determining  them.  The 
first  day  of  about  twelve  hours  is  occupied  in  a  struggle 
to  reach  Eski  Sher,  where  one  is  permitted  to  rest  in 
such  comfort  as  the  accommodation  afforded  by  the 
hotel  allows  until  4  a.m.,  when  the  remaining  journey 
of  fifteen  hours  over  a  monotonous  table-land  is  begun. 
By  7.30  P.M.  Konia  will  be  reached,  and  the  weary 
traveller  will  find  a  welcome  at  the  Greek  inn,  a  few 
minutes'  walk  from  the  station,  which  he  will  probably 
sum  up  as  even  less  inviting  than  the  hotel  at  Eski 
Sher.  Luncheon  on  the  first  day  can  be  obtained  at 
Ismid,  and  on  the  second  at  Afium  Kara  Hissar,  five 
and  three-quarter  hours  beyond  Eski  Sher.     This  ser- 


THE   TOWN  OF  KONIA.  33 

vice,  however,  in  view  of  the  probable  consummation 
of  the  Baghdad  railway  scheme,  may  be  looked  upon  as 
temporary  :  when  the  train  de  luxe,  which  is  now  in 
course  of  construction  with  a  view  to  future  eventual- 
ities, is  in  use,  all  this  will  be  changed. 

Konia,  the  present  terminus  of  the  railway,  is  a 
scattered  town  of  about  40,000  inhabitants,  and  capital 
of  a  vilayet,  though  for  the  moment  government-house 
was  untenanted,  the  vali,  Ferhit  Pasha,  having  left  to 
take  up  his  duties  as  president  of  the  Macedonian 
Reform  Committee,  while  his  successor  Tewfic  Pasha 
had  not  arrived.  I  found  the  tekke  of  the  Mevlevi 
dervishes,  which  contains  the  tombs  of  Hazret  Meviana, 
the  founder  of  the  order,  and  of  his  successors,  and  a 
semi-ruined  building  with  a  ceiling  of  beautiful  enamel 
tile-work,  a  worthy  rival  of  the  renowned  specimens  of 
Samarkand,  the  objects  of  chief  interest ;  but  on  the 
whole  I  was  not  greatly  edified  by  a  morning's  wander- 
ing in  the  town,  and  after  persevering  through  a  suc- 
cession of  filthy  lanes  and  alleys,  was  quite  ready  to 
agree  with  the  genial  companion  of  my  walk,  that  in 
Konia  it  would  be  superfluous  to  name  the  streets, — 
there  was,  of  course,  no  thought  of  doing  so, — one  knew 
them  by  their  smells  ! 

It  is  only  fair  while  speaking  of  Konia  to  mention 
in  passing  how  greatly  the  whole  district  has  benefited 
under  the  enlightened  rule  of  the  late  governor,  though 
I  observed  that  an  excellent  scheme  of  irrigation,  pro- 
pounded by  him  some  years  ago,  had,  so  far,  proceeded 
no  farther  than  the  brain  of  its  deserving  originator, 
lack  of  funds  no  doubt  forming  a  formidable  bar  to  its 
practical  application. 


34  ACROSS  THE   TAURUS. 


CHAPTER   III. 

ACROSS    THE    TAURUS. 

Difficulties  of  travel  in  the  winter — An  Eastern  road — The  Axylon  plateau 
— Off  the  road  at  night — Eregli — Through  the  Taurus  mountains — 
The  defile  at  Bozanti — A  pleasant  Chi^istmas  ! — A  silver  mine — Death 
of  a  kaimakam — Bad  weather — The  Cilician  Gates — An  ancient  high- 
way of  nations — The  trac^  of  the  future  railway  not  through  the  Gates 
— Reach  the  Cilician  plain  and  Mersina. 

Any  one  who  undertakes  under  existing  circumstances 
to  travel  from  Konia  to  the  Cilician  plain  in  the  depth 
of  winter  must  not  expect  to  find  the  experience  a 
pleasurable  one.  In  the  event  of  his  being  overtaken 
by  continuous  bad  weather,  as  I  was,  he  will  find  it  a 
journey  productive  of  a  minimum  of  pleasure  and  a 
maximum  of  discomfort.  The  road — where  there  is  any 
— is  sufiiciently  bad  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  pro- 
ceeding at  anything  better  than  a  walk ;  the  only 
shelters  in  which  to  spend  the  night  are  miserable 
hovels,  affording  no  conveniences  beyond  the  walls, 
roof,  and,  as  a  rule,  mud  floor,  infested  by  vermin  and 
indescribably  filthy ;  and,  finally,  if  unprovided  with 
cooking-pots,  washing-basin,  and  whatsoever  else  confers 
upon  life  a  modicum  of  comfort,  the  traveller  will  have 
to  content  himself  with  whatever  food  his  foresight  may 
happen  to  have  provided  him  with,  cooked  in  the  un- 
savoury and  uninviting-looking  utensil  that  will  be 
offered  him,  and  to  look  forward  to  a  succession  of  days 


THE  EOAD   OF  THE  EAST.  35 

with  an  entire  dispensation  from  ablutions.  Fowls  and 
eggs,  it  is  true,  may  be  obtained  in  the  villages  on  the 
Konia  plateau,  but  in  winter,  when  the  rigours  of 
climate  have  driven  away  the  encampments  of  nomads, 
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  mountains  duringf  the 
summer  months,  nothing  can  be  expected  from  the 
dilapidated  khans  which  serve  for  stages  on  the  main 
artery  of  communication  between  the  desert  uplands 
of  Western  Anatolia  and  the  lowlands  of  Cilicia  and 
Mesopotamia  beyond. 

When  I  left  Konia  by  carriage  on  the  morning  of 
December  the  20th  I  had  not  the  benefit  of  the  experi- 
ence which  I  was  so  shortly  to  acquire,  and  I  accepted 
thankfully  and  literally  the  information  that  there  was 
a  passable  road  the  whole  of  the  way.  There  is,  how- 
ever, one  road  of  the  West  and  another  of  the  East,  and 
it  very  soon  became  evident  that  the  road  in  question 
was  essentially  and  unmistakably  of  the  latter.  That 
is  to  say,  there  was  no  road  at  all ;  but  we  just  drove 
over  the  plain  in  the  direction  of  our  objective,  following 
more  or  less  faithfully,  according  to  circumstances,  the 
tracks  of  others  who  had  gone  before.  In  this  case, 
Eregli,  a  village  at  the  foot  of  the  Bulgar  Dagh  Mount- 
ains, was  our  objective,  with  the  villages  of  Ismil  and 
Kara  Bunar  as  intermediate  points. 

The  south  -  eastern  -'  corner  of  the  great  highland 
plateau,  known  as  the  Axylon,  presents  a  picture  of 
mournful  desolation.  An  arid  and  dessicated  expanse 
for  one-half  of  the  year,  it  becomes  in  winter  a  sea  of 
mud,  producing  to  all  appearances,  where  it  produces 
anything  at  all,  a  crop  of  sorry -looking  camel-thorn, 
such  life  as  there  is  being  presented  by  small  strings  of 
camels  that  pass  with  silent  ghostly  tread,  and  here  and 
there  by  a  small  clump  of  miserable  little  houses, 
dignified  by  the  title  of  village. 


36  ACROSS  THE  TAURUS. 

On  the  second  day  of  my  journey  across  this  uninvit- 
ing stretch,  night  came  down  to  find  us  still  ploughing 
through  the  snow,  and  I  was  not  in  the  least  surprised 
to  hear  about  6  p.m.  that  we  were  off  the  road!  To 
complicate  matters,  the  horses  of  the  conveyance,  with 
my  Persian  servant  ^  and  the  luggage,  now  gave  in,  and 
could  in  no  way  be  induced  to  move  another  step.  All 
round  darkness  and  a  driving  snowstorm,  and  the 
situation  was  sufficiently  depressing.  Fortunately  one 
of  my  escort  of  zaptiehs,  who  had  galloped  off  to  recon- 
noitre, returned  ere  long,  having  found  the  track,  and 
taking  Joseph  in  with  me  and  leaving  the  cart  with  the 
beaten  horses  until  such  time  as  we  might  be  able  to 
send  assistance,  set  off  once  more,  reaching  Kara  Bunar 
eventually  without  further  mishap. 

As  the  road  approaches  Eregli  all  thought  of  follow- 
ing even  the  footsteps  of  those  who  have  gone  before 
has  to  be  abandoned,  since  the  plain  develops  into  a 
very  tolerable  snipe  -  bog.  Through  this  my  driver 
plunged  with  stolid  oriental  composure,  turning  neither 
to  the  right  nor  to  the  left,  supremely  indifferent  to  the 
vagaries  of  the  conveyance  as  it  was  dragged  along, 
now  sunk  above  the  axles  in  mud  and  water,  now 
balanced  at  an  angle  which  threatened  every  moment 
to  end  in  total  collapse,  and  it  was  vastly  to  my  surprise 
and  in  complete  defiance  of  all  the  laws  of  gravity  that 
we  did  eventually  reach  our  destination  in  an  upright 
position.     The  village  of  Eregli,  on  the  fringe  of  the 

1  Joseph  Abbas,  a  native  of  Tabriz,  -who  has  however  for  long  resided  in 
England.  He  first  became  associated  with  Englishmen  on  the  Eiisso- 
Afghan  Boundary  Commission  in  1885.  Before  that  time  he  had  per- 
formed the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  and  Medina,  and  has  since  talked  with  the 
followers  of  the  murdered  Englishman  Dalgleish  in  the  heart  of  Turkestan. 
The  story  of  his  travels  would  indeed  fill  many  volumes,  and  I  gladly  take 
this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  the  faithful  service  which  he  accorded 
me  during  the  whole  of  my  journey,  till  I  reached  civilisation  once  more  on 
the  Siberian  Eailway. 


THROUGH  THE   TAURUS  MOUNTAINS.  37 


Axylon  plain,  is  a  tolerably  large  one  of  4000  or  5000 
inhabitants,  occupying  houses  of  sun-dried  bricks,  which 
are  in  many  instances  surrounded  by  well -watered 
gardens  and  orchards. 

The  remark  which  appears  at  this  point  in  the  route- 
book  of  Asia  Minor,  to  the  effect  that  "some  care"  has 
been  bestowed  on  the  araba-road,  will  evoke  a  smile  at 
the  humour  of  the  writer  or  a  sigh  of  regret  at  the  poor 
return  there  is  to  show  for  the  care  bestowed,  according 
to  the  credulity  of  the  reader  !  It  is,  however,  possible 
that  my  driver  took  me  straight  across  country  to 
Ulukishla,  or  that  the  sentence  in  the  route-book  was 
intended  to  apply  to  the  road  beyond  that  place,  for  it 
was  not  until  we  were  a  mile  or  more  beyond  it  that  we 
got  into  anything  that  could  by  any  possible  stretch  of 
imagination  be  termed  a  made  road.^ 

From  this  point  we  entered  the  Bulgar  Dagh,  and 
for  the  remainder  of  the  way  to  Tarsus  passed  through 
the  magnificent  mountain  scenery  afforded  by  the 
frowning  peaks  and  precipitous  defiles  of  the  rugged 
Taurus  range.  The  wild  grandeur  of  some  of  the 
gorges  through  which  the  road  passes  is  striking  in 
the  extreme,  notably  the  narrow  passage  between  per- 
pendicular walls  of  naked  rock  which  gives  access  to 
the  vale  of  Bozanti,  and  which  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
admitting  impressed  me  to  a  greater  extent  than  did 
even  the  world-famed  defile  known  to  history  as  the 
pass  of  the  Cilician  Gates.     At  the  southern  end  of 

1  It  is,  as  Lord  Curzon  has  remarked,  due  either  to  "  the  poverty  or  the 
tyranny  of  the  English  vocabulary  "  that  one  is  obliged  to  use  the  word  road 
in  describing  the  communications  of  the  East.  Eoads  in  reality,  in  our  sense 
of  the  word,  except  where  introduced  by  European  enterprise,  may  be  said 
to  be  non-existent  in  Asia.  Cf.  Lord  Percy  :  "  The  road  after  passing  the 
Kara  Dagh  is  a  marvel  even  for  Turkey.  According  to  Murray's  hand- 
book it  is  just  passable  for  carriages  throughout,  but  if  any  vehicle  ever 
accomplished  the  feat,  it  must  have  been  at  the  cost  of  the  lives  of  its 
occupants." — Notes  from  a  Diary  in  Asiatic  Turkey. 


38  ACROSS  THE  TAURUS. 

this  passage  stands  Ak  Keupri,  the  "white  bridge" 
over  the  Tchakid  Su,  and  a  miserable  khan.  Here  I 
spent  Christmas  night,  and  can  corroborate  the  state- 
ment lately  made  by  Professor  Ramsay  that  the  new 
khan  which  has  been  built  in  the  course  of  the  last  few 
years  at  the  north  end  of  the  bridge  "  is,  if  possible, 
dirtier  and  more  miserable  than  the  old  khans  on  this 
route."  ^  The  fire  which  I  lit  in  the  centre  of  the 
hovel  soon  melted  the  accumulated  snow  on  the  roof, 
which  thenceforward  dripped  steadily  through,  while  a 
biting  wind  whistled  shrilly  through  the  many  chinks 
in  the  thin  wood  wall. 

A  short  distance  before  reaching  the  defile  as  one 
approaches  from  the  west  stands  the  guard-house  of 
Chifte  Khan,  from  which  runs  a  road  to  Bulg-ar  Maden, 
where  a  silver-mine  is  worked  under  the  direction  of  a 
kaimakam,  the  output  amounting  to  two  pony-loads 
a- week,  according  to  the  information  which  I  was  given 
on  the  spot.  The  chausse  leading  to  it  was  the  delight 
of  the  kaimakam  of  Marash,  to  whose  energy  and  pro- 
gressive ideas  its  construction  was  due.  I  say  ivas, 
because — tragic  example  of  the  irony  of  fate — it  was 
while  inspecting  the  very  work  of  which  he  was  so 
justly  proud  that  he  met  his  death,  being  pitched 
over  one  of  the  precipices  which  he  had  spent  his 
time  in  rendering  passable  a  few  weeks  before  I  passed 
through. 

After  crossing  the  Tchakid  Su  by  the  bridge  at  Ak 
Keupri,  the  road  runs  south-east,  and  later  on  south, 
passing  first  through  a  fine  glen,  and  then  ascending  to 
a  small  open  tableland  known  as  the  Tekir  Plateau, 
at  an  altitude  of  about  4300  feet,  20  kilometres  from 
Ak  Keupri.  And  it  is  to  the  summit  of  this  small 
plateau  that  the  evolution  of  modern  warfare  has  trans- 

1  Journal  E.G.S.,  October  1903. 


THE  GILIGIAN  GATES.  39 

ferred  the  true  line  of  defence  from  the  narrow  neck  of 
the  Cilician  Gates,  whose  perpendicular  walls  of  rock 
rise  high  on  either  side  of  the  road  a  few  miles  to  the 
south.  The  bad  weather  which  had  pursued  me  the 
whole  way  showed  no  improvement  as  I  drove  through 
the  celebrated  Gates,  and  I  saw  nothing  consequently 
but  a  blurred  picture  of  perpendicular  walls  of  rock 
through  flakes  of  falling  snow.  Professor  Ramsay 
describes  the  passage  as  a  narrow  cleft  piercing  the 
front  wall  of  the  main  mass  of  Taurus  :  "  The  actual 
passage  of  the  Gates  is  about  100  yards  long.  On 
both  sides  the  rock  walls  rise  almost  perpendicularly 
(that  on  the  west  side  literally  so,  at  one  point  to  about 
100  feet  above  the  road),  and  then  slope  steeply  back 
towards  the  towering  summit  of  the  ridge.  A  mediaeval 
castle  crowns  the  western  summit,  evidently  a  relic 
of  the  long  frontier  warfare  between  Byzantine  and 
Saracen  power,  641-965  a.d."  ^  In  the  same  paper  he 
points  out  the  falsity  of  the  legend  that  Ibrahim  Pasha 
widened  the  passage,  which  before  was  too  narrow  to 
admit  of  two  loaded  camels  passing  one  another,  re- 
calling the  fact  that  "  a  road  practical  for  waggons 
traversed  the  Gates  at  least  as  early  as  400  B.C.," 
while  his  own  estimate  of  the  width  of  the  defile 
corresponds  exactly  with  that  of  Kinneir,  who  when 
traversing  it  in  1812,  before  Ibrahim's  day,  described  it 
as  not  more  than  ten  or  twelve  paces  in  the  narrowest 
part.  It  may  further  be  pointed  out  that  there  remains 
a  rock  inscription  on  either  side  of  the  pass  dating  from 
a  period  many  hundreds  of  years  prior  to  the  time  of 
Ibrahim. 

So  much  for  this  ancient  highway  of  nations,  which 
has  resounded  with  the  tramp  of  the  armies  of  Cyrus, 
Alexander,   Cicero,    Harun-al-Kaschid,    and    Ibrahim 

1  Journal  E.G.S.,  October  1903. 


40  ACROSS  THE  TAURUS. 

Pasha,  and  literally  rung  with  the  clash  of  arms  during 
the  prolonged  era  of  Byzantine  and  Arab  conflict.  It 
must  be  with  a  sigh  of  regret  that  the  sentimental 
learn  that  its  day  of  greatness  has  all  but  run  its  course, 
since,  contrary  to  popular  supposition,  its  importance  as 
a  highway  is  not  destined  to  be  revived  by  the  passage 
of  an  iron  way,  which  will  leave  the  present  road  at 
Ak  Keupri  and  descend  to  the  Cilician  plain  by  the 
gorge  of  the  Tchakid  Su.  But  of  this  I  shall  have  more 
to  say  later  on  in  a  chapter  devoted  to  a  discussion  of 
the  railway  question. 

After  leaving  the  defile  the  road  passes  down  a  glen, 
through  superb  mountain  scenery,  and  finally  debouches 
on  to  the  plain  from  among  the  low  foothills  of  Taurus, 
a  mile  or  two  from  the  nearest  point  on  the  Mersina- 
Tarsus-Adana  Railway,  which  runs  from  the  coast  east- 
ward to  the  capital,  over  a  distance  of  forty-one  miles. 
From  here  another  three  miles  brought  me  to  Tarsus, 
whence  I  took  train  to  Mersina,  glad  enough  after  the 
discomfort  of  my  eight  days'  journey  through  the 
Taurus  to  avail  myself  of  the  kind  hospitality  ex- 
tended to  me  by  the  British  Consul,  Colonel  Massy. 


THE  CILICIAN  PLAIN.  41 


CHAPTEE    IV. 

CILICIA. 

Cilicia,  ancient  and  modern — Mersina,  a  typical  seaport  of  the  Near  East — 
Natural  disadvantages  as  a  port — The  ancient  harbour  of  Tarsus — The 
ruins  at  Soli  Pompeiopolis — St  Paul's  Institute  at  Tarsus — Course  of 
the  Cydnus  diverted  by  Justinian — The  Dinck  Tash — Fallacy  of  the 
legend  that  it  is  the  tomb  of  Sardanapalus — Relics  at  Tarsus — The  site 
of  the  ancient  capital — Adana,  capital  of  Cilicia — Description  of — 
Population  of — The  American  mission — Turkish  rule — Want  of  public 
works — Instances  of  official  corruption — The  cotton  industry — Climate 
—  Leave  Adana — Ruined  castles — A  gorgeous  sunset — Nature  of 
Eastern  Cilicia — Across  the  Giaour  Dagh—  Excavations  at  Zingerli — 
Reach  Aleppo. 

The  Cilician  Plain  consists  of  two  distinct  halves  :  the 
western  plain,  a  flat,  low-lying  expanse  of  rich  stone- 
less  loam,  bounded  on  the  south  by  the  sea,  on  the  west 
and  north  by  the  Taurus  Mountains,  and  on  the  east 
by  the  Jebel  Nur,  which  divides  it  from  the  eastern 
plain.  The  latter,  known  also  as  the  Chukur  Ova,  is 
likewise  bounded  on  the  north  by  Taurus,  while  on  the 
east  it  is  shut  in  by  the  range  of  the  Giaour  Dagh, 
known  to  the  ancients  as  Amanus.  The  whole  of  the 
eastern  plain  is  broken  by  low  hills,  the  Jebel  Nur  and 
the  foothills  which  run  up  to  Taurus  and  the  Giaour 
Dagh,  and  is  in  parts  marshy.  Both  parts  can  boast  of 
ancient  cities  and  ruins  which  speak  of  an  early  civil- 
isation, such  as  Tarsus  in  the  western  and  Anazarba  in 
the  eastern  plain ;  but  the  Anazarba  of  to-day  retains 


42  CILICIA. 

none  of  the  importance  with  which  it  was  once  invested 
as  the  capital  of  Cilicia  Secunda  in  the  days  of  Augustus 
and  Tiberius ;  nor  can  there  be  much  resemblance  be- 
tween the  ancient  Tarsus  of  a  million  inhabitants  and 
the  moderate  town  which  bears  that  name  to-day. 
Nevertheless,  though  the  glory  has  departed  never  to 
return,  Cilicia  may  yet  rise  again  from  the  depths  of 
obscurity  to  which  it  has  fallen,  and  claim  for  itself  in 
the  future  some  small  share  of  attention  from  the 
merchant  and  politician. 

At  the  present  time,  judged  by  the  modern  standards 
of  trade  and  commerce,  Mersina  may  be  considered  the 
town  of  chief  importance,  since  it  is  the  seaport  through 
which  pass  the  imports  to  and  exports  from  the  district, 
while  Tarsus  and  Adana,  the  capital  of  the  province 
and  centre  of  administration,  rank  next,  being  con- 
nected with  the  coast  by  rail.  In  the  event  of  the 
trans  -  continental  rail  being  constructed  as  at  pres- 
ent designed,  the  importance  of  Adana  will  increase, 
while  Tarsus,  deprived  of  the  command  of  the  one 
great  artery  of  communication  with  the  interior,  must 
dwindle  in  proportion,  and  Mersina,  should  a  more 
suitable  harbour  be  found  at  the  terminus  of  a  branch 
from  the  main  line  to  the  coast,  sink  into  comparative 
insignificance.  For  the  time  being,  however,  whatever 
may  be  its  future  fate,  Mersina  flourishes,  and  it  was 
to  Mersina  that  I  hurried  as  soon  as  the  somewhat 
scanty  service  of  the  M.T.A.  railway  admitted  of  my 
doing  so. 

Arrived  here,  I  found  a  typical  seaport  town  of  the 
Near  East.  A  central  thoroughfare,  enclosed  on  either 
side  by  the  familiar  shops  of  an  oriental  bazaar,  which 
have  the  appearance  of  little  square  boxes  with  one 
side  knocked  out ;  the  vendors  squatting  idly  among 
their  wares,  which  are  displayed  on  a  counter  filling 


MERSINA.  43 


the  open  side  of  the  box  and  as  often  as  not  straying 
down  into  the  street  in  front,  consisting  largely  of  fruit 
and  vegetables,  bread  and  a  variety  of  native  delicacies ; 
here  and  there  on  the  shady  side  of  the  street  a  little 
knot  of  men,  seated  on  what  ought  to  be  the  pavement, 
engaged  in  a  game  of  dice  or  cards  amid  a  group  of 
interested  onlookers, — the  whole  centre  of  the  thorough- 
fare filled  during  the  day  with  a  polyglot  collection  of 
leisurely  humanity,  strolling  ever  backwards  and  for- 
wards, with  the  infinitely  superior  air  of  those  in  whose 
calculations   of  life  time   has   found    no   place,   among 
w^hom   camels,    ponies,    and   donkeys,    laden  with    the 
various  products  of  the  country,  pick  their  way  with 
stoical  indifference.    Passing  through  this  central  bazaar, 
an  open  space,  which  with  a  stretch  of  imagination  may 
be  dubbed  a  square,  will  be  found,  in  the  centre  of 
which  a  caravan  of  camels  may  perhaps  be  seen ;  while 
beyond  this  again  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town  little 
enclosures  fill  the  view,  surrounded  by  straggling  hedges 
of  prickly-pear,  amid  which,  half-hidden  by  orchards  of 
fruit-trees,  stand  the  better-built  houses  of  the  Euro- 
pean residents.     Such  is  a  description  of  many  a  coast 
town  of  the  Nearer  East.     Such  is  Mersina. 

I  have  said  that  its  importance  is  due  to  its  being 
the  seaport  town  through  which  passes  the  bulk  of  the 
commerce  of  Cilicia.  This  is  true ;  but  for  the  reason 
that  there  is  no  other,  for  its  natural  disadvantages  in 
this  respect  are  great.  Nature,  so  prodigal  of  inlets 
and  harbours  on  the  western  extremity  of  Asia  Minor, 
has  been  severely  frugal  on  the  south,  and  the  best 
accommodation  that  Mersina  can  offer  is  that  of  an 
open  roadstead,  in  which  ships  have  perforce  to  lie  at 
distances  of  from  a  mile  to  two  miles  from  the  coast. 
It  cannot  compare  with  the  advantages  formerly  offered 
by  the  land-locked  harbour  of  Tarsus,  which  went  so 


44  GILIOIA. 

far  to  confer  upon  that  city  its  former  greatness ;  but 
the  Rhegma, — once  a  lagoon,  later  an  inland  lake, — 
which  by  the  aid  of  human  art  was  made  into  an 
excellent  and  commodious  harbour,  is  now  a  marsh, 
and  the  Cydnus,  which  then  flowed  through  it  to  the 
sea,  now  passes  by  on  the  east,  receiving  from  it  but 
the  overflow  of  a  swamp,  which  renders  useless  a  large 
extent  of  what  might  under  happier  circumstances  be 
excellent  land.  For  this  reason  I  have  said  that  the 
prosperity  of  Mersina  is  likely  to  wane  if,  as  is  likely, 
a  branch  line  is  built  from  the  Baghdad  railway  to 
some  point  on  the  bay  of  Ayas.  It  is  true  that  the 
Pyramus  is  filling  up  the  latter ;  but  the  day  when  a 
port  there  would  be  rendered  useless  owing  to  land 
encroachment  is  too  far  distant  to  warrant  considera- 
tion, whereas  the  silt  brought  down  by  the  Cydnus 
and  Saros  and  deposited  in  the  vicinity  of  Mersina  is 
distributed  along  the  coast-line  by  a  strong  current 
which  sets  west,  so  that,  though  land-encroachment  is 
greatly  retarded,  the  sea  is  kept  constantly  shallow  for 
a  considerable  distance. 

Farther  west  along  the  coast  may  be  seen  the  remains 
of  an  artificial  harbour  at  Soli  Pompeiopolis,  but  the 
facilities  oflered  by  nature  are  no  greater  here  than 
they  are  at  Mersina.  Little  seems  to  be  known  of  the 
ancient  town  that  stood  there.  I  drove  out  one  morn- 
ing over  a  partially  possible  road,  which,  however,  had 
been  made  use  of  in  one  part  by  a  cultivator  of  the  soil, 
who  was  in  the  act  of  ploughing  it  when  I  drove  by. 
Being  in  Turkey,  I  could  hardly  credit  it  that  this  over- 
sight on  the  part  of  the  son  of  toil  was  due  to  super- 
abundant zeal,  and  concluded,  therefore,  that  it  was 
owing  to  an  inability  to  decide  where  his  field  ended 
and  the  road  began.  In  addition  to  the  remnants  of 
a  harbour,  already  alluded  to,  there  remain  parts  of  an 


TARSUS.  45 

aqueduct  from  the  mountains  to  the  north,  and  not  far 
from  the  shore  a  long  Hne  of  stone  pillars,  surmounted 
by  well-preserved  carved  capitals. 

The  16|-  miles  to  Tarsus  can  be  covered  in  fifty 
minutes  by  the  railway,  and  I  found  a  hearty  welcome 
awaitinof  me  on  arrival  from  the  Kev.  Dr  Christie,  who 
presides  over  a  college  for  young  men  known  as  St 
Paul's  Institute,  which  boasts  of  nearly  200  students, 
129  of  whom  at  the  time  of  my  visit  were  boarders. 
Here  I  saw  Greeks  and  Armenians  being  instructed  in 
French  and  trigonometry,  and  competing  later  in  the 
sports  which  one  inevitably  associates  with  an  English 
public  school.  The  present  town,  which  has  a  large 
and  well-supplied  bazaar,  has  a  population  of  about 
25,000.  To  the  archaeologist  and  the  historian  it  pre- 
sents many  problems  of  the  greatest  interest — problems 
still,  thanks  to  the  objection  raised  by  Turkish  auto- 
cracy to  the  revelation  which  excavation  invariably 
makes  of  the  perished  splendour  of  a  former  age, 
which  casts  so  searching  a  glare  on  the  decay  and 
squalor  of  the  present.  Oil  the  eastern  side  of  the 
town  the  river  Cydnus  forms  a  fine  cascade.  At  one 
time  it  undoubtedly  flowed  through  the  city,  but  its 
course  was  diverted  by  Justinian  (a.d.  527-563)  to 
prevent  a  recurrence  of  a  flood  which  had  on  a  former 
occasion  washed  away  part  of  the  town. 

Situated  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  among  the 
many  gardens  of  fruit-trees  which  surround  it,  stands  a 
massive  rectangular  construction  of  hard  concrete,  or 
rather  a  series  of  blocks  separated  by  open  spaces, 
known  as  the  Dinek  Tash  or  overturned  stone,  which 
has  for  some  reason  or  other  succeeded  in  arrogating  to 
itself  a  certain  measure  of  distinction  as  the  tomb  of 
Sardanapalus.  The  futility  of  any  such  pretension  is 
sufficiently  obvious  in  light  of  the  fact  that,  given  to 


46  GILICIA. 

begin  with  that  there  was  such  a  person  as  Sardanapalus 
and  that  he  was  buried  in  Cihcia,  it  is  to  Anchiale  that 
the  evidence  of  the  Greek  writers  would  point  as  the 
probable  resting-place  of  his  remains.  Thus  Strabo  : 
"Anchiale,  a  little  way  above  the  sea,  founded  by 
Sardanapalus,  says  Aristobulus,  who  also  says  there  is 
there  a  tomb  ^  of  Sardanapalus,  and  a  stone  figure  joining 
the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  as  if  snapping  them,  and 
an  inscription  in  Assyrian  writing  to  the  following 
effect :  '  Sardanapalus,  son  of  Anacyndaraxis,  built 
Anchiale  and  Tarsus  in  one  day.  Eat,  drink,  play, 
nothing  else  is  worth  even  that — i.e.,  a  snap  of  the 
finger.'"  Another  inconvenient  objection  to  such  a 
pretension  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  hard 
concrete,  of  which  the  building  is  composed,  is  un- 
doubtedly Koman,  while  the  practical  will  find  a  still 
more  cogent  reason  for  disbelief  in  the  almost  certain 
knowledge  that  no  such  person  as  Sardanapalus  ever 
existed.  His  name,  it  is  true,  has  been  identified  with 
that  of  Ashurbanipal,  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  later 
Assyrian  kings;  but  the  luxurious  and  effeminate 
character  given  him  by  the  Greeks  in  no  way  cor- 
responds to  what  is  known  of  that  monarch,  and  it  is 
fairly  safe  to  assume  that  Sardanapalus,  as  such,  may 
be  put  aside  as  the  creation  of  a  too  lively  imagination. 
The  most  probable  conjecture  with  regard  to  the  Dinek 
Tash  is,  that  it  is  the  core  of  a  Grseco-E-oman  temple 
from  which  the  marble  and  stone  facings  have  been 
removed. 

That  it  is  only  necessary  to  dig  anywhere  in  the 
present  town  to  find  remains  of  the  Tarsus  of  old  of  a 
million  inhabitants  is  a  well-known  fact,  and  at  every 
corner  large  square-cut  stones  and  portions  of  old  stone 

1  The  word  used  is  M»"?Ma>  which  might  equally  and  perhaps  more  probably 
mean  monument. 


ADANA.  47 

pillars,  built  roughly  into  the  foundations  of  modern 
houses,  catch  the  eye.  A  point  of  extreme  interest  is  a 
mound  at  the  edge  of  the  present  town,  thought  to 
mark  the  site  of  the  ancient  capital,  and  standing  on 
the  summit  one  would  indeed  have  to  be  built  in  a 
callous  mould  to  be  unconscious  of  the  strange  spell 
of  the  romance  of  history  as  it  is  borne  in  upon  one 
that  here,  on  this  very  spot,  it  in  all  probability  was 
that  Mark  Antony  "  enthroned  i'  the  market-place  did 
sit  alone  whistling  to  the  air,"  while  "  the  city  cast  her 
people  out  upon  her,"  to  gaze  on  the  syren  queen  of 
Egypt,  Cleopatra,  whose  barge  "  like  a  burnished  throne 
burn'd  on  the  water,"  as,  decked  in  a  wonderful  disguise 
representing  Aphrodite,  she  sailed  up  the  Cydnus  river. 
There  remains  now  for  me  to  make  a  passing  refer- 
ence to  Adana,  and  the  chief  towns  of  the  Cilicia  of 
to-day  may  be  said  to  have  been  enumerated.  The 
morning  train  from  Mersina  starts  at  this  time  of  year 
at  about  8  a.m.,  and  steaming  leisurely  eastward  across 
the  absolute  level  of  the  western  plain,  manages  to 
spend  precisely  two  and  a  half  hours  in  covering  the 
forty-one  miles  to  the  terminus,  a  performance  which  no 
doubt  appeals  to  the  inherent  sense  of  dignity  which 
prevades,  and  is  an  inalienable  attribute  of  the  East. 
The  town  is  built  partly  on  an  isolated  hill  and  partly 
on  the  plain,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Saros  river, 
spanned  here  by  an  excellent  bridge  ;  and,  in  addition 
to  a  good  bazaar  displaying  a  vast  assortment  of  the 
piece-goods  of  the  West,  can  boast  of  well-built  govern- 
ment buildings,  churches,  and  mosques.  I  gazed  in 
through  the  gateway  of  the  most  interesting  of  the 
last,  said  to  be  built  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  church, 
but  could  see  but  little  of  the  architectural  beauty  of 
the  interior,  Europeans  being  prohibited  from  entering 
without  special  permission.     Mr  Chambers,  the  hospit- 


48  GILICIA. 


able  chief  of  the  Adana  branch  of  the  American  mission, 
who  was  kind  enough  to  invite  me  to  be  his  guest 
during  my  stay  in  the  town,  put  the  population  at 
about  50,000,  —  an  estimate,  however,  which  he  ad- 
mitted was  formed  without  any  accurate  data.-^ 

Such  in  brief  are  the  three  chief  towns  of  modern 
Cilicia,  a  country  of  enormous  agricultural  potentiality, 
which,  under  good  management,  could  undoubtedly 
become,  to  some  extent  at  any  rate,  a  granary  of 
Europe.^  But  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  same  methods 
which  have  made  Turkish  government  a  byword  for 
maladministration  and  corruption  are  as  prevalent 
here  as  they  are  in  any  other  portion  of  the  Ottoman 
empire.  The  result  is  that  the  peasants,  squeezed 
beyond  endurance  to  produce  a  sum  of  sufficient  magni- 
tude to  satisfy  the  central  government,  after  it  has 
been  materially  reduced  at  the  hands  of  the  different 
official   harpies   who    have   the    handling  of  it  on  its 

1  The  trade  of  the  vilayet  of  Adana  for  the  year  1903  amounted  to 
£2,431,844,  divided  as  follows  :  Imports,  £629,450  ;  exports,  £1,802,394. 
Of  the  imports,  goods  to  the  value  of  £209,907  came  from  the  United  King- 
dom, India,  Egypt,  and  Cyprus.  Of  the  exports,  goods  to  the  value  of 
£269,365  were  destined  for  the  United  Kingdom  and  British  dependencies. 
The  chief  articles  of  import  are  :  Alcohol,  cotton  cloth,  and  manufactured 
goods,  cloth  and  woollen  goods,  cotton  yarn,  hides,  iron-ware,  indigo,  jute 
sacks  and  canvas,  machinery,  silk  stuffs,  and  sugar.  Of  export :  Barley, 
cotton,  flour,  gum  tragacanth,  linseed,  oats,  sesame  seed,  timber,  wheat, 
wool,  and  yellow  berries. 

It  is  also  satisfactory  to  observe  that  whereas  the  number  of  steamers 
flying  the  British  flag  at  Mersina  in  1901  was  88,  the  number  in  1903 
amounted  to  111  out  of  a  total  of  368. 

2  That  the  country  was  at  one  time  an  exceedingly  rich  one  is  certain. 
See  Schlumberger's  '  L'epopee  byzantine  a  la  fin  du  x**  siecle ' :  "  Ce  pays  de 
Cilicie,  le  pachalik  actuel  d'Adana,  pays  aujourd'hui  desole,  .  .  .  etait  a 
I'epoque  on  y  penetra  I'armee  de  Nicephore,  d'une  richesse  infinie,  d'une 
fertilite  incomparable.  Les  Sarrasins  solidement  etablis  dans  toutes  les 
anciennes  cites  Byzantines,  y  avaient  apporte  leurs  admirables  procedcs 
d'agriculture,  leur  systfeme  perfectionne  d'irrigation.  Toute  cette  campagne 
etait  un  vaste  jardin,  et  chaque  ete  les  belles  moissons  Ciliciennes  tombaient 
abondantes  sous  la  faucille  des  moissonneurs  musulmans.'' 


TURKISH  CORRUPTION.  49 

devious  way  to  the  capital,  give  up  labouring  to  pro- 
duce more  than  is  sufficient  to  afford  them  a  bare 
livelihood,  since  there  is  little  or  no  chance  of  their 
securing  any  of  the  profits  accruing  from  a  surplus. 
Nothing  is  done  by  the  Government  in  the  shape  of 
public  works  of  utility,  such  as  schemes  for  drainage 
and  irrigation ;  nor  is  any  encouragement  given  to 
those  who  volunteer  to  inaugurate  the  very  works 
which  those  whose  duty  it  should  be  to  undertake  them 
so  sadly  neglect. 

It  is  now  some  years  since  a  group  of  Europeans 
interested  in  the  Mersina  -  Adana  railway  sought  a 
concession  for  a  scheme  of  drainage  and  irrigation. 
A  petition  was  drawn  up  in  which  it  was  stated  that 
a  certain  sum  of  money  was  to  be  paid  for  every  acre 
of  land  that  could  be  irrigated  were  the  concession 
granted,  and  the  vali  was  approached  and  asked  to 
co-operate  with  the  promoters  in  granting  facilities  for 
the  acquisition  of  the  signatures  of  the  agriculturists 
of  the  district.  "  Oh  yes,"  replied  the  calculating 
governor  of  the  province,  "  but  how  much  am  I  to 
receive  for  my  assistance  ? "  The  promoters  are  still 
biding  in  patience,  and  the  land  is  still  unirrigated  and 
undrained.^  The  vali  in  asking  how  large  his  bribe 
was  to  be  was  doing  nothing  unusual  whatever ; 
indeed  he  would  hardly  have  been  a  Turkish  gov- 
ernor if  he  had  not  done  so.  A  short  time  before  my 
arrival  at  Adana  the  public  prosecutor,  whose  duty 
necessitated  his  prosecuting  a  criminal  for  murder, 
oddly  enough  found  himself  at  that  very  time  the 
recipient  of  a  handsome  gift  amounting  to  £200.     The 

^  At  the  time  of  my  visit  a  group  of  capitalists,  possessed  of  great  influ- 
ence at  Constantinople,  were  considering  the  advisability  of  pressing  for 
a  concession.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  an  improvement  may  ere  long 
be  brought  about  in  the  condition  of  the  agriculturists  of  Cilicia. 

D 


50  GILICIA. 


prisoner  was  found  not  guilty.  Curious  coincidence, 
muses  the  ingenuous  stranger ;  elementary  example  of 
cause  and  effect  scoffs  the  resident,  well  versed  in  the 
tortuous  byways  of  Ottoman  jurisprudence  ! 

Under  these  circumstances  it  is  surprising  to  find 
as  much  commercial  and  agricultural  development  as 
there  is.  In  spite  of  every  disadvantage  a  certain 
amount  of  wheat  is  grown,  and  the  cotton  industry  is 
in  a  flourishing  condition.  There  are  cotton-mills  at 
Adana,  Tarsus,  and  Hamidiyeh.  In  the  hands  of 
Messrs  Trypanni  the  factory  at  Adana  does  a  large 
and  flourishing  business.  Founded  by  the  father  of 
the  present  proprietors,  who  made  a  fortune  by  the 
export  of  cotton  to  America  during  the  war  of  18 GD- 
IS 64,  the  mills  now  have  an  average  annual  output  of 
1,800,000  lb.  of  cotton  thread,  and  employ  from  600  to 
800  hands.  The  thread  finds  its  way  to  various  parts 
of  the  country,  where  it  is  made  up  into  cloth,  and  in 
a  good  year  the  seed  extracted  from  the  raw  cotton  is 
exported  to  England  to  make  cotton-seed  oil. 

The  chmate  of  the  plaints  unpleasant  in  the  summer, 
when  the  pests  of  the  insect  world  issue  forth  in  their 
thousands  from  the  low-lying  marshes  in  the  vicinity 
of  Tarsus,  and  the  European  population  of  Mersina 
moves  in  a  body  to  the  hills  near  by.  That  the  heat 
is  appreciable  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  an 
enterprising  company  which  was  a  short  time  ago 
formed  in  Tarsus  for  making  ice,  paid  no  less  than 
40  per  cent  the  first  year,  though  charging  only  the 
modest  sum  of  |-d.  per  oha  (2f  lb.). 

Having  interviewed  the  va/i,;  [Bahri  Pasha,  a  Kurd- 
ish prince  who  exercises  a  strong  if  masterful  authority 
over  his  district,  and  having  obtained  a  huyuruldu  or 
open  letter,  and  the  necessary  zaptieh,  I  continued  my 
journey  on  the  morning  of  January  5.     The  road  runs 


A    GORGEOUS  SUNSET.  51 

across  the  rich  level  plain  to  Missis,  a  village  on  the 
Jihun  river  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Jebel  Nur, 
which  I  have  already  described  as  dividing  the  two 
halves  of  the  Cilician  plain.  A  little  farther  on,  on 
the  far  side  of  the  river,  which  is  crossed  by  a  good 
stone  bridge,  the  remains  of  a  building  of  solid  masonry 
comes  into  view,  one  of  many  such  ruins  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  the  eastern  half  of  the  Cilician  plain,  one 
and  all  bearing  eloquent  testimony  to  the  severity  of 
the  border  warfare  of  which  the  country  was  formerly 
the  scene. 

Towards  evening  on  the  second  day  we  passed  the 
ruins  of  a  famous  stone  castle,  Toprak  Kaleh,  on  the 
summit  of  a  low  hill ;  and  a  few  minutes  later,  a  short 
time  before  reaching  Osmaniyeh,  a  small  village  where 
we  intended  halting  for  the  night,  were  treated  to  one 
of  those  magnificent  sunsets  which  are  perhaps  char- 
acteristic rather  of  the  stormy  skies  of  the  wild  west 
than  of  the  placid  serenity  which  one  associates  with 
the  eastern  heavens.  As  we  marched  steadily  east 
the  snow  -  clad  peaks  in  front  of  us  were  suddenly 
suffused  with  a  glow  of  pink,  while  to  the  west  a 
crimson  band  shot  across  the  horizon,  resting  for  a 
moment  on  the  low  hills  behind  us,  to  cast  a  lurid  light 
across  a  heavy  bank  of  scowling  storm-clouds  imme- 
diately above  ere  it  gradually  faded  from  view,  leaving 
the  landscape  as  it  went  to  the  neutral  tint  of  night. 

The  whole  of  the  eastern  division  of  Cilicia  presents 
a  more  broken  surface  than  does  the  western,  and 
warrants  its  description  by  Schlumberger  as  "  un  pays 
fort  accidente."  In  places  I  observed  the  land  being 
ploughed  with  primitive  implements  of  wood  drawn 
by  oxen  ;  in  others  large  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of 
goats  were  to  be  seen,  and  sometimes  big  droves  of 
cattle.     A  good  deal  of  scrub  is  observable  in  parts, 


52  CILICIA. 

while  in  others  tall  reeds  and  patches  of  pampas  grass 
give  evidence  of  marshy  ground. 

Osmaniyeh  is  the  last  village  we  passed  in  Cilicia, 
and  a  short  distance  beyond  the  road  turns  into  the 
Giaour  Dagh  Mountains.  Crossing  by  the  col  above 
Hassan  Beyli,  we  descended  to  the  remarkable  valley 
of  the  Kara  Su,  which  stretches  from  Marash  in  the 
north  to  Antioch  in  the  south,  passing  on  our  way 
down  it  the  German  excavations  at  Zingerli,  which 
have  laid  bare  a  number  of  Hittite,  Assyrian,  and  old 
Semitic  monuments.  Crossing  the  valley  to  the  south 
of  Islayeh,  we  made  our  way  over  the  southern  ex- 
tremity of  the  Kurt  Dagh  to  Killis,  and  thence 
through  vast  groves  of  olives,  and  later  across  smil- 
ing acres  of  corn  land  to  Aleppo,  which  we  reached 
on  the  eighth  day  after  our  start  from  Adana. 


THE   CITADEL   OF  ALEPPO.  53 


CHAPTEE  V. 

ALEPPO   TO   DEIR-EL-ZOR. 

Aleppo— Its  bazaars— Population— Importance  as  a  distributing  centre- 
More  tales  of  Turkish  administration— Routes  between  Aleppo  and 
Mossul— The  northern  route— The  southern  route  — The  proposed 
railway  route— Internal  disorder— Reason  for  travelling  by  southern 
route— Start  from  Aleppo— Nature  of  country— A  long  march  and  a 
scanty  dinner— Meskineh— The  lands  of  the  Euphrates— Historical 
interest  of  the  river  banks— Deir— A  visit  from  a  Turkish  colonel— I 
secure  an  escort— Road-making— The  disadvantages  of  an  absence  of 
road. 

Aleppo,  more  generally  known  in  the  country  as  Haleb, 
is  a  large  town,  possessed  in  one  quarter  of  many  well- 
built — for  Turkey  almost  imposing — houses.  The  chief 
feature,  however,  which  attracts  attention  is  the  castle 
or  citadel,  consisting  of  a  steep  artificial  mound  crowned 
by  a  wall,  which  encloses  the  various  buildings  on  the 
summit,  the  whole  considered  by  the  inhabitants  to  be 
impregnable.  Both  the  walls  and  buildings,  however, 
are  in  bad  preservation,  and  the  best  preserved  and  far 
most  massive  portions  now  extant  are  the  solidly  built 
fortification,  which  gives  entrance  to  certain  subter- 
ranean chambers,  by  means  of  which  access  is  obtained 
to  the  summit,  and  the  stone  bridge  across  the  moat 
which  surrounds  the  whole  mound.  The  bazaars  are 
worthy  of  note,  consisting  of  a  labyrinth  of  covered-in 
arcades  which  run  from  one  into  another,  and  cover  a 


54  ALEPPO   TO  DEIR-EL-ZOR. 

very  large  extent  of  ground.  The  description  of  them 
given  by  Dr  Kussell  upwards  of  a  century  ago,  in  his 
'  Natural  History  of  Aleppo,'  holds  good  to-day  :  "  The 
bazaars  or  markets  are  lofty  stone  edifices  in  the  form 
of  a  long  gallery,  for  the  most  part  very  narrow,  arched 
above,  or  else  roofed  with  wood.  The  shops,  which  are 
either  placed  in  recesses  of  the  wall  or  formed  of 
wooden  sheds  projecting  from  it,  are  ranged  upon  each 
side  upon  a  stone  platform  two  or  three  feet  high,  which 
runs  the  whole  length  of  the  gallery.  In  many  of  the 
old  bazaars  these  shops  are  so  confined  as  barely  to 
leave  room  for  the  shopkeeper  to  display  his  wares  and 
for  himself  and  one  guest  to  sit  conveniently.  The 
buyers  are  obliged  to  remain  standing  on  the  outside  ; 
and  when  opposite  shops  happen  to  be  in  full  employ- 
ment it  is  not  easy  for  a  passenger  to  make  his  way 
through  the  crowd." 

The  town  has  a  population  of  135,000,  including  a 
Ptussian  Consul- General,  a  Russian  Yice-Consul,  and 
one  Russian  subject !  and  its  chief  importance  lies  in 
its  being  a  large  trade  depot  and  distributing  centre  for 
the  surrounding  vilayets.  It  is  probable,  therefore, 
that  the  advent  of  the  railw^ay  will  tend  to  lessen  rather 
than  to  increase  its  importance.  From  the  south  it 
will  eventually  be  connected  with  Damascus  when  the 
French  line  via  Homs  and  Hamah,  which  has  reached 
the  latter  place,  is  completed.  On  the  north  a  branch 
line  will  leave  the  German  main  line  at  Tel  Habesch, 
a  little  east  of  Killis,  and  cover  the  60  kilometres 
between  that  place  and  Aleppo.  It  has  also  some 
importance  as  a  military  centre,  and  in  addition  to 
the  many  well-built  stone  houses  belonging  to  private 
individuals  in  the  Azizieh  quarter  —  built  of  the 
excellent  stone  which  is  found  close  by  —  there  are 
large    barracks   where   a  regiment   of  cavalry,   a  bat- 


TURKISH  ORDER  AND  JUSTICE.  55 

tery  of  artillery,   and  two  regiments  of  infantry  are 
quartered. 

Tales  of  Turkish  order  and  justice  are,  of  course,  as 
plentiful  here  as  they  are  in  any  other  part  of  Turkey. 
A  company  of  soldiers  had  in  one  town  not  so  very  far 
off  stormed  and  captured  the  telegraph  -  office,  and 
having  put  themselves  into  communication  with  the 
capital,  declared  their  intention  of  monopolising  the 
wires  until  some  portion  at  least  of  their  arrears  of  pay 
had  been  made  good.  In  another  direction  I  heard 
at  first  hand  of  a  case  of  a  man  who  had  been  dead 
for  upwards  of  ten  years  having  to  pay  the  military 
exemption  tax  !  But  perhaps  the  most  comic  example 
of  Turkish  administration  which  came  under  my  notice 
was  a  little  contretemps  in  connection  with  the  mail- 
bags.  Some  apprehension  was  being  felt  lest  the  plague, 
which  was  prevalent  at  Damascus,  should  spread  to 
Aleppo.  Strict  quarantine  regulations  were  conse- 
quently enforced  against  that  city,  among  others  a 
decree  going  forth  that  all  mail-bags  were  to  be  fumi- 
gated. Fumigation  was  carried  on  with  great  zest, 
and  it  was  probably  with  far  greater  disgust  than 
surprise  that  the  European  community,  while  patiently 
awaiting  the  delivery  of  their  letters,  learnt  that  the 
fumigation  had  gone  further  than  was  intended,  and 
that  the  whole  of  their  mail  had  been  consumed  ! 

From  Aleppo  to  Mossul  the  traveller  has  a  choice  of 
routes.  Perhaps  the  best  known  and  least  exposed  to 
Arab  raids  is  the  road  by  Diarbekr  and  Mardin,  which 
is  said  to  be  much  patronised  by  caravans  for  the  latter 
reason.  This  is  the  northern  route.  Another  route, 
making  a  detour  to  the  south,  but  shorter  than  that  by 
Diarbekr,  runs  straight  to  the  Euphrates  at  Meskineh, 
whence  it  follows  the  right  bank  of  the  river  to  Deir-el- 
Zor.       Crossing    the   river  here    by    ferry,    the    track 


56  ALEPPO   TO  DEIR-EL-ZOR. 

continues  up  the  right  bank  of  the  Khabur  river,  which 
is  crossed  at  Shehdadi,  [and  then  traverses  the  desert 
steppe  of  Central  Mesopotamia  to  the  Sinjar  Mountains 
and  Mossul.     It  is,  however,  by  neither  of  these  routes 
that  it  is  proposed  to  construct  the  Baghdad  railway. 
Running   almost    due    east    from    Killis,    it    will   pass 
through  Harran  and  Ras-el-Ain,  and  leaving  Mardin 
to  the  north  reach  Mossul  by  Nissibin.    It  had  been  my 
intention  to  travel  by  this  latter  route,   but  circum- 
stances decided  otherwise.     For  rumour  had  been  busy 
of  late,  which  by  the  beginning  of  the  New  Year  left 
little  room  for  doubt,  that  the  whole  of  the  country  in 
the  vicinity  of  Ras-el-Ain,  as  far  south  as  the  Jebel 
Abdul  Azziz,  was  in  a  state  of  seething  irritation.     It 
was  said  that  Ras-el-Ain  itself  had  become  the  centre 
of  a   vast   encampment    of  upwards   of   15,000    tents, 
and  that  there  the  arch- brigand  Ibrahim  Pasha,  with 
a  swarm  of  Hamidiyeh  myrmidons  and  an  allied  force 
of  Anazeh  Arabs,  M^as  waiting  in  readiness  for  the  ex- 
pected onslaught  of  a  horde  of  Shammar  Arabs,  they 
in  their  turn  accompanied  by  their  Kurd  allies. 

During  the  previous  year  the  Shammar  tribe  had 
suffered  heavily  at  the  hands  of  the  notorious  Ibrahim, 
and,  acting  on  the  principle  of  an  eye  for  an  eye  and 
a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  were  now  rallying  their  forces,  bent 
on  retaliation  in  the  form  of  battle,  murder,  and  sudden 
death.  Had  the  prospect  been  merely  that  of  an  inter- 
tribal fight  among  the  Arabs,  it  is  possible  that  a 
traveller  might  have  passed  through  with  impunity  ; 
but  from  all  accounts  it  mattered  little  to  the  Hamidi- 
yeh Kurds,  who  under  pretence  of  serving  the  empire 
bear  their  royal  title,  and  receive  arms  and  ammunition 
from  the  Government,  who  fell  into  their  net,  all  alike 
being  considered  equal  and  legitimate  prey. 

I  was  not  altogether  surprised,  therefore,  when  on 


THE  SOUTHERN  ROUTE  SELECTED.  57 

approaching  Ali  Pasha,  the  general  at  the  head  of  the 
"  extraordinary  command  "  in  Aleppo,  and  asking  for  an 
escort  and  permission  to  proceed,  I  was  met  with  a 
polite  but  firm  refusal.  Permission,  then,  to  travel  by 
this  route  not  being  forthcoming,  there  remained  the 
northern  route  by  Diarbekr  and  the  southern  one  by 
Deir  and  the  Sinjar  Mountains.  Under  certain  con- 
ditions in  the  dim  future,  a  branch  line  is  to  be  con- 
structed from  some  point  on  the  Baghdad  line  to 
Diarbekr,  and  it  was  even  rumoured  in  Constantinople 
that  the  main  line  itself  might  after  all  pass  that  way  ; 
but  despite  these  facts  I  decided  to  travel  by  the 
southern  route,  since  the  more  northern  was  already 
well  known  to  me  from  the  descriptions  given  of  it 
by  others,  and  the  country  traversed  by  the  southern  is 
all  part  of  the  same  plain,  and  presents  the  same  par- 
ticulars as  the  tract  between  the  Euphrates  and  the 
Tigris  vid  Harran  and  E,as-el-Ain,  through  which  the 
railway  is  to  be  constructed. 

Accordingly,  after  a  short  rest  in  Aleppo,  I  set  out 
on  the  morning  of  the  15th  January  in  a  direction 
slightly  south  of  east.  From  Aleppo  to  the  Euphrates 
at  Meskineh  the  track  lies  over  vast  stretches  of  un- 
dulating ground,  practically  treeless  (except  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  town  itself,  where  groves  of 
olives  and  pistachio-trees  are  seen),  though  large  tracts 
of  it  are  under  cultivation.  Once  through  the  groves 
which  surround  the  town,  there  is  nothing  to  relieve 
the  monotony  of  the  dreary  reaches  of  an  almost 
featureless  expanse  beyond  occasional  small  villages, 
resembling  bunched-up  conglomerations  of  giant  clay 
beehives,  and  a  number  of  artificial  mounds  which  are 
scattered  over  the  country,  or  the  saline  waters  of  the 
salt  Lake  Jebul,  which  may  be  seen  to  the  south  shim- 
mering in  the  sun. 


58  ALEPPO   TO  DEIR-EL-ZOB. 

At  Deir  Hafr,  an  Arab  village,  it  is  usual  to  spend 
the  first  night  out  of  Alej)po.  The  march  is  a  long 
one,  so  that  with  irritating  perversity  my  muleteer 
seized  the  opportunity  of  making  an  unusually  late 
start,  with  the  result  that  night  was  upon  us  long 
before  we  had  reached  our  destination.  There  being 
no  moon  till  late,  we  were  obliged  to  grope  our  way  at 
snail's  pace  over  the  plain,  with  nothing  whatsoever  to 
guide  us  but  a  camel-track,  which  under  the  circum- 
stances was  hardly  distinguishable.  The  ponies  with 
the  baggage  did  not  arrive  till  11  p.m.,  after  I  had 
dined  off  barley  bread  and  a  delectable  compound  of 
sugar  and  grapes,  the  only  food  the  Arabs  could 
produce. 

As  one  approaches  the  Euphrates  one  passes  over  a 
good  deal  of  uncultivated  plain  covered  with  short 
grass,  on  which  small  flocks  of  sheep  are  to  be  seen 
grazing,  and  on  reaching  the  river,  comes  upon  the 
three  mud  buildinofs  which  constitute  Meskineh.  Had 
the  scheme  of  navigating  the  Euphrates  from  Baghdad 
to  the  latitude  of  Aleppo  proved  practicable,  Meskineh, 
which  now  affords  the  shelter  of  a  moderate  khan, 
might  have  become  an  important  place  as  the  head- 
quarters of  the  steam  navigation.  At  the  present  day, 
however,  the  river  is  only  navigated  by  small  native 
craft,  and  the  prospects  of  Meskineh  rising  superior  to 
its  present  unpretentious  level  are  remote.-^ 

From  here  on,  the  road  lies  sometimes  in  the  river- 
plain,    sometimes  over  the   great  rolling   stretches   of 

1  In  '  The  Nearer  East '  Mr  Hogarth  says,  "  The  river  is  not  considered 
navigable  above  Eakka,  while  it  is  not  in  point  of  fact  ascended  above 
Hit."  I  could  not  learn  that  any  steam-vessel  had  ascended  the  river  even 
as  far  as  Hit  for  at  least  a  decade,  while  if  the  above  is  intended  to  refer 
to  other  vessels,  it  is  equally  incorrect,  since  shallow  native  craft  carry 
goods  from  Birejik  to  Deir,  where  they  are  transhipped  into  larger  boats, 
and  conveyed  down  the  rivei\ 


STEPPE-LAND.  59 


undulating  steppe  land  which,  for  want  of  a  better 
term,  is  usually  designated  desert.  In  point  of  fact, 
the  country  through  which  the  Euphrates  rolls  its  broad 
placid  waters  at  this  period  of  its  journey  to  the  sea 
is  a  vast  broken  waste,  showing  here  and  there  rocky 
and  stony  excrescences,  covered  for  the  greater  part 
with  short  grass  and  aromatic  scrub,  capable  of  afford- 
ing subsistence,  during  some  part  of  the  year  at  least, 
for  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  goats,  but  too  stony, 
and  possessed  of  too  precarious  a  water-supply,  to  be 
considered  arable.  Yet, — I  am  speaking  of  winter, 
when  I  passed  through,  —  despite  the  covering  of 
herbage  which  gives  the  ground  immediately  around 
one  a  colouring  of  green,  the  general  view  presented 
by  the  landscape  is  a  dreary  brown,  such  colouring  as 
I  have  described  becoming  merged  at  a  short  distance 
in  an  all-pervading  neutral  tint,  produced  by  a  com- 
bination of  the  earth  itself  and  the  faded  grey  of  the 
ubiquitous  desert  scrub,  wan  and  sad  looking  in  the 
lifeless  garb  of  winter.  Along  the  river-banks  them- 
selves thick  jungle  of  liquorice,  Euphrates  poplar,  tall, 
lank  thorn-bush,  and  kindred  growth  is  always  to  be 
found,  while  some  little  colour  is  here  and  there  infused 
into  the  scene  by  pale-green  patches  of  tamarisk,  and 
odd  little  pieces  of  riparian  cultivation.  Humanity  is 
represented  by  the  squat  black  tents  of  the  Anazeh 
Arabs,  with  their  flocks  of  sheep  and  herds  of  goats  and 
camels.  Such  existed  in  no  great  quantity  at  this 
season,  though  I  was  informed  that  in  the  summer 
months  the  whole  river-plain  between  Meskineh  and 
Abu  Hurareh,  a  ruined  fort  a  day's  journey  farther 
east,  is  alive  with  Arabs,  who  collect  to  pay  their 
annual  dues  to  the  Government. 

Between  Meskineh   and   Deir,    a    six  days'  journey, 
no  places  of  importance  are  passed,  small  mud  police- 


60  ALEPPO   TO  DEIR-EL-ZOIi. 

stations  at  intervals  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  miles 
being  the  only  form  of  permanent  habitation,  if  I 
except  the  few  small  houses  which  have  grown  up 
round  the  largest  of  them — Sabkah.  The  places  of 
greatest  historical  interest  are  Phunsah  and  Rakka, 
the  latter  on  the  left  bank  close  to  the  junction  of  the 
Belik  and  the  Euphrates.  At  the  former  place  the 
river  was  forded  by  the  army  of  Cyrus  the  younger, 
by  Darius,  both  before  and  after  Issus,  and  by 
Alexander  in  pursuit,  while  Thapsacus,  which  stood 
on  or  near  the  present  site,  has  been  identified  with 
Tiphsah,  the  eastern  boundary  of  King  Solomon's 
dominion.  The  latter,  the  site  of  Nicephorium,  is 
still  a  fair-sized  place,  and  extensive  ruins  are  visible 
around  it. 

On  January  22  I  reached  Deir,  which  is  described  as 
"  a  considerable  place  in  the  desert."  I  found  it  a 
small  town  with  two  fair  khans,  some  fairly  good 
houses,  and  a  long  central  street  and  bazaar.  An 
officer  of  rank  and  500  men  are  quartered  here,  in 
addition  to  the  usual  police,  and  on  arrival  I  left  a 
letter  of  introduction  on  him,  given  me  by  Ali  Pasha 
at  Aleppo.  Result :  in  the  midst  of  general  untidiness 
consequent  on  the  rearrangement  of  baggage  in  the 
bare  room  of  the  khan,  enter  a  smart  uniformed 
individual,  evidently  of  high  rank,  to  the  discomfiture 
of  the  Englishman  in  shirt-sleeves,  knickerbockers,  and 
shooting-boots  !  The  Colonel,  however, — for  it  was  no 
other, — was  affability  itself,  assured  me  that  there  was 
no  occasion  for  formality,  and  intimated  that  he  had 
merely  come  to  inform  me  that,  as  I  intended  crossing 
the  desert  to  Mossul,  an  escort  would  be  necessary,  and 
that,  in  compliance  with  the  wish  of  his  superior  at 
Aleppo,  he  would  supply  me  with  the  men  the  follow- 
"  How    many    men    did    he    consider 


^iV  ESCORT  ARRANGED  FOR.  61 

necessary  ? "  "  He  could  not  allow  me  to  proceed 
with  less  than  six,  and  would  arrange  for  a  larger 
number  if  I  desired  it."  I  groaned  inwardly,  desired 
my  interpreter  to  offer  him  my  profuse  thanks  for  his 
kindness,  and  to  beg  him  not  to  trouble  himself  by 
making  arrangements  for  sending  more  than  the  neces- 
sary minimum.  "  He  was  at  my  service,  and  it  should 
be  as  I  wished,"  and  for  the  next  half-hour  we  passed 
those  little  absurdities — the  Colonel  seated  on  my  only 
chair,  myself  on  the  bed — which  under  such  circum- 
stances have  perforce  to  do  duty  for  conversation. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  town  I  found  considerable  care 
being  bestowed  upon  the  construction  of  a  metalled 
road,  which  extended  for  three  or  four  miles  in  the 
direction  of  Aleppo.  This  I  learnt  was  the  work  of  a 
syndicate  of  merchants,  whose  too  sanguine  subscribers 
entertained  the  hope  that  it  might  some  day  be  laid 
with  rails.  Should  it  be  successful  in  escaping  the 
usual  fate  of  premature  collapse,  which  overtakes  most 
schemes  of  regeneration  in  Turkey,  it  will  no  doubt  be 
of  some  service  to  wheeled  traffic,  especially  if  an 
experience  which  I  witnessed  not  far  from  Deir  is  of 
common  occurrence.  Rounding  a  small  spur  of  cliffs 
which  bound  the  river-plain,  I  was  startled  by  vocifer- 
ous shouting  and  a  resounding  crash,  and  the  next 
moment  came  in  sight  of  an  araha  lying  upside  down 
in  front  of  me.  It  required  the  united  efforts  of  the 
spilt  party,  and  of  all  the  king's  horses,  and  all  the 
king's  men,  in  the  shape  of  my  escort,  who  arrived 
upon  the  scene  most  opportunely,  to  set  it  up  again. 


THE  DESERT. 


CHAPTER    VI. 


THE   DESERT. 


Crossing  the  Euphrates — The  monotonous  desolation  of  the  country — A 
surprise— A  band  of  Arab  marauders — A  peaceful  conclusion — Arab 
propensities — The  river  Gozan  of  the  Old  Testament — Crossing  the 
Khabur  river— The  Mesopotamian  steppe— A  well  in  the  desert — 
Reach  the  Jebel  Sinjar— The  Yezidis— A  punitive  expedition— An 
uncomfortable  night  —  The  country  between  Jebel  Sinjar  and  the 
Tigris— The  aspect  of  Mesopotamia  in  spring  and  in  summer— De- 
scription by  Sir  Henry  Layard. 

From  Deir  the  direct  road  to  Baghdad  continues  down 
the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates  by  Hit,  but  to  go  to 
Mossul  the  river  must  now  be  crossed  and  a  north- 
easterly direction  taken  across  the  desert  plains  of 
Mesopotamia.  After  crossing  on  the  morning  of  the 
24th,  a  lengthy  proceeding  effected  by  means  of  a 
cumbrous  ferry  propelled  by  a  vociferous  gang  of  pre- 
historic looking  Arabs  armed  with  a  motley  collection 
of  oars  and  punt-poles,  we  travelled  over  a  country 
devoid  even  of  the  attraction  hitherto  afforded  by  the 
narrow  ribbon  of  the  jungle  -  covered  banks  of  the 
Euphrates.  It  is  a  country  in  which  one  may  ride  on 
and  on  for  hours  at  a  time  without  so  much  as  seeing 
a  human  being  or  any  sign  of  human  habitation,  such 
life  as  there  is,  in  the  shape  of  Arab  encampments, 
clinging  closely  to  the  banks  of  the  Khabur  river,  which 
flows  sluggishly  south  to  mingle  its  waters  with  those 


A    GREAT  LONE  LAND.  63 

of  the  Euphrates  a  little  south  of  Deir.  It  is  in  fact 
often  only  by  a  thin  black  line  of  Arab  tents  stretching 
across  the  plain  that  it  is  possible  to  follow  the  course 
of  the  stream,  which  otherwise  becomes  indistinguish- 
able at  a  very  short  distance.  Where  these  wanderers 
pitch  their  tents  little  plots  of  land  will  be  ploughed  and 
clumsily  irrigated,  but  away  from  the  river-banks  nothing 
will  meet  the  eye  but  waste — dreary,  desolate  waste. 

Often  it  is  across  an  absolute  level  that  one  canters, 
hoping  against  hope  that  some  time  that  elusive  horizon 
in  front  will  be  reached  ;  again  it  is  across  great  billowy 
undulations  that  go  rolling  away  into  infinite  space, 
tempting  one  always  to  think  that  at  any  rate  from  the 
crest  of  the  next  something  definite  will  await  one's 
gaze.  But  the  summit  of  the  next  is  reached,  and  of 
the  one  after  that,  and  there  is  always  just  such 
another  beyond,  unrelieved  by  anything  but  the  meagre 
grass  and  rusty  scrub  which,  while  redeeming  it  from 
the  utter  destitution  of  the  true  desert,  serves  but  to 
accentuate  the  hideous  forlornness  of  the  whole  sur- 
rounding. And  so  one  relapses  into  indifi'erence  and 
jogs  wearily  along,  one's  thoughts  wandering  absently 
to  other  lands,  since  there  is  nothing  in  the  present  to 
keep  them,  thankful  when  night,  or  some  small  isolated 
police-station,  or  the  squat  black  tents  of  some  Arab 
encampment,  apprise  one  that  the  end  of  the  day's 
march  is  at  hand. 

"  Ah  ! "  The  short  sharp  exclamation  broke  the  deep 
silence  which  Nature  always  preserves  in  those  vast 
solitudes  of  hers  where  space  is  infinite  and  time  and 
distance  have  no  place.  My  wandering  thoughts  came 
tumbling  back,  from  a  wild  flight  to  distant  lands,  to  the 
reality  of  the  present.  Mohammed  had  pulled  up,  and 
was  standing  like  a  statue  gazing  into  vacancy. 
"  What  is  it  ? "  I   inquired,   as   I  pulled  up  alongside 


64  THE  DESERT. 


of  him.  He  turned  slowly  in  the  saddle  and  then 
pointed  towards  the  horizon  in  front  of  him.  I  stared 
hard,  but  saw  nothing  but  stones  and  sand  and  faded 
vegetation,  and  in  the  distance  a  small  column  of  dust 
— a  sand-devil,  I  thought ;  they  were  common  enough. 
"  I  see  nothing,"  I  said,  as  I  pulled  out  my  field-glasses 
and  swept  the  horizon.  Wait  a  moment  though. 
Yes,  through  the  field-glasses  the  little  cloud  of  dust  did 
look  different  from  the  usual  sand-devil,  which  whirled 
giddily  round  like  some  demented  sprite  and  then 
vanished,  unstable  creation  born  and  destroyed  of  the 
wind.  There  was  something  more  solid  about  this, 
and,  moreover,  the  cloud  which  but  a  moment  before 
had  been  but  the  size  of  a  man's  hand  was  rapidly 
assuming  alarming  proportions. 

Mohammed  looked  anxiously  back.  The  pack-ponies 
with  the  remainder  of  the  escort  were  crawling  leisurely 
along  some  distance  behind,  as  is  the  manner  of  pack- 
ponies  and  muleteers  when  left  to  themselves.  He 
signalled  to  them  to  hurry  on,  and  then  fixed  his  gaze 
in  front  of  him  once  more.  "  We  must  wait  here  till 
they  close  up,"  he  said.  Dark  objects  began  to  show 
amid  the  approaching  dust-cloud — numbers  of  them. 
The  truth  dawned  upon  me  like  a  flash,  and  the  revela- 
tion was  not  an  altogether  pleasant  one.  I  had  not  the 
slightest  doubt  now  what  it  was  that  was  coming 
racing  towards  us  behind  that  thin  veil  of  sand,  but  I 
asked  all  the  same.  "Yes,"  came  the  reply,  "Arabs, 
and  all  mounted."  I  glanced  over  my  shoulder  and 
noticed  that  the  rest  of  our  party  were  now  close  upon 
us,  and  then  turned  my  eyes  upon  the  object  in  front  of 
us  once  more.  I  admit  that  my  feelings  were  not  those 
of  absolute  composure.  When  you  see  a  body  of  forty 
or  fifty  mounted  men,  all  armed  with  long  spears,  which 
they  brandish  menacingly  over  their  heads,  galloping 


AN  EXCITING  MOMENT.  65 

furiously  towards  you,  and  are  unaware  of  their  exact 
intentions,  you  have  some  excuse  for  perturbation ;  and 
that  is  what  I  saw  now.  Yet  admiration  struggled  for 
a  little  foothold  too,  for  it  was  a  grand  sight.  The 
swarthy  Arabs  galloping  recklessly  over  the  desert 
plain,  their  long  white  robes  streaming  in  the  wind,  and 
their  whirling  lances  flashing  in  the  sun,  made  a  picture 
such  as  one  does  not  often  see.  They  were  so  eminently 
fitted  to  their  surroundings — wild  children  of  the  desert, 
free  as  the  winds,  born  to  be  lords  of  the  land. 

But  there  was  little  enough  time  for  musing,  for  the 
Arabs  were  now  within  rifle-shot,  and  seeing  the  rest  of 
our  party  close  up  they  halted  too,  and  one  of  them 
rode  forward  in  our  direction  a  little  ahead  of  his 
followers.  It  seemed  that  a  parley  was  desired,  and 
Mohammed  rode  slowly  out  to  meet  him,  while  we 
stayed  still  where  we  were.  I  fingered  my  revolver 
mechanically,  and  found  myself  listening  for  the  beats 
of  the  pendulum  of  time,  so  slowly  did  the  seconds 
pass.  At  last  they  met  midway,  and  a  period  of 
strained  excitement  ensued.  How  long  they  talked  I 
cannot  say,  probably  not  more  than  a  few  seconds,  but 
it  seemed  long  enough,  and  when  at  last  they  parted 
and  a  signal  from  Mohammed  warned  us  to  come  on, 
the  cry  of  the  muleteers  urging  their  charges  on  once 
more  broke  pleasantly  across  the  desert  air  and  relieved 
the  nervous  strain  which  had  hung  over  all.  As  we 
rode  slowly  forward  the  opposing  band  divided  to  right 
and  left  while  we  passed  through  between  them,  and 
the  last  that  I  saw  of  them  as  they  galloped  away  into 
space  was  a  wild  chase,  which  had  all  the  appearance  of 
a  glorified  pig-stick,  in  which  one  of  the  band  selected 
for  the  purpose  was  the  pig,  pursued  at  break -neck 
speed  by  a  delirious  and  shrieking  band  of  his  fellows 
across  the  plain. 

E 


$ 

66  THE  DESERT. 


It  is  not  always  that  a  caravan  will  pass  by  such 
a  company  with  impunity,  though  an  afFray  with 
government  soldiers  armed  with  modern  rifles  is  not 
altogether  to  the  taste  of  such  roving  bands  of  free- 
booters, unless,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  they  are 
equally  well  armed  themselves.  Wandering  over  such 
a  country  as  is  theirs,  it  is  perhaps  only  to  be  ex- 
pected that  an  independent  and  freedom -loving  people 
such  as  they  should  treat  the  moral  authority  of  the 
Porte  with  scant  respect,  and  I  thought  more  kindly 
of  my  friend  the  Colonel  at  Deir  for  his  insisting  on 
my  being  in  a  position  to  back  mere  moral  persuasion 
with  a  show  of  force. 

The  district  which  one  traverses  in  a  northern 
direction  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Khabur  river  is 
the  Gozan  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  which  Shalman- 
ezer  carried  the  captive  Israelites  in  the  reign  of 
Hoshea,  "  and  placed  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor 
by  the  river  of  Gozan."  ^  It  was  once  prosperous  and 
well  wooded,  but  now  a  few  mounds  and  scattered 
remnants  of  former  buildings  are  all  that  remain  of 
its  erstwhile  prosperity. 

About  sixty  miles  up  the  river  is  situated  a  small 
isolated  police-station,  Shehdadi,  where  the  Khabur  is 
crossed  by  means  of  a  ferry  similar  to  that  at  Deir, 
and  the  traveller  strikes  east  into  the  heart  of  the 
Mesopotamian  steppe.  A  long  stretch  it  seems  across 
the  dreary,  almost  waterless  desert,  before  the  small 
settlements  which  cling  to  the  foot  of  the  Sinjar 
mountains  are  reached.  My  ponies  were  weak  with 
long  marching  and  short  rations,  and  after  plodding 
steadily  along  from  sunrise  on   the   27th,  we  pitched 

1  2  Kings  xvii.  6.  Halah  has  been  identified  with  Sar-i-pul  i  Zohab,  the 
second  stage  on  the  Baghdad-Kermanshah  route  after  crossing  the  Persian 
frontier.      Vide  Mrs  Bishop's  '  Travels  in  Persia  and  Kurdistan,'  vol.  i. 


WATER  IN  THE  DESERT.  67 

camp  in  the  middle  of  the  plain  shortly  after  sunset. 
A  small  pool  two  parts  mud  and  two  parts  brackish 
water  which  we  passed  during  the  day,  and  at  which 
we  replenished  our  water-skins,  formed  the  centre  of 
a  large  Arab  encampment,  whose  flocks  of  sheep  and 
herds  of  camels  were  to  be  seen  straying  over  the 
plain  in  all  directions ;  but  these  once  passed,  all  signs 
of  life  vanished  once  more,  and  the  great  silence  of 
solitude  brooded  over  the  land.  Once  or  twice,  it  is 
true,  small  groups  of  horsemen,  easily  distinguishable 
in  the  distance  by  their  long  lances,  would  appear 
suddenly  on  the  summit  of  some  mound,  but  after 
taking  stock  of  our  party  they  would  as  suddenly  melt 
away  again,  lost  to  view  in  the  limitless  expanse. 

At  length  on  the  evening  of  a  cold  clear  day — 
for  the  winds  in  the  winter  are  bitter  and  the  ther- 
mometer is  apt  to  sink  low — we  reached  the  first 
villages  at  the  foot  of  the  Jebel  Sinjar,  a  limestone 
range  which,  with  the  Jebel  Abdul  Azziz,  forms  the 
only  feature  in  Mesopotamia  which  can  be  termed 
mountain.  All  along  the  footline  of  the  hills  small 
villages,  partly  Mohammedan  and  partly  Yezidi,^  are 
to  be  found,  whose  inhabitants  cultivate  the  land. 

1  The  Yezidis  are  a  people  living  for  the  most  part  scattered  over  the 
country  between  Erivan  and  Jebel  Sinjar.  Their  origin  is  unknown,  and 
their  religion  is  described  as  a  mixture  of  the  old  Babylonian  religion, 
Zoroastrianism,  Manicheeism,  and  Christianity,  and  as  having  also  an 
affinity  with  that  of  the  Ansariyeh.  They  were  at  one  time  much  perse- 
cuted by  the  Turks,  and  owe  much  of  their  present  freedom  to  the  good 
offices  of  Sir  Henry  Layard,  who  in  1848  presented  delegates  from  them 
to  Sir  Stratford  Canning,  the  British  ambassador  at  Constantinople. 
"Through  his  [Sir  Stratford  Canning's]  kindly  intercession  a  firman  or 
imperial  order  was  granted  to  the  Yezidis,  which  freed  them  from  all 
illegal  impositions,  forbade  the  sale  of  their  children  as  slaves,  secured  to 
them  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  religion,  and  placed  them  on  the  same 
footing  as  other  sects  of  the  empire.  It  was  further  promised  that  arrange- 
ments should  be  made  to  release  them  from  such  military  regulations  as 
rendered  their  service  in  the  army  incompatible  with  the  strict  observance 


68  THE  DESERT. 


By  the  greatest  bad  luck  a  flying  column  of 
Turkish  soldiers,  returning  to  Mossul  from  a  punitive 
expedition  against  the  Shammar  Arabs, — they  had  had 
an  encounter  in  the  desert  a  few  days  before,  leav- 
ing, according  to  their  own  account,  thirty  Arabs  dead 
upon  the  field,  while  they  had  despatched  eight  of 
their  own  men  severely  wounded  to  be  looked  after 
at  Deir, — had  elected  to  pass  the  night  at  the  very 
village  which  I  reached  tired  and  hungry  some  two 
hours  after  sunset,  with  the  result  that  every  house 
was  full  of  men  and  mules.  My  baggage  was  far 
behind,  and  I  was  unwillingly  constrained  to  make  the 
best  of  things  in  a  mud  shanty  along  with  half  a 
dozen  Turkish  soldiers  and  an  odd  villager  or  two, 
who  had  apparently  been  ousted  from  their  own 
houses  and  overflowed  into  ours,  as  providing  the 
only  available  space.  This  about  filled  up  the  room, 
and  all  were  settling  down  comfortably  for  the  night 
when  the  owners,  who  not  altogether  unnaturally 
seemed  to  think  that  they  had  some  claim  at  least 
to  standing-room  in  their  own  house,  appeared  upon 
the  scene.  The  difficulty,  however,  was  happily  solved 
by  the  ejection  of  the  family  donkey,  who,  with 
stolid  indiff'erence  to  the  unwonted  company,  was 
munching  straw  in  a  corner  of  the  apartment.  It 
was  certainly  a  night  to  cause  one  to  ponder  some- 
what regretfully  upon  the  discarded  comforts  of  civilis- 
ation, more  especially  when,  to  crown  all,  the  occu- 
pants insisted  on  lighting  a  smoky  wood -fire  in  the 
middle  of  the  floor — there  was  no  fireplace  or  chimney 
— and  closing  the  only  aperture,  the  door  ! 

of  their  religious  duties." — '  Discoveries  in  the  Ruins  of  Nineveh  and  Baby- 
lon,' by  A.  H.  Layard.  They  seem  to  have  many  strange  superstitions,  and, 
according  to  Dr  Wolff,  if  a  circle  be  drawn  round  them  "they  would 
rather  die  within  it  than  attempt  to  escape  out  of  it  unless  a  portion  of  the 
circle  be  effaced."—'  Bokhara,'  by  the  Eev.  Joseph  Wolff,  D.D.,  LL.D. 


THE  ME80P0TAMIAN  STEPPE.  69 

The  country  from  the  foot  of  the  Sinjar  Mountains  to 
Mossul  is  sHghtly  hilly,  while  an  occasional  village  and 
patch  of  cultivation  are  to  be  met  v^ith  ;  but  the  general 
appearance  is  sufficiently  depressing,  and  it  comes  as  an 
intense  relief  when,  from  the  summit  of  some  slight 
eminence,  the  snow-clad  wall  of  the  Tiari  heights  to 
the  east  of  the  Tigris  becomes  visible,  an  effectual 
boundary  to  the  seemingly  interminable  steppe. 

From  the  description  given  in  the  foregoing  pages 
it  will  be  gathered  that  the  scene  presented  by  the 
Mesopotamian  desert  is  anything  but  exhilarating  ;  but, 
lest  a  wrong  impression  be  gained,  it  must  be  added 
that  at  the  time  I  saw  the  country  it  was  neither 
at  its  best — nor  quite  at  its  worst.  In  spring  much 
of  the  country  teems  with  flowers  and  herbage,  and 
presents  an  appearance  of  brilliant  verdure  resembling 
rather  the  broad  stretches  of  an  English  down  than 
the  arid  reaches  of  an  Asian  desert.  Such  viridity, 
however,  is  short-lived,  and  with  the  first  feverish 
breath  of  summer  all  vegetation  withers,  as,  under  the 
fierce  glare  of  an  Eastern  sun,  the  land  becomes  scorched 
and  burnt,  and  where  for  a  few  short  weeks  a  veritable 
garden  flourished,  nothing  remains  but  a  parched  and 
dessicated  waste,  presenting  all  the  savage  horror  of 
lifeless  and  dust-strewn  desolation.  Few  Enoflishmen 
have  known  the  country  as  did  Sir  Henry  Layard,  who 
has  left  us  a  vivid  description  of  the  rapid  change  from 
spring  to  summer  :  "  The  change  to  summer  had  been 
as  rapid  as  that  which  ushered  in  the  spring.  The 
verdure  of  the  plain  had  perished  almost  in  a  day.  Hot 
winds  coming  from  the  desert  had -burnt  up  and  carried 
away  the  shrubs ;  flights  of  locusts,  darkening  the  air, 
had  destroyed  the  few  patches  of  cultivation,  and  had 
completed  the  havoc  commenced  by  the  heat  of  the 
sun." 


70  THE  LANDS  OF  THE  TIGRIS. 


CHAPTER    YII. 


THE   LANDS    OF   THE    TIGRIS. 

Curiosity  concerning  the  past — Collections  of  ancient  records — Time  the 
destroyer — Koyunjik  and  Nebi  Yunus — Nimrud — The  Germans  at 
Babylon— Mossul — Down  the  Tigris  on  a  raft— A  useful  escort ! — 
Samara  and  its  objects  of  pilgrimage — The  Malwiyeh — Latent  wealth 
of  the  lands  of  the  Tigris — Sir  William  Willcock's  scheme — British 
Government  must  interest  themselves — Chaldsea  described  by  Hero- 
dotus—Eeach  Baghdad— The  romance  of  Baghdad  is  of  the  past — A 
ffufa — Described  by  Herodotus — Baghdad  a  commercial  centre — 
Shortcomings  of  the  Turkish  Government — Fate  of  a  public  benefactor 
—  Trade  of  Baghdad — Lack  of  transport— Extraordinary  rates  of 
freight — Great  Britain  must  control  the  country  from  Baghdad  to 
the  Persian  Gulf. 

There  is  deep  down  in  the  soul  of  man  an  intense 
curiosity  concerning  the  past.  He  reads  history  and 
revels  in  the  deeds  of  men  and  nations  that  are  g-one. 
But  this  is  not  enough.  To  the  student  of  antiquity 
history  as  we  know  it  is  the  story  of  modern  times. 
Before  the  dawn  of  history,  what  then?  Who  were 
they  who  dwelt  in  the  earth  in  those  remote  times  still 
hidden  beneath  the  veil  of  oblivion,  or  appearing  but 
dimly  through  the  hazy  light  of  confused  tradition? 
Whence  came  they,  of  what  stock,  who  was  there 
before  them?  and  if  we  probe  the  question  to  the 
bottom,  what  was  the  origin  of  man  ?  After  the  ques- 
tion "  Why  am  I  here  ? "  there  is  probably  none  that 


RECORDS  OF  THE  PAST.  71 

exceeds  in  interest  that  of  "  Who  was  here  before 
me  ? "  and  there  can  be  few  who  have  not  been  assailed 
at  some  time  or  other  with  a  burning  desire  to  "  wind 
the  mighty  secrets  of  the  past  and  turn  the  key  of 
Time." 

It  is  fortunate,  therefore,  that  there  is  another  trait 
common  to  mankind  of  all  ages — namely,  an  uncon- 
querable aversion  to  being  forgotten.  Hence  all  these 
libraries  of  history,  hence,  too,  the  vast  collections  of 
ancient  records  and  inscriptions,  which  are  daily  being 
added  to  from  the  buried  cities  of  the  East,  all  telling 
strange  stories  of  kings  and  nations  long  since  dead. 
There  is  many  a  monarch  who  reigned  in  the  narrow 
strip  of  territory  between  the  two  great  rivers  of  the 
Near  East,  who  might  well  exclaim  with  the  poet, 
"  Exegi  monumentum  vere  perennius." 

I  do  not  think  that  any  expert  knowledge  of  Assyri- 
ology  is  necessary  to  arouse  one's  enthusiasm.  I  lay 
no  claim  to  anything  more  than  the  most  superficial 
acquaintance  with  the  leaves  of  the  great  book  of  the 
past,  and  when  those  learned  in  such  matters  talk 
animatedly  to  me  of  the  achievements  of  the  great 
Sharrukin,  3800  years  before  our  era,^  or  of  that  bene- 
ficent lawgiver  King  Khamurabi  and  his  code,  I  en- 
deavour to  look  wise  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  a 
discreet  silence.     Nevertheless  in  the  presence  of  the 

^  I  believe  that  the  oldest  authenticated  date  is  still  that  of  Sharrukin 
(Sargon),  King  of  Agade,  which  was  determined  by  the  discovery  of  a 
cylinder  of  Nabonidus,  the  last  King  of  Babylon  (  550  B.C.),  whereon  he 
has  described  the  finding  of  the  foundation  cylinder  of  Naram-Sin,  son  of 
Sharrukin,  in  the  great  sun-temple  at  Sippar,  "  which  for  thrice  thousand 
and  twice  hundred  years  none  of  the  kings  that  lived  before  me  had  seen." 
This  gives  3750  b.c.  as  the  date  of  Naram-Sin  (3200  +  550),  and  roughly 
3800  as  the  date  of  his  father  Sharrukin.  I  am  aware,  howevei',  that 
Assyriologists  at  the  present  time — Professor  Hilprecht,  for  instance — are 
confident  of  the  tremendously  ancient  dates  of  from  7000  to  8000  b.c, 
though  I  know  of  no  discovery  which  affoids  definite  proof  of  such  a  date. 


72  THE  LANDS   OF  THE   TIGRIS. 

hoar  ruins  of  the  past  I  fall  an  easy  victim  to  the  spell 
of  antiquity.  For  we  have  a  strange  reverence  for  all 
that  is  old.  As  I  finger  some  tablet  or  cylinder  of 
clay  scored  with  the  curious  dashes  of  the  cuneiform 
alphabet  telling  a  tale  of  the  past,  and  realise  that 
I  am  handlinof  the  actual  handiwork  of  some  monarch 
who  reigned  five  thousand  years  ago,  which  has  lain 
silent  in  the  earth  while  nations  have  come  and  gone, 
to  hand  his  fame  through  the  ages  to  a  wondering 
posterity,  I  am  conscious  of  an  extreme  fascination. 
And  now  as  I  wandered  among  the  mounds  of  Nineveh 
and  Babylon,  and  trod  in  the  courts  of  Esarhaddon 
and  Nebuchadnezzar,  I  dreamed  dreams  of  the  glory  of 
their  day,  reconstructed  the  palaces  and  temples  of 
their  monarchs  and  their  gods,  and  pictured  dimly  to 
myself  "  how  the  world  looked  when  it  was  fresh  and 
young,  and  the  great  deluge  still  had  left  it  green." 
And  when  I  returned  to  earth  again  and  gazed  on  the 
great  piles  of  debris  where  stood  great  cities,  the 
pathos  of  decay  swept  over  me,  and  I  bowed  before 
the  inexorable  power  of  the  destroyer  Time.  For  here, 
as  elsewhere.  Time  sadly  overcometh  all  things,  and 
amid  such  surroundings  the  poetic  lines  of  Sir  Thomas 
Brown  held  a  stran^-e  charm  for  me  : — 

Time  sadly  overcometh  all  things,  and  is  now  dominant  and 
sitteth  on  a  sphinx  and  looketh  into  Memphis  and  old  Thebes, 
while  his  sister  Oblivion  reclineth  semi-somnous  on  a  pyramid 
gloriously  triumphing,  making  puzzles  of  Titanian  erections,  and 
turning  old  glories  into  dreams.  History  sinketh, beneath  her 
cloud.  The  traveller  as  he  paceth  through  those  deserts  asketh 
of  her  who  builded  them  ?  And  she  mumbleth  something,  but 
what  it  is  he  heareth  not. 

But  to  leave  generalities  and  descend  to  particulars, 
the  great  mounds  of  Koyunjik  and  Nebi  Yunus,  which 
rise  within  the  colossal  earthern  ramparts  that  mark 


EXCAVATIONS  IN  CHALD^A.  73 

the  walls  of  Nineveh,  described  by  Xenophon  as  being 
upwards  of  100  feet  in  height  in  his  day,  and  still 
standing  to  a  height  of  from  40  to  50  feet,  guard  well 
the  treasures  which  they  conceal. ^  At  the  mound  of 
Nimrud  farther  south,  marking  the  site  of  a  town 
founded  by  Shalmanezer  in  the  year  1300  B.C.,  which 
reached  the  zenith  of  its  greatness  as  the  capital  of 
King  Asshurnazirpal  in  the  ninth  century  B.C.,  there 
is  far  more  to  be  seen  than  there  is  at  Koyunjik.  Here 
the  tunnels  dug  by  Sir  H.  Layard  are  still  open,  and 
the  outside  casing  of  huge  square  blocks  of  stone  of 
the  observatory  tower  are  still  visible  and  in  excellent 
preservation.^  A  vast  store  of  monuments  of  the 
greatest  interest  have  been  removed  from  here,  con- 
spicuous among  them  the  famous  black  obelisk  and  a 
statue  of  Nebo,  which  now  repose  in  the  British 
Museum ;  but  even  so,  many  carved  stones  are  still 
lying  where  they  were  found,  including  the  large  figure 
of  a  man,  the  lower  half  still  buried  in  the  earth,  and 
some  beautiful  specimens  of  the  great  winged  bulls 
common  at  the  entrance  to  the  courts  of  Assyrian 
palaces. 

At  Babylon,  where  German  scientists  had  already 
been  at  work  for  four  years,  having  built  themselves, 
with  German  thoroughness,  a  house  on  the  spot,  still 
more  is  to  be  seen.  The  excavations,  carried  on 
systematically  and  thoroughly,  have  already  laid  bare 
the  pavemented  streets  and  the  solid  walls  of  the 
palaces  and  temples  of  the  city  described  by  Herodotus. 
In  one  part  there  is  an  excellent  specimen  of  a  keystone 

1  We  may  hope,  however,  to  hear  of  further  discoveries  at  Koyunjik, 
since  Mr  L.  W.  King  arrived  there  in  the  spring  of  1903  to  carry  on  ex- 
cavations on  behalf  of  the  British  Museum. 

2  This  is  one  of  the  two  ziggurats  which  have  been  found  to  have  their 
sides  and  not  their  corners  facing  the  four  cardinal  points.  The  other  is 
the  temple  of  Bel  in  Babylon. 


74  THE  LANDS  OF  THE   TIGRIS. 

arch, — a  crushing  blow  to  the  theory  that  the  latter 
was  a  Roman  invention ;  and  in  another  a  wall  orna- 
mented with  figures  in  has  -  relief  had  recently  been 
discovered. 

The  present  counterpart  of  ancient  Nineveh  is  Mossul, 
which,  as  may  already  have  suggested  itself,  has  given 
its  name  to  one  of  those  fabrics  which  have  found  such 
favour  with  the  ladies  of  the  West :  the  connection  is 
obvious — Mossul-lin,  muslin.  It  stands  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  river,  just  opposite  the  site  of  the  ancient 
city,  and  of  course  it  is  surrounded  by  walls — no  town 
would  have  remained  a  town  for  five  minutes  without 
them,  encompassed  by  freebooting  Arabs.  Seven  gates 
give  access  to  the  town,  or  nine  if  you  include  two 
which  I  think  give  on  to  the  river.  Of  course  its 
interest  cannot  compare  with  that  aroused  by  the 
stupendous  piles  of  debris  opposite,  nevertheless  it  is 
possessed  of  a  distinct  charm  of  its  own.  For  it  is  a 
town  which  first  and  foremost  can  only  be  described 
as  of  the  East — Eastern.  Absolutely  untouched  by 
Western  influence,  it  remains  what  it  has  been  ever 
since  it  came  into  being,  affected  little  more  by  slight 
contact  with  the  Turk  in  the  shape  of  barracks,  and  the 
governor  of  the  province,  of  which  it  is  the  capital, 
than  it  is  by  the  utter  absence  of  European  ideas.  The 
bazaar  is  a  scene  of  animated  life,  but  the  majority  of 
the  streets,  when  not  mere  tunnels  through  the  build- 
ings, as  is  often  the  case,  form  a  complex  maze  of 
narrow  alleys,  so  narrow  in  many  instances  as  to  make 
it  difficult  for  two  persons  to  walk  abreast  conveniently, 
and  enclosed  by  blind  walls  of  such  height  that  the  sky 
is  often  only  to  be  seen  by  craning  one's  neck  upw^ards. 
Filth  indescribable  and  unutterable  is,  needless  to  say, 
the  predominant  feature  of  the  town,  whose  sanitary- 
arrangements  cannot  even  be  described  as  primitive. 


K 


DOWN  THE   TIGRIS.  75 


because  there  are  none.  I  spent  three  days  in  the 
discomfort  of  a  khan  which  has  doubtless  been  accum- 
ulating dirt  for  some  centuries,  one  of  the  "  two 
scurvy  inns"  in  alJ  probability  described  by  Tavernier 
in  the  seventeenth  century  as  the  only  hostelries  of 
the  place,  and  then,  having  had  a  raft  of  skins  con- 
structed, embarked  on  a  journey  down  the  Tigris. 

Floating  down  the  Tigris  on  a  raft  is  a  restful  and 
leisurely  mode  of  progress,  more  especially  when  the 
wind  happens  to  blow  up-stream,   in  which  case  the 
word  progress  altogether   ceases   to   be    applicable  to 
the  situation,  and  makes  a  pleasant  change  from  hard 
marching  through   a  desert    country.     I   had   huts  of 
felt   stretched  over  a   wooden   frame    erected   on    the 
raft  for  myself  and  Joseph,  and   before  leaving  took 
the  precaution  of  securing  the  services  of  a  soldier  to 
act    as    escort    and    walking    passport.      With    really 
supreme  sagacity  the  authorities    at  Mossul,  knowing 
that  I   was  about  to  proceed  through   a  country   in- 
habited entirely   by  Arabs,    selected    for   this   duty   a 
man  who  could  only  talk  Kurdish  !     As  an  ornament, 
his  value  was  a  negligible  quantity  ;  as  an  article  of 
practical  utility,  absolutely  nil.     On  one  occasion,  while 
waiting  close  to  a  village  on  the  river-bank,  I  suggested 
that  he  should  clear  off  the  Arabs  who  were  crowding 
round  and  becoming  a  nuisance  by  reason  of  their  too 
great  inquisitiveness,   to  which  he  replied  with  every 
symptom   of  regret  that    he   had   no  orders  from  his 
Government   to  shoot  down  the  riparian   population  ! 
After  this  I  ceased  wasting  time  and  energy  in  trying 
to    knock   sense   through    his   abnormally  thick  skull, 
and  made  the  best  of  a  bad  job  by  treating  him   as 
a  huge  joke. 

On  the  evening  of  the  first  day  we  glided  over  the 
great   dam   which  stretches    across   the   river   twenty 


76  THE  LANDS  OF  THE   TIGRIS. 

miles  below  Mossul,  and  later  on  passed  the  mound 
of  Nimrud  already  referred  to,  the  village  of  Kaleh 
Shergat  close  to  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  city  of 
Asshur,  which  gave  its  name  to  the  great  Assyrian 
empire,  and  the  hamlet  of  Tekrit,  where  I  changed 
raftsmen,  tying  up  on  the  evening  of  the  fifth  day 
close  to  the  sacred  city  of  Samara,  whose  brazen  dome 
shone  like  molten  gold  in  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun. 

The  town  of  Samara,  situated  on  the  left  bank  of 
the  Tigris,  not  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  river,  as 
stated  in  Murray's  handbook  (I  made  it  just  550  paces 
from  my  raft  to  the  city  gate),  is  the  usual  collection 
of  erections  of  sun  -  dried  brick,  surrounded  by  walls 
built  by  the  richer  pilgrims  to  resist  the  incursions  of 
pillaging  Bedouins.  The  objects  of  pilgrimage  are  the 
tomb  of  Imam  Hussein  Askar,  above  which  rises  the 
great  golden  dome  which  catches  the  eye  from  afar, 
and  a  small  mosque  and  dome,  beautifully  embellished 
with  enamelled  tile-work,  which  mark  the  site  of  the 
disappearance  of  the  Imam  Mohammed  el  Mahdi,  who, 
according  to  Moslem  belief,  will  return  to  earth  again 
with  Christ  at  the  end  of  the  world. 

The  only  other  object  which  stands  out  in  relief 
against  the  dead  level  of  the  plain  is  a  curious  spiral 
tower  built  of  brick,  which  rises  to  a  height  of  163 
feet  at  one  end  of  a  ruined  madressah,  and  is  known 
as  the  Malwiyeh.  The  spiral  way  which  leads  to  the 
summit  is  now  devoid  of  any  rail,  and  presents  a  surface, 
from  2  to  4  feet  in  width,  of  brick  roughly  imbedded  in 
cement.  The  portion  giving  access  to  the  small  turret 
which  forms  the  apex  has  been  much  broken,  and  at 
the  present  time  affords  but  a  narrow  ledge,  which 
would  constitute  a  formidable  obstacle  to  any  one  with 
"nerves"  or  a  bad  head  for  heights.  The  top  of  the 
turret  itself  is  reached  by  a  short  flight  of  steps,  and 


A   SCHEME  FOB  IRRIGATION.  77 

affords  a  fine  view  of  the  surrounding  country.  The 
whole  length  of  the  spiral  way  is  something  like  300 
yards — that  is  to  say,  I  counted  rather  over  300  some- 
what uneven  paces  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 

The  interest  of  the  country  south  of  Samara  lies  in 
its  extraordinary  agricultural  potentialities.  South  of 
a  line  drawn  from  Hit  on  the  Euphrates  to  Samara  on 
the  Tigris  is  a  vast  extent  of  magnificent  alluvial  soil, 
requiring  only  water  to  restore  to  it  its  pristine  harvests. 
There  are  in  Upper  Chaldaea,  according  to  Sir  William 
Willcocks, — the  famous  originator  of  the  great  Assouan 
dam  on  the  Nile, — no  less  than  1,280,000  acres  "of 
first-class  land,  waiting  only  for  water  to  yield  at  once 
a  handsome  return."  Here,  then,  is  an  opening  for 
British  enterprise  and  capital.  Here  is  an  opportunity 
for  Great  Britain  to  encourage  British  capital  to  develop 
the  resources  of  Mesopotamia,  "  as  strengthening  her 
political  claim  to  consideration  and  excluding  that  of 
possible  antagonists,"  ^  and  to  create  vested  interests 
which  will  refuse  to  be  ignored  when  the  day  of  the 
break-up  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  is  at  hand.  Sir 
William  Willcocks  gives  an  idea  of  the  probable  cost 
of  a  scheme  of  irrigation  and  of  its  results.  £8,000,000, 
he  says,  should  suffice  for  the  irrigation  of  the  1,280,000 
acres  of  Upper  Chaldtea — £7,  that  is,  per  acre.  He 
values  the  land  roughly  at  £38,000,000,  and,  placing 
the  rent  at  about  £3  per  acre,  shows  a  return  of 
£3,840,000.  Allowing  nearly  half  of  this  sum  for 
the  up-keep  of  canals,  there  is  still  a  net  return  of 
£2,000,000,  or  25  per  cent  on  £8,000,000  of  capital. 

It  may  be  urged  that  £8,000,000  is  a  large  sum  to 
sink  in  such  a  country  as  Asiatic  Turkey,  and  that 
those  who  hesitated  to  risk  £5,000,000  in  a  similar 
undertaking  in  Egypt  under  an  excellent  administra- 

1  Captain  A.  T.  Mahan. 


THE  LANDS  OF  THE   TIGRIS. 


tion,  and  who  were  sceptical  of  the  estimated  profits 
of  such  a  venture,  may  well  fight  shy  of  investing 
capital  in  Turkey,  a  country  notorious  chiefly  for  its 
sublime  contempt  for  anything  which  savours  of  order 
or  justice.  But  in  Egypt  the  dam  is  there,  and  is  in 
itself  a  monumental  answer  to  those  who  doubted.  In 
the  case  of  Mesopotamia  it  would  certainly  be  necessary 
for  the  British  Government  to  exert  pressure  at  the 
Porte  to  secure  a  guarantee  for  the  protection  of  the 
interests  of  those  concerned,  after  first  securing  a  con- 
cession for  such  an  enterprise.  Without  a  knowledge 
that  the  British  Government  was  behind  them  it  would 
be  absurd  to  expect  British  capitalists  to  move  in  such 
an  undertakino;-. 

No  one  will  be  found  to-day  to  deny  the  beneficial 
results  to  Egypt  of  the  monster  dam  of  Assouan,  and 
Sir  William  Willcocks  could  hardly  have  given  a  more 
alluring  description  of  the  potentialities  of  Egypt  than 
he  has  of  Chaldsea.  "  Of  all  the  regions  of  the  earth 
no  region  is  more  favoured  by  nature  for  the  production 
of  cereals  than  the  lands  of  the  Tigris.  .  .  .  Cotton, 
sugar-cane,  Indian  corn,  and  all  the  summer  products 
of  cereals,  leguminous  plants,  Egyptian  clover,  opium, 
and  tobacco  will  find  themselves  at  home  as  they  do 
in  Egypt."  Perhaps,  after  all,  w^e  should  not  accuse 
Herodotus  of  exaggeration  when  he  wrote  :  "  This  is  of 
all  lands  with  which  we  are  acquainted  by  far  the  best 
for  the  growth  of  corn.  ...  It  is  so  fruitful  in  the 
produce  of  corn  that  it  yields  continually  two  hundred- 
fold, and  when  it  produces  its  best,  it  yields  even  three 
hundred-fold.  The  blades  of  wheat  and  barley  grow 
there  to  full  four  fingers  in  breadth  ;  and  though  I  w^ell 
know  to  what  a  height  millet  and  sesame  grow,  I  shall 
not  mention  it,  for  I  am  well  assured  that,  to  those  who 
have  never  been  in  the  Babylonian  country,  what  has 


BAGHDAD.  79 


been   said   concerning   its   productions   will  appear  to 
many  incredible  ! "  -^ 

Perhaps  when  the  schemes  of  Sir  William  Willcocks 
have  been  carried  out,  and  corn  is  yielding  three  hundred- 
fold, and  millet  and  sesame  are  growing  to  a  height 
which  even  Herodotus  would  be  unwilling  to  commit  to 
writing,  it  will  at  last  begin  to  dawn  upon  Downing 
Street  that  the  dividends  of  any  future  Baghdad  Rail- 
way will  not  be  dependent  solely  upon  a  somewhat 
hypothetical  through  traffic  to  India. 

On  the  morning  of  the  seventh  day  after  embarking 
at  Mossul,  the  buildings  of  Baghdad  came  into  sight,  at 
the  far  end  of  a  long  vista  of  palm-trees,  and  a  few 
hours  later  I  left  my  floating  domicile,  and  installed 
myself  in  the  capital. 

As  I  have  pointed  out  already  in  chap.  i. ,  any  one  who 
comes  to  the  present  capital  of  Chaldsea  expecting  to 
find  in  it  some  semblance  of  the  Baghdad  of  his  imagin- 
ation will  be  rudely  disappointed.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  the  magnificence  and  romance  of  Baghdad  lie 
almost  entirely  in  tradition, — the  hopelessly  common- 
place buildings  and  bazaars  on  either  bank  of  the  river 
afibrding  an  entirely  inadequate  setting  to  the  lives  of 
Harun-al-Baschid  and  the  Khalifs,  or  to  the  engrossing 
scenes  of  the  'Arabian  Nights.'  The  palm-trees  which 
line  the  river  banks  and  give  a  certain  picturesqueness 
to  the  town  cease  with  abrupt  suddenness  immediately 
the  river  is  left ;  and  all  round,  encroaching  upon  the 
very  houses  of  the  city  itself,  the  mournful  desolation 
common  to  uncultivated  ground  in  lands  where,  for 
half  the  year,  a  scorching  sun  looks  down  from  a  brazen 
sky,  and  where  120°  in  the  shade  is  no  uncommon  read- 
ing of  the  thermometer  in  summer,  reigns  supreme. 

As  far  as  the  town  itself  is  concerned,  there  can  be 

1  Herodotus,  Book  I.  chap.  193. 


80  THE  LANDS  OF  THE  TIGRIS. 

few  who  will  not  agree  with  Sir  F.  Goldsmid  when  he 
says  that  "  the  streets  are  narrow,  dirty,  gloomy,  and 
irregular  ;  "  ^  or  again,  when  he  opines  that  the  occa- 
sional prettily  -  domed  mosque  is,  after  all,  "  painfully 
like  a  crockery  Jingan,  or  coffee-cup,  of  the  blue  flower 
pattern."  ^  The  river  is  perhaps  the  most  attractive 
feature  of  the  town,  being  covered  with  native  craft  of 
all  sorts,  and  presenting  a  scene  of  lively  animation. 
Conspicuous  among  them  are  the  curious  round  giiffas, 
a  form  of  boat  which  appears  to  have  remained  constant 
since  the  days  of  Herodotus.  From  the  appearance  of 
the  vessel  in  question,  a  specimen  of  which  may  be  seen 
in  the  foreground  of  the  photograph  here  reproduced,  it 
will  be  observed  how  accurately  the  description  given 
by  that  historian  fits  at  the  present  day :  "  Their 
vessels  that  sail  down  the  river  to  Babylon  are  cir- 
cular, and  made  of  leather.  For  when  they  have  cut 
the  ribs  out  of  willows  that  grow  in  Armenia  above 
Babylon,  they  cover  them  with  hides  extended  on  the 
outside,  by  way  of  a  bottom  ;  neither  making  any  dis- 
tinction in  the  stern,  nor  contracting  the  prow,  but 
making  them  circular  like  a  buckler."  ^ 

Is  Baghdad,  then,  a  great  commercial  centre  ?  The 
answer  may  be  given  in  the  aflirmative,  provided  you 
qualify  it  with  the  all-important  words  "  for  Turkey." 
The  whole  of  the  surrounding  country  is  fed  by  Baghdad, 
as  also  are  many  of  the  markets  of  Western  Persia, 
notably  those  of  Kermanshah  and  Hamadan  ;  but  they 
are  not  fed  to  the  extent  that  they  ought  to  be  :  firstly, 
because  of  lack  of  communications  other  than  mule- 
tracks  ;  and,  secondly,  because  of  obstruction  on  the  part 
of  the  Turkish  Government,  where  assistance  and  en- 

^  Telegraph  and  Travel.     Sir  F.  Goldsmid. 

-'  Ibid. 

2  Herodotus,  Book  I.  chap.  194. 


THE   TRADE  OF  BAGHDAD.  81 

couragement  should  naturally  be  looked  for.  Railways 
there  are  none,  if  I  except  the  short  tramway  which 
runs  a  few  miles  to  the  Mosque  of  Kazimin,  and  which 
I  believe  is  a  great  success  financially ;  and  the  number 
of  steamers  which  ply  between  Baghdad  and  Basra  is 
limited  to  four,  two  of  which  may  generally  be  counted 
on  as  being  hors  de  combat,  since  they  are  run  by  a 
Turkish  firm. 

Enterprise  is  likely  to  meet  with  a  sharp  rebuke,  as 
instanced  by  the  fate  of  the  Pasha  who,  a  short  time 
ago,  built  an  excellent  bridge  which  spans  the  river  at 
the  present  time.  Great  were  the  preparations  for  the 
opening  of  this  work  of  public  benefit.  The  crowds 
assembled,  and  expectation  ran  high ;  but,  alas !  no 
governor  appeared  to  perform  the  opening  ceremony. 
It  was  a  great  pity,  but  it  was  inevitable.  The  broad- 
minded  governor  had  been  mentioned  by  the  mullah 
in  public  prayer  as  a  benefactor  to  his  country,  and  his 
fame  had  reached  the  ears  of  the  Sublime  Porte.  His 
immediate  recall  was  the  result.  The  Sultan  can  brook 
no  interference  in  his  monopoly  of  the  deity  ! 

The  trade  of  Baghdad  in  1902  amounted  to 
£2,560,232,  divided  as  follows  :  Exports,  £575,253, 
and  imports,  £1,984,979.  This  trade  might  be  greatly 
increased  even  at  the  present  time  by  so  simple  a  pro- 
cedure as  insisting  upon  the  Porte  removing  the  absurd 
limitation  of  two  steamers  a-week,  which  is  all  that 
is  allowed  to  Messrs  Lynch.  It  seems  a  most  extra- 
ordinary thing  that  we  should  be  powerless  to  effect  so 
necessary  a  step.  Not  very  long  ago  permission  was 
obtained  by  Messrs  Lynch  to  draw  a  barge  along  with 
their  steamers,  but  this  was  regarded  as  a  great  diplo- 
matic triumph  !  The  result,  as  pointed  out  by  Major 
Newmarch,  acting  British  Consul-General,  is  that  the 
delay  in  Basra,  more  especially  since  there  is  a  want  of 

F 


82  THE  LANDS  OF  THE   TIGRIS. 


proper  go-downs  and  cover  for  goods  while  waiting 
there,  is  a  serious  matter,  and  most  detrimental  to  the 
entire  trade  of  the  province.  I  was  informed  by  a 
friend  that  he  had  seen  as  much  as  8000  tons  of 
merchandise  lying  waiting  transportation  at  Basra  at 
one  time ;  and  it  is  no  doubt  perfectly  true,  as  Mr 
Whigham  has  said,  that  goods  are  as  often  six  months 
on  the  way  from  London  to  Baghdad  as  not.^ 

But  this  is  not  the  only  objection  to  entire  absence  of 
competition  on  the  Tigris.  At  the  time  of  my  visit 
competition  had  lowered  the  rate  of  freight  from  London 
to  Basra  to  about  15s.  per  ton,^  while  absence  of  com- 
petition had  raised  it  between  Basra  and  Baghdad  to 
from  £2  to  £2,  5s.  per  ton !  Thus  we  see  the  astound- 
ing phenomenon  of  the  freight  of  goods  from  Basra  to 
Baghdad,  a  distance  roughly  of  500  miles,  amounting  to 
nearly  four  times  the  freight  of  goods  from  London  to 
Basra  !  On  the  journey  back  from  Baghdad  a  different 
state  of  things  exists,  since  native  craft  carry  a  good 
deal  of  stuff  down-stream,  and  the  charge  is  reduced  to 
about  12s. 

These  few  facts  alone  are  sufficient  to  show  that  the 
trade  of  Baghdad  is  not  what  it  might  be,  even  under 
existing  circumstances.  Were  the  purchasing  power  of 
the  people  to  be  increased  by  the  realisation  of  some 
such  scheme  as  that  of  Sir  William  Willcocks,  it  is 
obvious  that  a  very  large  increase  would  speedily 
accrue. 

British  control  from  Baghdad  to  the  Gulf  should 
be  the  watchword  of  British  diplomacy  in  this  par- 
ticular  square   of  the    board,   and,   of  course,   railway 

1  The  Persian  Problem.     H.  J.  Whigham. 

2  This  was  the  figure  given  me  by  a  merchant.  Major  Newmarch  gives 
the  figure  for  1902  as  from  £1,  17s.  6d.  to  £2. 


CONTROL  FROM  BAGHDAD   TO   THE  SEA.  83 

construction  comes  under  this  head.  Why  such  a 
hne  was  not  built  years  ago  is  a  mystery,  but  the 
fact  remains  that  it  was  not.  The  time  for  monopoly 
has  gone  by ;  let  us  at  least  see  to  it  that  we  secure 
control  of  any  future  extension  of  the  Baghdad  rail- 
way from  that  place  to  the  sea. 


84  THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 


CHAPTEH   VIII. 

THE    BAGHDAD    RAILWAY. 

Railway  projects  in  the  past — The  success  of  Germany — Lack  of  interest 
of  British  Government  in  the  past — English  concessions  pass  to  other 
countries  —  The  prophecy  of  the  deputation  of  1857  —  The  German 
commission  of  1899 — The  concession  of  1902 — Proposed  route  of  the 
line — Branch  lines — Description  of  the  country  through  which  the  line 
will  pass — The  Taurus  barrier — Possibilities  of  Asia  Minor — Law- 
lessness of  Mesopotamia — Important  towns  all  lie  to  the  north — The 
right  bank  of  the  Tigris  preferred  to  the  left — Centres  of  pilgrimage 
— Points  to  be  remembered  in  criticising  the  line  —  The  financial 
prospect  —  International  complications  —  Germanophobia  in  England 
— The  line  as  an  alternative  route  for  the  Indian  mails  —  The  con- 
ditions upon  which  Great  Britain  must  insist  as  essential  to  her 
co-operation — The  position  of  Great  Britain  with  regard  to  the  rail- 
way— The  state  of  affairs  at  the  present  time. 

If  there  is  much  that  is  wearisome  in  a  journey 
through  the  Asiatic  dominions  of  the  Sultan,  there 
is  also  much  that  is  of  considerable  interest,  as  I  hope 
may  have  been  made  clear  by  a  perusal  of  the  fore- 
going chapters  ;  but  the  problem  of  supreme  interest 
to  myself,  and  I  have  no  doubt  to  many  others  as  well, 
which  is  brought  under  consideration  in  the  course  of  a 
journey  such  as  I  have  already  described,  in  that  its 
solution  is  likely  to  have  a  vital  effect  for  good  or 
for  evil  upon  the  fortunes  of  Great  Britain  in  Asia, 
has  yet  to  be  dealt  with  :  and  since  a  desire  to  ac- 
quaint  myself  as   fully   as   possible    with    the    possi- 


EARLY  RAILWAY  SCHEMES.  85 

bilities  and  probabilities,  as  affecting  this  country,  of 
any  future  railway  to  the  Persian  Gulf  alone  deter- 
mined the  direction  of  my  journey,  I  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  setting  before  my  readers  the  situation  in 
connection  with  the  so-called  "  Baghdad  railway,"  as 
I  understand  it  at  the  present  time. 

And  when  considering  the  prospects  of  a  railway 
which  is  to  connect  Constantinople  with  the  Persian 
Gulf,  it  is  impossible  to  help  recalling  the  long  story 
of  brilliant  inception  which  distinguishes  the  part 
played  by  Great  Britain  at  intervals  during  a  period 
of  upwards  of  sixty  years,  in  an  endeavour  to  in- 
augurate a  system  of  direct  land  communication  be- 
tween Europe  and  the  seas  of  Southern  Asia,  or  to 
refrain  from  indulging  in  a  lament  at  the  remorseless 
regularity  with  which  the  lifelong  efforts  of  more 
than  one  patriotic  Englishman  were  destined  to 
flicker  out  in  a  pitiable  succession  of  unrewarded  and 
abortive  endeavour.  The  attempts  made  during  the 
first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  to  navigate  the 
Euphrates,  a  relic  of  which  may  still  be  seen  in  the 
garden  of  the  British  Consulate  at  Aleppo,  in  the  shape 
of  the  small  guns  with  which  the  steamers  were  to 
have  been  fitted,  followed  during  the  early  years  of 
the  latter  half  by  the  railway  schemes  inseparably  con- 
nected with  the  names  of  Chesney  and  Andrew ;  the 
reawakening  of  public  interest  a  few  years  later  in 
a  short  road  to  the  East,  which  led  to  the  drawing 
up  of  a  report  by  a  select  committee,  and  again  early 
in  the  last  quarter  of  the  waning  century,  as  indicated 
by  the  formation  of  the  "  Euphrates  Valley  Railway 
Association,"  pass  successively  across  the  scene,  to 
terminate  in  an  attempt  by  a  group,  chiefly  English, 
to  obtain  a  concession,  up  to  the  very  time  that  the 
telegram    was    despatched   to    the   Emperor   William 


86  THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 

at  Windsor,  granting  to  a  German  syndicate  a  con- 
cession to  draw  up  a  report  concerning  the  construc- 
tion of  an  iron  way,  which  would  pass  through  the 
heart  of  the  Asiatic  dominions  of  the  autocrat  at 
Yildiz,  and  forge  the  much-talked-of  link  which  was 
to  complete  the  chain  of  railroad  communication  from 
Paris  to  the  Persian  Gulf 

I  have  always  regarded  it  as  a  cause  for  regret  that, 
despite  the  untiring  eftbrts  of  such  pioneers  of  empire, 
England  failed  to  construct  the  railway  advocated. 
The  British  Government  could  by  no  means  be  in- 
duced to  look  favourably  upon  the  scheme,  and  with- 
out the  countenance  of  the  Government  British  capit- 
alists fought  shy.  Moreover,  at  no  time  did  British 
railway  enterprise  receive  that  measure  of  approbation 
from  the  Porte  which  that  body  has  been  pleased  to 
display  towards  the  schemes  of  other  nations.  When 
Great  Britain  was  alone  in  the  field,  British  promoters 
paid  scant  attention  to  the  wishes  of  the  Porte,  and 
calmly  ignored  the  fact  that  a  railway  with  its 
terminus  on  the  Levant,  many  hundreds  of  miles  from 
the  Turkish  capital,  was  regarded  with  little  favour 
by  the  Government  through  whose  territory  it  was 
intended  that  it  should  pass. 

As  time  went  on  rival  Powers  entered  upon  the 
field  of  railway  expansion  in  the  Near  East,  and 
not  only  did  the  proposed  trunk  line  fail  to  assume 
material  form,  but  other  railways  originally  English 
passed  slowly  but  surely  into  other  hands,  so  that, 
whereas  the  Mersina-Adana,  the  Smyrna -Aidin,  the 
Smyrna  -  Cassaba,  and  the  Haida  -  Pasha  -  Ismid  lines 
were  all  in  the  first  instance  built  with  English 
capital  and  English  material  and  under  English  man- 
agement, the  Smyrna- Aidin  line  is  the  solitary  English 
concern  remaining  at  the  present  day.     Such  a  state 


THE  PROPOSED  RAILWAY  ROUTE.  87 


of  affairs,  to  whatever  it  may  have  been  due, — and 
it  was  due  to  various  causes  which  I  need  not  enter 
into  here, — has  undoubtedly  been  detrimental  to  British 
influence  and  trade ;  but  what  is  perhaps  of  even 
greater  moment  at  the  present  time  is  the  fact  that 
the  words  of  the  deputation  which  waited  upon  Lord 
Palmerston  in  1857,  to  the  effect  that  the  Euphrates 
Valley  Railway  would  pass  into  other  hands  if  Great 
Britain  declined  the  task,  have  at  length  been  fulfilled. 
Little  good,  however,  is  now  to  be  gained  by  indulg- 
ing in  lamentation  over  neglected  opportunities  of  the 
past ;  rather  is  it  of  more  profit  to  make  some  attempt 
to  inquire  into  the  probabilities  of  the  future,  and  to 
consider  in  what  way  and  to  what  extent  the  interests 
of  our  own  country  are  likely  to  be  affected  by  the  pro- 
ject known  as  the  "  Baghdad  Railway  Scheme." 

As  a  result,  then,  of  the  preliminary  concession  of 
1899,  a  committee  was  appointed  with  a  view  to 
surveying  and  reporting  upon  the  country  through 
which  the  line  would  pass,  and  was  occupied  from 
the  middle  of  September  1899  to  the  beginning  of 
April  1900  in  conducting  a  practical  examination  on 
the  spot.  As  evidence  of  the  success  of  their  labours 
came  the  news  of  the  concession  of  January  1902  for 
the  extension  of  the  existing  line  between  Haida-Pasha 
and  Konia  to  Baghdad  and  the  Persian  Gulf.  Now, 
in  treating  of  the  route  to  be  followed  by  the  future 
line,  I  would  qualify  any  statement  that  I  may  make 
by  the  remark  that  I  consider  that  he  would  be  a 
bold  seer  who  ventured  to  prophesy  with  any  degree 
of  confidence  regarding  it;  but  for  the  purposes  of 
the  agreement  a  line  was  sketched  out  which  will 
pass  through  the  country  as  follows  :  from  Konia  it 
will  pass  by  Karaman  to  Eregli,  from  which  point  it 
will  enter  the  Bulgar  Dagh,  and  by  many  loops  and 


THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 


tunnels  compass  the  descent  of  the  3400  feet  to  the 
Cilician  plain.  In  the  course  of  this  descent  of  the 
Taurus  it  will  not,  as  popularly  supposed,  pass  through 
the  famous  Cilician  Gates,  but  will  follow  the  course 
of  a  small  river,  the  Tchakid  Su,  east  of  the  pass, 
and  thence  debouch  on  to  the  plain.  Crossing  the 
level  expanse  of  Cilicia  by  Adana — already  connected 
with  the  sea  by  the  Mersina-Tarsus- Adana  line,  forty 
miles  in  length — it  will  encounter  the  only  other  great 
physical  obstacle  which  will  be  met  with,  in  the  shape 
of  the  Giaour  Dagh.  This  range  will  be  crossed  either 
by  the  Arslani  Bell  above  Bagche,  necessitating  an 
ascent  of  upwards  of  3000  feet,  or  by  the  ridge  above 
the  village  of  Hassan  Beyli  to  the  south  of  Bagche. 
Personally  I  crossed  by  the  latter,  and  it  appeared  to 
me  that  a  tunnel  might  be  made  here  at  no  very  great 
cost,  considerably  lessening  the  ascent,  and  the  descent 
to  the  valley  of  the  Kara  Su  on  the  far  side.  Having 
reached  the  valley  of  the  Kara  Su,  a  remarkable  stretch 
of  ground  extending  practically  from  Marash  in  the 
north  to  Antioch  in  the  south,  part  marsh,  part  culti- 
vation, and  part  woodland,  it  will  turn  south  to  the 
extremity  of  the  Kurt  Dagh,  and  rounding  the  latter, 
reach  Killis,  a  small  town  situated  at  the  foot  of  the 
mountains.  Between  the  valley  of  the  Kara  Su  and 
the  Euphrates,  which  will  be  crossed  about  20  kilo- 
metres south  of  Birejik,  the  low  ridges  which  enclose 
the  basins  of  the  Afrin,  the  Kowaik,  and  the  Sajur 
intervene ;  but  these  are  of  no  great  height,  and  will 
offer  little  resistance  to  the  engineers.  From  the 
Euphrates,  which  will  require  a  considerable  bridge, 
the  line  might  almost  have  been  drawn  with  a  ruler 
to  the  Tigris  at  Mossul,  passing  only  the  insignificant 
villages  of  Harran,  Ras-el-Ain,  and  Nissibin  on  the 
way.     From  Mossul  to  Baghdad  the  right  bank  of  the 


BRANCH  LINES.  89 


Tigris  will  be  followed ;  but  from  the  latter  place  the 
line  will  turn  south-west  to  the  Euphrates,  and,  cross- 
ing that  river  for  the  second  time,  reach  the  Gulf 
by  Kerbela  and  Zobair,  the  suggested  terminus  being 
Kasima  on  the  bay  of  Koweit. 

So  much  for  the  direction  to  be  followed  by  the 
main  line.  The  branch  lines  included  in  the  con- 
cession are  as  follows  :  (l)  from  Tel  Habesch,  a  little 
east  of  Killis  to  Aleppo,  a  distance  of  60  kilometres ; 
(2)  from  Sadiyeh  on  the  Tigris  to  Khanikin  on  the 
Persian  frontier,  115  kilometres;  (3)  from  Zobair  to 
Basra,  19  kilometres.  A  branch  line  is  also  to  be 
built  in  the  future,  when  the  receipts  of  the  main 
line  admit  of  it,  to  Diarbekr,  and  a  temporary  line 
for  construction  purposes  is  to  be  taken  from  the 
main  line  in  the  Cilician  plain  to  some  point  on  the 
Gulf  of  Alexandretta,  probably  Yumurtalik  on  the 
bay  of  Ayas.  I  have  already  given  some  description 
of  the  country  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  narra- 
tive, but  before  discussing  the  questions  which  are 
suggested  by  a  consideration  of  such  a  line  in  all  its 
bearings,  it  may  be  well  to  recapitulate  briefly  the 
particulars  of  such  description  which  bear  directly  upon 
the  construction  of  the  railway. 

The  direct  road  from  Konia  to  Eregli  lies  across  the 
eastern  extremity  of  the  Axylon  plain,  which  presents 
to  the  eye  an  expanse  of  savage  sterility  which  can 
scarcely  claim  for  itself  any  other  term  than  that  of 
desert.  For  this  reason  the  line  makes  a  bend  by 
Karaman,  more  fortunate  in  being  situated  on  the 
fringe  of  the  desert  than  Karabunar,  a  small  village 
which  stands  in  the  centre  midway  between  Konia  and 
Eregli.  It  is  at  this  latter  place  that  the  Bulgar  Dagh 
will  be  entered,  and  between  here  and  Adana  that  the 
descent  of  the  Taurus  will  present  a  formidable  though 


90  THE  BAGHDAD  BAILIVAY. 

by  no  means  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  engineer. 
The  main  artery  leading  south  from  the  important  com- 
mercial centre  of  Kaisariyeh  will  be  cut  at  Porsuk,  and 
the  long  strings  of  camels — I  passed  something  like 
a  thousand  in  the  course  of  a  single  day  returning 
lightly  laden  from  the  coast — which  now  bear  burdens 
of  hides  and  grain,  passing  with  silent  ghostly  tread 
over  the  highway  of  conquering  armies  of  the  past, 
must  ere  long  give  place  to  the  iron  horse.  As  far 
as  the  bridge  over  the  Tchakid  Su  at  Ak  Keupri  it  will 
follow  the  existing  road,  and  in  so  doing  will  encounter 
no  engineering  difficulty  greater  than  that  afforded  by 
a  gradient  of,  at  the  outside,  1  in  80  ;  ^  but  from  here 
on  the  caravan  road  must  be  left,  and  the  one  serious 
difficulty  of  the  whole  line  is  soon  afterwards  en- 
countered in  a  vast  mountain  wall  nearly  2000  feet  in 
height,  with  hardly  any  room  for  curves  in  surmount- 
ing it,  which  rises  between  the  valley  of  the  Tchakid 
Su  and  the  Cilician  plain.^  I  was  informed  by  an 
engineer  who  had  accompanied  the  Commission  of  1899 
that  as  many  as  seventy  tunnels  would  be  required  in 
surmounting  this  obstacle,  but  the  preliminary  survey 
was  admittedly  a  rough  one,  and  a  further  detailed 
survey  will  have  to  be  undertaken  before  this  section 
of  the  line  is  constructed. 

Arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  it  is  natural  to 
inquire  why,  when  there  is  already  a  railway  to  the  sea, 
another  line — the  temporary  branch  I  have  already 
spoken  of — should  be  required,   tapping  the  identical 

1  Professor  Ramsay  writes  as  follows  :  "  Once  placed  at  the  northern 
end  of  the  pass,  the  line  has  a  gentle  descent  down  a  continuous  easy 
glen — interrupted  only  once  by  a  ridge  of  no  serious  consequence — for 
about  35  miles.  In  those  35  miles  the  descent  is  only  about  2200  feet, 
giving,  without  any  zigzags,  a  gradient  of  1  in  80,  roughly  speaking." — 
Jouinal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  for  October  1 903. 

"  The  Tchakid  Su  escapes  through  an  undergi'ound  channel. 


AN  INFERIOR  HARBOUR.  91 


district.  The  answer  is  to  be  found  partly  in  the  fact 
of  some  hitch  having  arisen  in  the  negotiations  for  buy- 
ing up  the  line  entered  upon  by  the  German  company, 
and  partly  in  the  unsuitableness  of  Mersina  as  a  port. 
A  demand  was  long  since  made,  it  is  true,  by  the  pro- 
moters of  the  Mersina- Adana  Eailway  for  a  concession 
for  improving  the  port  by  means  of  a  breakwater,  but 
this,  victim  perhaps  of  the  intrigue  of  rival  schemes, 
still  lies  with  many  another  in  the  dead  letter  office  at 
Yildiz.  From  the  description  given  in  chap.  iv.  it  will 
have  been  gathered  that  in  Cilicia  the  Government 
have  so  far  displayed  an  extraordinary  aptitude  for 
burying  their  talent  in  the  ground,  and  further  com- 
ment is  unnecessary  here.  Passing  mention  has  also 
been  made  of  the  probable  line  of  ascent  and  descent  of 
the  range  of  the  Giaour  Dagh.  Though  a  system  of  no 
great  Mndth,  the  traveller  crossing  it  will  find  ample 
grounds  for  singing  its  praises,  the  snow-bound  wall 
of  the  higher  peaks  standing  out  in  sharp  contrast 
above  the  lower  slopes,  clothed  with  a  mantle  of 
mountain  laurel,  box,  and  ilex  bushes. 

In  the  vicinity  of  Killis  vast  groves  of  olives  fill  the 
view,  and  the  rolling  expanse  between  that  place  and 
Aleppo  presents  a  broad  smiling  stretch  of  well- 
cultivated  plain. 

From  this  description  it  will  be  gathered  that  thus 
far  the  line  will  pass  through  a  country  of  vast  latent 
possibilities,  which  is  blessed  even  now  by  considerable 
agricultural  and  commercial  development  ^  and  some  of 

1  As  evidence  of  the  development  of  the  countiy  by  railways,  see  the 
report  published  by  the  Public  Debt  Administration  in  1903,  wherein  it  is 
estimated  that  the  tithes  of  the  districts  traversed  or  affected  by  the  rail- 
ways have  increased  in  the  last  twelve  years  by  46  per  cent.  According  to 
Consul  Waugh,  the  Angora  district,  which  exported  no  grain  before  the 
railway  was  opened,  now  has  an  annual  export  of  wheat  and  barley  valued 
at  from  £1,500,000  to  £2,000,000. 


THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 


the  elements  of  public  security ;  but  it  is  to  be  feared 
that  from  here  on  to  Baghdad  the  country  to  be 
traversed  can  boast  neither  of  the  one  nor  of  the  other. 
After  crossing  the  Euphrates  and  the  low  ridge  of 
Jebel  Tek-Tek,  the  line  will  run  through  a  country 
consisting  of  a  practically  featureless  steppe,  whose 
rolling  undulations  succeed  one  another  with  mono- 
tonous regularity.  Nor  would  it  appear  that  the  lack 
of  natural  attraction  has  been  compensated  for  by  the 
art  of  man,  the  mouldering  ruins,  which  are  in  keeping 
everywhere  with  the  forlorn  aspect  of  the  scene,  bear- 
ing eloquent  testimony  to  the  wild  depredations  of 
Kurd  and  Arab,  who  from  the  days  of  their  first  con- 
tact seem  to  have  regarded  the  plains  of  northern 
Mesopotamia  as  a  legitimate  stage  for  the  enactment 
of  a  drama  of  wholesale  bloodshed  and  destruction. 
Indeed,  Ibrahim  Pasha,  on  the  west,  and,  until  his 
recent  violent  death,  Mustapha  Pasha,  on  the  east, 
might  well  congratulate  themselves  on  being  far  from 
unworthy  recipients  of  the  mantle  of  Timur,  who  five 
centuries  earlier  stamped  upon  this  self-same  district 
an  indelible  trail  of  desolation  —  inevitable  legacy  of 
his  victorious  progress  through  Asia. 

On  such  a  line  no  places  of  importance  will  be  found. 
Harran,  the  ancient  city  of  Nahor,  to  which  Abraham 
migrated  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  consists  now  of  a 
low  range  of  mounds  on  either  side  of  the  river  Belik, 
whose  chief  object  of  interest  is,  probably,  the  far- 
famed  well  of  Pebecca.  Pas-el-Ain  is  only  a  small 
village,  and  Nissibin  a  moderate  mud  town.  No 
advantage,  then,  for  this  route  can  be  claimed  on  the 
grounds  of  its  passing  through  any  large  centres  of 
trade,  all  of  which — Marash,  Aintab,  Birejik,  Urfa, 
Diarbekr,  Mardin — lie  far  to  the  north,  and  the  whole 
advantage  which  it  ofi'ers  is  summed  up  in  directness  of 


GOODS   FLOATED  DOWN   THE   TIGRIS.  93 

line  and  absence  of  physical  obstruction.  Such  oppo- 
sition as  will  be  encountered  in  this  section  will  be 
provided  by  paucity  of  water,  dust  -  storms,  and 
the  raids  of  a  lawless  and  migratory  population,  more 
especially  if  history  repeats  itself,  and  it  is  found  in 
the  case  of  the  future  railway,  as  has  been  found 
in  the  case  of  those  already  constructed,  that,  to 
use  the  words  of  Mr  Hogarth,  "the  primary  result 
of  an  extension  of  railways  in  Anatolia  has  always 
been  an  extension  of  brigandage." 

Mossul  itself  is  a  town  of  some  importance,  being  the 
largest  centre  in  northern  Mesopotamia ;  but  it  is 
hardly  probable  that  the  goods  which  are  now  floated 
down  the  river  on  rafts  will  not  continue  to  be  so  in 
the  future,  more  especially  since  the  wood  forming  a 
large  portion  of  the  raft  is  sold  at  a  profit  at  the  end 
of  the  journey.  Moreover,  the  country  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  river  through  which  the  line  will  run  is 
almost  entirely  desert,  roamed  over  by  the  Shammar 
Arabs,  the  promoters  being  of  opinion,  seemingly,  that 
the  saving  of  distance  and  modest  opposition  aflbrded 
by  the  few  dessicated  waddies  and  low  ridges  en- 
countered on  the  right  bank  more  than  compensate 
for  the  greater  promise  offered  by  the  fertile  lands  of 
the  left,  more  especially  since  the  difference  in  cost 
between  the  two  routes  is  estimated  at  approximately 
76,000,000  francs.  As  it  is,  there  is  little  prospect  for 
many  years  to  come  of  any  greater  effect  from  its  con- 
struction in  these  parts  being  attained  than  a  slight 
increase  in  the  local  reputation  of  the  hot  baths  at 
Hammum  Ali  and  some  small  growth  in  the  few  mud 
villages  which  hug  the  river  bank. 

South  of  Baghdad  the  country  between  the  two 
great  rivers  is  too  marshy  to  admit  of  rails  being  laid, 
and  the  Euphrates  will  have  to  be  crossed  once  more, 


94  THE  BAGHDAD  RAIL JV AY. 

and  its  right  bank  followed  to  the  Gulf.  The  great 
centres  of  pilgrimage — Kazimin,  Nejef,  and  Kerbela — 
will  be  passed,  and  high  expectations  are  set  on  the 
receipts  which  it  is  anticipated  will  accrue  from  the 
vast  numbers  of  pilgrims,  estimated  at  100,000  annually, 
bearing  an  average  number  of  60,000  corpses  to  be 
entombed  in  proximity  to  the  departed  saints, — the 
Imams  Musa,  Ali,  and  Hussein.  At  first  sight  it 
would  appear  that  land  transport  could  never  compete 
successfully  with  the  existing  water-way  from  Baghdad 
to  the  Gulf;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that,  so  far, 
British  diplomacy  has  only  succeeded  in  obtaining  per- 
mission for  Messrs  Lynch  to  run  one  steamer  a-week  on 
these  waters,  while  the  only  other  company  running 
steamers,  being  Turkish,  need  hardly  be  considered. 
Even  in  face  of  this  puny  competition  the  promoters 
have  proved  their  business  capacity  by  securing  under 
article  ix.  of  the  Convention  of  March  1903  the  right 
during  construction  to  acquire  and  use  steam  and 
sailing  vessels  and  other  craft  on  the  Shatt-el-Arab, 
the  Tigris,  and  the  Euphrates,  for  the  transport  of 
materials  and  other  requirements,  while  under  article 
xxiii.  the  company  has  the  right  of  establishing  ports 
at  Baghdad,  Basra,  and  the  terminal  point  on  the 
Persian  Gulf. 

In  making  any  criticism  of  such  a  line,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  those  responsible  for  it  were  con- 
fronted by  a  variety  of  considerations.  The  obvious 
route  from  Adana,  for  instance,  along  the  coast  to  the 
port  of  Alexandretta,  thence  over  the  Beylan  Pass  to 
Aleppo,  had  to  be  discarded  on  the  grounds  of  its 
exposure  to  attack  from  the  sea,  similar  considera- 
tions being  responsible  for  the  refusal  of  the  Sultan  to 
sanction  a  permanent  branch  to  the  coast.  I  have 
italicised    the    word    temporary    in    this    connection, 


A    STRATEGIC  LINE.  95 


because  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  the  shrewd 
promoters  of  the  scheme  will  consent  to  its  removal 
when  once  it  has  been  built,  since  without  such  a 
branch  it  would  be  folly  to  imagine  that  they  could 
compete  with  the  existing  camel  transport  between 
Alexandretta  and  Aleppo. 

The  most  glaring  defect,  however,  which  is  likely  to 
strike  any  one  looking  at  the  project  from  a  commercial 
point  of  view,  is  the  persistent  way  in  which  all  the 
large  towns  of  Northern  Mesopotamia  are  left  severely 
on  one  side.  Here,  again,  those  responsible  had  much 
to  take  into  consideration.  On  economic  grounds,  as 
far  as  actual  construction  was  concerned,  the  more 
southern  trace  was  far  preferable,  avoiding  as  it  did 
the  mountainous  districts  in  which  are  situated  the 
larger  towns,  while  to  the  Turk,  sublimely  disdainful 
of  commercial  returns,  the  shortest  route  connecting 
the  6th  army  corps  at  Baghdad  with  the  1st,  2nd,  and. 
3rd  at  Constantinople,  Adrianople,  and  Monastir,  and, 
when  the  Damascus- Aleppo  line,  already  constructed  as 
far  as  Hamah,  is  completed,  with  the  5th  at  Damascus, 
seemed  distinctly  the  most  desirable.  Nor  must  it  be 
for2"otten  that  that  Power  which  was  careful  to  exact 
from  the  Sultan  an  agreement  for  the  monopoly  of 
railway  construction  in  the  Black  Sea  basin  has  used 
its  powerful  influence  at  Yildiz  to  frustrate  any  scheme 
which  might  form  the  basis  of  an  effective  zone  of 
defence  and  offence  on  the  north-eastern  frontier  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire.^ 

1  As  part  of  a  scheme  of  Turkish  defence,  Colonel  Mark  Bell  advocated 
in  the  '  Journal  of  the  Eoyal  United  Service  Institution '  of  September  1899 
the  construction  of  two  main  lines  as  follows  :  (1)  Starting  from  Iskan- 
derun  or  some  neighbouring  post  on  the  Mediterranean,  and  proceeding 
via  Aleppo,  Birejik,  and  Urfa  ;  (2)  running  from  the  northern  post  of 
Samsun  through  Tokat,  Sivas,  Kharput,  and  Diarbekr,  so  as  to  join  the 
western  line  at  Mardin.     Herein  is  to  be  found  in  part  the  explanation 


96  THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 

As  regards  the  southern  extremity  of  the  line,  looked 
at  from  the  point  of  view  of  local  development,  it  may 
be  said  that  in  the  Baghdad  and  Basra  districts  there 
is  a  country  of  vast  potential  wealth  ;  but  it  may  with 
equal  truth  be  said  that  until  the  nomadic  propensities 
of  the  population  are  given  up  for  those  of  a  settled 
existence,  and  the  whole  country  rejoices  in  the  benefits 
of  law  and  order  to  a  degree  which  it  is  to  be  feared 
will  not  be  attained  under  the  existing  regi7ne,  there 
is  little  prospect  of  Chaldaea  revelling  once  more  in  the 
abundant  prosperity  of  an  almost  forgotten  past. 

If,  then,  the  probability  of  immediate  returns  from 
local  development  is  not  great,  it  must  not  be  supposed 
that  those  whose  duty  it  has  been  to  estimate  the 
prospects  from  a  financial  point  of  view  have  deceived 
themselves  as  to  the  probable  result.  Hard-headed  men 
of  business,  qualified  to  form  a  right  judgment,  are  of 
opinion  that  working  expenses  will  be  covered,  though 
no  surplus  will  for  some  time  be  forthcoming,  and  it 
is  unlikely  therefore  that  the  line  will  be  built  until 
these  same  men  of  business  see  where  the  promised 
State  guarantee,  amounting  in  all  to  something  like 
£1,000,000  per  annum,  is  to  come  from. 

And  here  it  is  that  complications  of  an  international 
nature  arise,  and  here  that  Great  Britain  will  eventually 
have  to  come  to  a  decision  one  way  or  the  other — to 
assume  an  aspect  of  friendly  co-operation  or  of  hostile 
opposition.  For  though  it  was  at  one  time  hoped  that 
a  considerable  sum  might  be  available  for  the  purposes 
of  the  guarantee  from  the  conversion  and  unification  of 
the  Ottoman  public  debt,  it  is  now  generally  recognised 

of  the  Black  Sea  Basin  Convention,  and  the  southern  trace  of  the  German 
line.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  the  Eussian  Tugovitch  proposed  that 
Eussia  herself  should  build  the  Baghdad  line,  a  suggestion,  however,  which, 
despite  the  supposed  favour  shown  towards  it  by  M.  de  Witte,  was 
negatived  by  the  Cabinet. 


ATTITUDE   OF  THE  POWERS.  97 

that  such  guarantee  can  only  be  found  from  an  increase 
of  the  import  duties,  which  increase  cannot  be  secured 
without  the  contraction  of  new  commercial  treaties. 
Any  such  increased  revenue  could  now  be  applied  to 
any  purpose  the  Sultan  thought  fit,  since  under  the  con- 
version and  unification  scheme,  recently  consummated, 
the  bondholders  gave  up  the  exclusive  lien  on  any  fresh 
revenue  resulting  from  any  increase  in  the  import  duty 
which  was  theirs  by  right  of  article  viii.  of  the  Decree 
of  Moharrem  (December  8,  1881). 

At  the  present  time  we  may  safely  assume  that 
Germany  is  the  only  Power  that  has  signified  her 
acquiescence  in  a  revision  of  the  existing  commercial 
treaty,  and  that  while  France,  Austria,  and  Italy  are 
willing  to  do  so,  England  and  Russia  object.  There  is 
no  occasion  to  discuss  the  attitude  of  Russia  beyond 
remarking  that  a  due  consideration  paid  to  her  large 
export  of  corn  and  oil,  when  any  future  tariif  is  framed, 
will  probably  suffice  to  obtain  her  consent  to  it.  Eng- 
land, whose  trade  with  Turkey  is  far  larger  than  that 
of  any  other  single  country,  has  reasonable  grounds  for 
raising  objection  to  any  alteration  in  the  existing  fiscal 
arrangements  which  may  affect  her  trade  adversely. 
But  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  such  a  scheme  as  this 
must  be  looked  at  from  the  broader  point  of  view  of 
imperial  policy,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  it  will  be 
found  possible  for  us  to  pursue  a  course  of  cordial 
co-operation  given  in  return  for  certain  privileges — 
in  other  words,  that,  in  return  for  our  waiving  all 
objections  to  a  revision  of  the  customs  tariff,  and  for 
our  providing  facilities  for  the  acquisition  of  a  terminus 
on  the  Gulf,  we  are  allotted  an  equal  share  of  the  capital, 
and  receive  adequate  representation  on  the  Board. 

It  is  of  course  impossible  to  be  blind  to  the  fact  that 
there  is  in  England  at  the  present  time  a  certain  school 

G 


THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 


of  political  thought  to  whose  followers  the  word  German 
is  as  a  thing  accursed,  and  who  are  so  blinded  by  their 
Germanophobia  that  the  mere  suggestion  of  any  enter- 
prise undertaken  in  concert  with  that  Power  evokes 
from  them  a  chorus  of  hysterical  denunciation.  Never- 
theless, when  a  decision  has  to  be  made,  it  must  and  will 
be  made  without  reference  to  the  ephemeral  jealousies 
of  prejudiced  politicians.  Let  me  at  once  admit  that  I 
have  no  desire  whatsoever  to  see  any  formal  alliance 
contracted  with  Germany,  any  more  than  with  any  other 
Continental  Power  ;  but  to  work  in  friendly  co-operation 
with  the  people  of  another  nation  in  a  mission  of  civilisa- 
tion is  a  totally  different  thing  from  being  bound  by 
the  chains  of  a  formal  alliance,  and  to  put  unnecessary 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  any  scheme  which  tends  to 
improve  and  bring  the  ameliorating  influences  of  civilisa- 
tion within  reach  of  a  people  who  are  in  sore  need  of 
them  is  to  renounce  the  high  mission  which  it  has  ever 
been  the  pride  of  England  to  uphold.  Nor  from  a 
material  point  of  view  would  such  an  arrangement  be 
devoid  of  mutual  benefit.  Any  scheme  which  tends  to 
defer  the  partition  of  Turkey — for  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  I  am  discussing  the  line  on  the  assumption 
that  it  is  an  international  enterprise — is  to  the  ad- 
vantage of  Great  Britain,  since  the  integrity  of  Turkey, 
Persia,  and  Afghanistan  has  been  the  dominating  note 
of  her  policy  in  the  Near  East,  nor  can  any  undertaking 
which  tends  to  quicken  commerce  be  anything  but 
advantageous  to  the  nation  that  holds  the  lion's  share, 
provided  of  course  that  preferential  treatment  to  parti- 
cular nations  is  disallowed.  In  addition,  the  participa- 
tion of  Enofland  would  secure  for  our  own  manufacturers 
orders  for  a  proportion  of  the  requisite  material  for 
construction. 

The  original  promoters  of  the  scheme  would,  on  the 


THE  INDIAN  MAILS.  99 

other  hand,  profit  by  the  support  England  could  give 
to  the  traffic  in  the  shape  of  a  contract  for  the  Indian 
mails.  It  is  calculated  that,  provided  an  improved 
service  of  steamers  were  run  from  the  terminus  on  the 
Persian  Gulf  to  Kurrachi,  a  saving  of  3  days  16^  hours 
would  be  effected  on  the  present  14  days  16  hours  to 
India ;  and,  estimating  the  subsidy  now  given  to  the 
P.  and  0.  Company  for  carrying  the  mails  to  India  at 
£90,000,  an  increase  of  about  500  francs  jDer  kilometre 
would  accrue.  The  tendency  of  passenger  traffic  is  like- 
wise to  follow  the  mails,  and  in  addition  to  a  saving  of 
nearly  four  days,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  first-class 
fare  would  be  reduced  from  £72  to  £61. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  in  renewing  the 
contract  with  the  P.  and  O.  Company  the  Gov- 
ernment might  stipulate  for  a  higher  rate  of  speed 
than  the  present  14|-  knots,  and  were  19  knots 
attained  the  post  to  India  would  occupy  only  eleven 
days.  Many  who,  in  common  with  myself,  have 
passed  through  the  irritating  experience  of  having 
to  slow  down  to  half  speed  to  avoid  reaching 
Bombay  before  the  appointed  day,  can  testify  to 
the  ease  with  which  the  speed  of  the  P.  and  O. 
service  might  be  increased ;  but  to  attain  a  uniform 
speed  of  19  knots  would  doubtless  entail  an  enor- 
mously increased  consumption  of  coal  and  consequent 
expenditure,  for  which  there  would  appear  to  be  no 
call.i 

From  what  I  have  written  above  it  might  per- 
haps be  inferred  that  I  was  disappointed  at  the 
decision    of  his    Majesty's    Government,   made   known 

1  It  is  gratifying  to  learn  from  Sir  E.  Law's  speech  on  the  Indian 
budget  in  March  of  this  year  that  the  English  mail  contract  with  the 
P.  and  O.  Company  has  been  renewed  for  a  period  of  three  years,  on 
condition  that  the  mails  are  to  be  delivered  twenty-four  hours  earlier 
at  either  end. 


100  THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 

in  the  House  of  Commons  on  April  23,  1903.  Let 
me  hasten  to  dissipate  any  such  inference.  My 
desire  to  see  British  co-operation  is  prompted  not 
by  any  quixotic  goodwill  towards  Germany,  but  by 
the  necessity,  which  is  plainly  apparent,  of  protect- 
ing our  own  interests.  Nothing  could  be  more 
fatuous  than  for  us  to  look  quietly  on,  while  a 
railway  in  the  hands  of  two  foreign  nations,  "  with 
whom,"  to  quote  the  words  of  the  Prime  Minister, 
"  we  are  on  the  most  friendly  terms,  but  whose 
interests  may  not  be  identical  with  our  own,"  is 
being  pushed  right  down  to  a  sea  with  which  we 
are  so  closely  concerned  as  the  Persian  Gulf.  And 
so  I  urge  CO  -  operation,  in  order  that  the  railway 
may  become  an  international  undertaking,  and  that 
Great  Britain  may  have  that  voice  in  the  matter 
which,  in  view  of  her  special  interests,  she  is  entitled 
to  demand.  But  though  I  urge  co-operation  I  urge 
it  upon  certain  conditions,  because  I  realise  that 
Great  Britain  is  in  a  position  to  dictate.  On  no 
account  should  the  Government  consent  to  further 
the  undertaking  without  the  certainty  of  securing 
equal  powers  of  construction,  management,  and  con- 
trol. I  have  elsewhere  urged  that  the  section  from 
Baghdad  to  the  gulf  should  be  placed  in  British 
hands  ;  ^  but  should  this  prove  impracticable,  the  con- 
ditions as  stated  above  should,  provided  we  main- 
tain our  supremacy  in  the  gulf,  prove  adequate  to 
safeguard  our  interests.  It  was  because  these  con- 
ditions were  not  guaranteed  that  the  Government 
refused  their  support  in  the  spring  of  1903,  and  it 
is  because  I  am  convinced  that  in  the  end  these 
conditions  will  be  offered  that  I  welcome  the 
decision   which    was   then    come    to. 

^  In  an  article  written  for  'The  Times'  of  April  9,  1903. 


THE  POSITION  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN.  101 


I    have   said    that    Great    Britain   is    in    a    position 
to    dictate,    because    I   believe    that,    in    spite   of  the 
emphatic  declaration  of  Mr   Balfour  in   the  House  of 
Commons   on   April    8,    1903,   that   "the    project   will 
ultimately  be  carried  out,  with  or  without  our  having 
a  share  in  it,"  it  will  not  see  realisation  in  the  face 
of  the    uncompromising    opposition   of    this    country. 
Great  Britain  holds  two  trump-cards :   firstly,  in   the 
opposition  she  can  raise  to  any  revision  of  the  customs 
— and    the    Deutsche    Bank    must    eventually   realise 
that   the   favourable   attitude    of  Great   Britain   is    a 
necessity ;    and,   secondly,   in    our   position  of  ascend- 
ancy  at   Koweit.     When  the  extension  is   built  from 
Baghdad  to  the  Persian  Gulf,  it  will  most  assuredly 
be  of  England's  grace  and  not  of  England's  necessity. 
We    can    afford,    then,    to    content    ourselves,    as    our 
Russian    friends    would   say,    "with    quietly    awaiting 
the  further  development  of  events,"  and  we  may  rest 
assured  that  such  further  development  of  events,  how- 
ever  long   deferred,    will    take    the    form   of  renewed 
advances  to   Great   Britain.     When  an  offer  is  made 
which    recognises    the    principle    of   equal    powers    of 
construction,    management,     and     control,     then     will 
come   the    time    for    Great   Britain    to    take    up    that 
share    in    the    promotion    of   the     Baghdad     railway 
which,    I    have   not    the    slightest   doubt,   is    destined 
to  be  hers. 

It  may  be  well  before  concluding  this  chapter  to 
explain  the  position  at  the  present  moment.  Affairs 
have  advanced  to  the  extent  that  a  new  company  has 
been  created,  with  the  title  of  the  "  Imperial  Ottoman 
Baghdad  Bailway  Company,"  and  an  amended  form 
of  the  convention  of  January  1902  concluded  (March 
5,  1903).  An  arrangement,  which  may  be  regarded 
as   temporary,   has  been  arrived   at  by  which  France 


102  THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY. 

and  Germany  are  each  responsible  for  40  per  cent 
of  the  capital  sum,  in  order  that  the  first  section  of 
the  extension  from  Konia  may  be  embarked  upon. 
This  section  of  200  kilometres,  from  Konia  to  the 
village  of  Bulgurlu,  five  miles  beyond  Eregli,  is  now 
in  process  of  construction.  By  the  middle  of  March 
the  railhead  had  reached  a  point  50  kilometres  beyond 
Eregli,  and  was  advancing  at  the  rate  of  a  kilometre 
a-day ;  and  the  whole  distance  is  likely  to  see  com- 
pletion by  September  of  the  present  year.  According 
to  Consul  Waugh,  the  company  receives  bonds  from 
the  Turkish  Government  to  the  amount  of  54,000,000 
francs,  bearing  interest  at  4  per  cent,  with  a  sinking 
fund,  which  will  extinguish  the  loan  in  ninety-eight 
years,  the  term  of  the  concession  of  the  railway,  in 
guarantee  of  the  cost  of  construction  of  this  section. 
He  further  adds,  in  his  report  of  the  trade  of  Con- 
stantinople and  district  for  1903,  that  "  failing  sufficient 
surplus  from  the  receipts  of  the  line,  the  service  of 
the  loan,  which  is  equivalent  to  a  kilometric  guarantee 
of  11,000  francs,  is  to  be  met  by  an  annual  charge  of 
£106,000  on  certain  tithe  revenues." 

So  the  first  section  will  be  built  without  any  diffi- 
culty, and,  moreover,  under  the  above-mentioned 
arrangement,  the  company  expect  to  reimburse  them- 
selves for  all  expenses  contracted  up  to  the  present 
time,  so  that  with  the  completion  of  the  line  to  the 
edge  of  the  Taurus  Mountains,  the  company  will  be 
in  a  position  to  start  anew  with  a  clean  slate.  Whether 
any  further  progress  will  be  made  under  existing 
circumstances  is  open  to  doubt,  for  the  difficult  and 
expensive  section  through  the  Taurus  Mountains  looms 
large  in  the  foreground,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  if  further  progress  is  made  it  will  be  in  connection 
with  a  section  in  the  vicinity  of  Aleppo.      It  might 


^.V  IMPORTANT  STIPULATION.  103 

appear  that  the  stipulation  that  the  line  is  to  be 
constructed  in  eight  years  would  necessitate  its  con- 
tinuation without  delay ;  but  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  convention  has  been  drawn  up  by  wily  Ger- 
mans, who  knew  perfectly  well  what  they  were  about. 
This  stipulation  is,  in  the  first  place,  dependent  on  the 
punctual  fulfilment  by  the  Government  of  its  financial 
obligations  towards  the  concessionaire ;  and,  secondly, 
is  subject  to  delays  arising  from/o7^ce  majeure,  and  the 
definition  given  of  force  majeure  is  a  curious  one : 
"Seront  egalement  consideres  comme  cas  de  force 
majeure  une  guerre  entre  Puissances  Europeennes, 
ainsi  quun  changement  capital  dans  la  situation 
financier e  de  VAllemagne,  de  VAngleterre  ou  de  la 
France."  The  convention  abounds  with  curious  pro- 
visions of  a  similar  nature,  safeguarding  the  C07i- 
cessionaire,  and  it  is  perfectly  easy,  as  a  friend  of 
mine  remarked,  to  drive  a  carriage-and-pair  through 
it  anywhere. 

Such  in  brief  is  the  Baghdad  railway  question.  The 
review  which  I  have  given  of  it  makes  no  pretension 
to  being  exhaustive,  but  space  does  not  admit  of  a 
more  detailed  account.  The  objects  which  I  have  kept 
more  especially  in  view  have  been,  firstly,  to  point  out 
that  the  country  through  which  such  a  railway  will 
pass  cannot  fail  in  the  future — though  that  future 
may  be  a  distant  one — to  benefit  enormously  by  its 
construction,  from  the  point  of  view  both  of  internal 
development  and  of  expansion  of  trade ;  secondly,  to 
explain  the  position  of  Great  Britain  with  regard  to 
it ;  and,  lastly,  to  give  a  warning  to  any  one  who  takes 
any  interest  in  the  question  against  being  led  astray 
from  the  real  issues  at  stake  by  the  prejudiced  utter- 
ances of  Germanophobe  orators,  or  the  irresponsible 
ebullitions  of  a  Germanophobe  press. 


PEKSIA 


"  Clime  of  the  unforgotten  brave  ! 
Whose  land  from  plain  to  mountain  cave 
Was  freedom's  home  or  glory's  grave 
Shrine  of  the  mighty  !     Can  it  be 
That  this  is  all  remains  of  thee  ? " 

— Byron. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

BAGHDAD   TO   KERMANSHAH. 

Persian  characteristics— Methods  of  travel  in  Persia— Interesting  monu- 
ments of  Western  Persia— Nature  of  country  on  the  Turkish  border— 
The  legends  of  Shirin— Man  walled  up  alive— The  Darcy  concession— 
A  strange  dinner-party— The  ascent  to  the  Persian  highlands— A  late 
winter  — Reach  Kerman shah  —  Strategic  position  of  —  Population  — 
Persian  amenities  !— The  nakarreh  kha^ieh— The  rock  sculptures  of 
Bostan  —  Description  of  —  Inscriptions  —  Disfigurement  of  panels  — 
Opinion  of  the  late  Shah  concerning— Other  remains. 

"  The  springs  of  the  Teams  yield  the  best  and  finest 
water  of  all  rivers ;  and  a  man,  the  best  and  finest  of 
all  men,  came  to  them,  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  King 
of  the  Persians  and  of  the  whole  continent."  Thus 
Darius — at  least  so  says  Herodotus,  though  we  are  all 
of  course  entitled  to  our  own  opinion  as  to  how  far 
Herodotus  wrote  history  and  how  far  story.  I  have 
recalled  the  above,  because  the  trait  which  prompted 
a  Persian  2400  years  ago  to  cause  such  an  inscription 
to  be  chiselled  on  stone  is  so  palpable  in  a  very  large 
number  of  the  dwellers  in  that  country  to-day.  I  was 
once  discussing  various  episodes  in  the  history  of  Anglo- 
Persian  relations  in  the  past  with  a  gentleman  in  a 
position  of  authority,  and  I  happened  to  remark  that  I 
hoped  if  ever  England  and  Persia  were  again  involved 
in  war,  that  it  would  be  side  by  side  that  their  soldiers 
would  be  fighting,  and  not  in  opposition  as  once  before. 
"  Yes,  indeed,"  replied  my  friend,  "  you  have  good  reason 


108  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 

for  hoping  so,  for  my  men  here  are  certainly  the  equal 
of  ten  Europeans  "  !  Without  seeing  the  said  men  you 
could  not  enjoy  the  full  force  of  the  remark.  The  noble 
bearer  of  the  Garter  to  his  Majesty  the  Shah,  who  was 
saluted  with  a  broken  table-leg  on  joassing  one  of  the 
State  sentries  on  guard,  would  appreciate  it.  Another 
historian  has  handed  it  down  that  the  Persians  of  his 
day  were  taught  to  ride,  to  shoot,  and  to  speak  the 
truth.  Not  all  these  characteristics  have  withstood 
the  test  of  time.  I  came  to  an  agreement  with  a 
Persian  muleteer  to  supply  me  with  transport,  and 
personally  to  conduct  me  as  far  as  Teheran.  The  day 
fixed  for  departure  came  and  with  it  the  mule-man, 
who  begged  me  to  proceed  a  short  day's  journey  with- 
out him  as  he  had  business  in  the  town ;  and  with  an 
assurance  that  he  would  overtake  us  on  the  morrow,  he 
bade  us  God  -  speed.  That  was  the  last  I  ever  saw 
of  my  Persian  friend,  which  is  an  example  of  what  I 
mean. 

But,  for  the  most  part,  as  far  as  travelling  in  Per- 
sia goes,  it  might  still  be  the  days  of  the  historian 
of  Halicarnassus.  You  are  in  the  East  unredeemed 
and  unregenerate.  There  are  not  many  parts  of  the 
country,  for  instance,  in  which  you  can  expect  to  make 
a  journey  corresponding  to  that,  say,  from  Edinburgh  to 
London  in  much  less  than  a  month,  and  then  only  at 
an  expenditure  of  much  labour  and  forethought.  On 
the  post-roads  you  may  travel  fast — fast,  that  is,  for 
Persia,  and  may  cover  as  much  as  from  90  to  100 
miles  in  a  day  if  you  reduce  your  baggage  to  a  minimum, 
and  can  coax  your  jaded  spirit  and  weary  limbs  to 
resign  themselves  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  Persian 
post-horse  for  so  long.  But  the  number  of  post-roads 
is  limited,  and  where  there  is  no  post-road,  or  in  the 
event  of  your    having  more  worldly  goods  than  can 


ANCIENT  INSCRIPTIONS.  109 

be  conveniently  strapped  on  to  a  galloping  pony,  you 
must  travel  as  the  patriarchs  of  old,  with  the  immemorial 
camel  or  the  hard -worked  baggage -mule.  It  can  of 
course  be  claimed  as  an  advantage  that  travelling  thus 
one  sees  far  more  of  the  country  than  would  be  possible 
otherwise  ;  and  the  country  I  was  about  to  travel 
through  was  of  exceptional  interest,  whether  looked  at 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  lover  of  strange  records 
from  the  past,  or  from  that  of  the  speculator  as  to  the 
political  possibilities  of  the  future.  In  the  magnificent 
rock  sculptures  near  Kermanshah  the  lover  of  the 
antique  will  find  ample  reward  for  his  journey  ;  while 
twenty  miles  farther  on,  high  up  on  the  precipitous 
rock-cliffs  of  Piru,  stand  inscribed  the  imperishable 
records  of  Darius,  which  proclaim  to  the  world  to-day, 
as  confidently  as  when  first  cut  upon  the  face  of  the 
rock  2400  years  ago,  the  achievements  of  one  of  the 
mightiest  monarchs  of  the  past.  The  more  practical 
mind,  bent  on  inquiry  into  trade  and  commercial  re- 
turns, will  find  ample  material  to  occupy  attention, 
while  an  added  interest  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that 
here  lies  the  most  probable  line  of  a  Trans-continental 
railway  which  some  of  us  may  yet  live  to  see. 

Between  Baghdad  and  the  Persian  frontier  there  is 
little  that  calls  for  remark.  You  travel  for  ninety  miles 
across  the  level  plain  of  Chaldsea,  crossing  only  three 
insignificant  ridges  as  you  draw  towards  the  frontier. 
Kound  Baghdad  is  displayed  a  panorama  which  is 
mournful  and  irretrievably  monotonous — one,  that  is  to 
say,  with  which  the  traveller  in  the  East  is  likely  to 
become  painfully  familiar.  Dry,  dusty,  drab- coloured 
desert  is  the  only  description  that  can  be  given  of  the 
country  that  stretches  eastward  from  Baghdad,  though 
desert  only  because  uncultivated.  It  would  probably 
be  difficult  to  find  soil  that  would  give  better  value  in 


110  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 


return  for  water  and  a  modicum  of  labour.  Presently 
the  palm-girt  banks  of  the  Diala  rise  uncertainly  on  the 
horizon,  and  after  crossing  the  river  by  a  bridge  of 
boats  your  way  lies  through  a  zone  of  partial  cultivation 
which,  thanks  to  the  proximity  of  the  river,  extends  up 
to  the  frontier.  The  small  towns  of  Yakubieh,  Shah- 
raban,  Kizil  Robat,  and  Khanikin,  all  buried  in  palm- 
trees,  afford  you  shelter  for  the  night,  where  solemn, 
long-legged  storks  occupy  every  house -roof,  cutting 
quaint  figures  as  they  stand  motionless  with  one  leg 
tucked  up,  sharply  silhouetted  against  the  golden  back- 
ground of  the  western  sky. 

By  the  time  you  reach  Khanikin  you  have  discovered 
several  errors  in  the  guide-book  ;  but  let  me  not  be 
hypercritical,  for  after  all  the  wonderful  thing  is  that 
there  should  be  a  guide-book  at  all. 

After  crossing  the  frontier,  which  you  recognise  by  a 
small  round  tower,  the  country  becomes  broken  with 
low  hills,  which  culminate  in  the  rugged  peaks  and 
savage  mountain  gorges  of  Kurdistan.  On  the  right 
bank  of  the  Hulvan,  prettily  situated  on  a  steep  hill- 
side, stands  Kasr-i-Shirin,  the  first  town  encountered 
in  Persia,  and  likewise  the  first  place  of  any  interest  on 
the  road  from  Baghdad,  for  close  by  are  the  substantial 
remains  of  the  palace  built  by  the  monarch  Khosroe 
for  his  beautiful  bride  Shirin,  whose  personality  is 
enshrouded  in  a  veil  of  the  wildest  romance.  The  story 
of  the  great  love  of  Ferhad  for  the  peerless  Shirin,  of 
the  colossal  works  which  he  undertook  as  the  price  of 
her  hand,  of  his  tragic  self-destruction  on  hearing  a 
false  tale  of  her  death,  Is  one  with  which  that  quaint 
enigma,  the  story-teller  of  Asia,  knows  full  well  he  can 
still  set  a  cord  trembling  through  the  passionate  pulses 
of  the  East.  One  of  the  buildings  still  standing  is 
undoubtedly  a  fire  temple,  while  the  remains  of  a  vast 


A    TERRIBLE  DEATH.  Ill 

aqueduct,  "  and  of  troughs  and  stone  pipes  by  which 
water  was  brought  into  the  palace  and  city  from  a 
distance  of  fifteen  miles,  are  still  traceable  among  the 
desolations."  ^  This  was  said  to  have  been  one  of  the 
works  of  Ferhad  for  Shirin.  Excavation  might  be  well 
repaid  here,  for  I  heard  of  a  native  having  dug  up  a 
small  gold  statue  ten  or  twelve  years  ago.  It  is  per- 
haps needless  to  add  that  local  officialdom  found  it 
incumbent  on  it  to  take  charge  of  the  said  golden 
statuette ! 

Beyond  these  relics  of  the  past  I  found  another 
monument  of  an  entirely  different  description  and  of 
quite  recent  construction,  having  been  erected,  in  fact, 
only  a  few  weeks  before.  This  consists  of  a  small  oval- 
shaped  building  of  brick  and  plaster,  which  is  of  no 
particular  attraction  of  itself,  and  might  even  pass 
unnoticed  by  a  casual  observer.  There  is,  however,  a 
tale  attached,  a  tale  which  w^as  related  to  me  in  grue- 
some detail,  which  lost  nothing  in  the  telling  by  an 
eye-witness  of  the  scene.  For  the  odd  oval -shaped 
building,  which  assumed  a  ghastly  significance  as  the 
horrid  details  were  poured  forth,  was  nothing  less  than 
a  cruel  shroud  wound  slowly  round  a  living  criminal, 
while  death  still  held  aloof,  mocking  his  victim  with  the 
unspeakable  horror  of  his  slow  approach.  Incredible 
though  it  may  seem,  the  appalling  custom  of  walling  a 
man  up  alive  is  still  practised  in  the  twentieth  century  ! 
The  victim — he  had  stolen  a  bale  of  cotton — was  strong, 
his  struggles  were  fierce,  the  operation  long-drawn-out, 
and  the  appreciation  of  the  crowded  onlookers  great  in 
proportion.  The  builders  found  their  task  no  easy  one, 
even  though  their  victim  was  bound,  and  the  order  was 
finally  given  to  reduce  his  power  of  resistance.     The 

1  I  quote  Mrs  Bishop  here,  because  I  did  not  observe  the  "  troughs  and 
stone  pipes"  myself.     See  her  'Journeys  in  Persia  and  Kurdistan.' 


112  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 

only  weapon  handy  was  a  blunt  butcher's  knife,  the 
executioner  was  intoxicated,  and  the  ghastly  terror  of 
that  final  scene  beyond  belief.  Let  me  not  dwell  upon 
the  revolting  details.  Suffice  it  that  the  monument  is 
there — a  timely  warning  to  all  would-be  malefactors. 

Within  a  dozen  miles  of  Kasr-i-Shirin  an  experi- 
mental shaft  was  being  sunk  in  search  of  oil.  When 
one  thinks  of  the  forest  of  derricks  and  feverish  activity 
of  Baku,  the  single  shed  and  engine  here  seems  a  small 
affair.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  the  beginning  of  an 
important  business.  That  oil  exists  in  many  parts  of 
Southern  Persia  is  well  known,  and  it  is  a  matter  for 
congratulation  that  a  concession  of  such  vast  possibilities 
has  fallen  into  British  hands.  The  concession  obtained 
from  the  Shah  by  Mr  Darcy  is  for  sixty  years,  dating 
from  1902,  and  includes  the  whole  of  the  south  of 
Persia.  I  rode  out  one  morning, — passing  on  the  way 
the  village  of  Azziz  Khan,  a  monster  of  iniquity  who 
had  lately  shot  his  own  nephew  under  circumstances 
of  the  greatest  treachery,  and  farther  on  a  group  of 
villages,  all  in  process  of  reconstruction  after  being 
burnt  in  a  recent  inter-tribal  engagement, — and  spent 
a  day  at  the  hospitable  camp  of  the  engineer  in  charge. 
Oil  had  not  then  been  struck, — the  borer  reached  a 
depth  of  800  feet  the  morning  I  was  there, — though  all 
the  indications  of  its  presence  were  observed.^  Galatian 
mechanics  were  at  the  head  of  gangs  of  Persian  drillers 
from  Baku,  while  the  natives  were  being  made  use  of  as 
far  as  their  incapacity  for  skilled  labour  would  allow,  in 
order  to  comply  with  the  provision  of  the  concession 
which  demands  the  employment  of  Persian  subjects. 

1  Early  in  the  present  year  (1904)  one  of  the  borings  began  to  spout, 
and  oil  was  sent  to  England  as  a  sample.  The  presence  of  oil  in  satisfac- 
tory quantity  having  thus  been  proved,  exploration  was  embarked  upon 
farther  south,  and  additional  progress  may  no  doubt  shortly  be  looked  for. 


UNFAVOURABLE  SITE   OF   TRIAL   SHAFT.  113 

If  it  may  be  permitted  to  one  who  has  no  expert 
knowledge  to  make  a  criticism,  it  is  that  the  site 
selected  does  not  appear  to  be  a  particularly  happy  one 
to  have  chosen  for  a  trial  shaft.  To  begin  with,  it  is 
unpleasantly  close  to  an  extremely  nebulous  Turko- 
Persian  border,  at  a  point  where  the  promoters  of  the 
Baghdad  railway  have  mineral  rights  for  a  distance  of 
20  kilometres  on  either  side  of  their  line.  But  even 
supposing  there  is  no  possibility  of  future  friction  on 
these  grounds,  how  is  the  oil,  when  it  is  found,  to  be 
conveyed  to  the  coast  ?  The  only  transport  is  that  of 
animals  until  Baghdad  is  reached,  and  if,  as  is  sug- 
gested, a  pipe  be  laid,  it  will  have  to  pass  through  500 
miles  of  extremely  mountainous  country,  a  costly  under- 
taking in  itself,  which  will  be  rendered  infinitely  more 
so  by  the  necessity  which  will  inevitably  arise  of  bribing 
the  various  predatory  tribes  through  whose  dominions 
it  must  pass.  If,  as  is  said,  the  oil -field  extends  for 
300  miles  and  touches  Shushter  and  Dizful,  it  is  natural 
to  wonder  why  a  trial  venture  was  not  made  there — the 
oil  found  at  Shushter  is  so  pure  that  it  is  used  by  the 
natives  without  refining — since  the  excellent  port  of 
Mohammerah  is  within  such  easy  reach.  It  is  to  be  sup- 
posed, however,  that  those  whose  business  it  is  know 
best,  and  the  enterprise  is  in  any  case  one  which  every 
Englishman  will  wish  a  hearty  success. 

In  looking  over  my  notes  on  Kasr-i-Shirin  I  find  it 
put  down  that  I  attended  a  dinner-party  there.  There 
is  nothing  very  remarkable  about  going  to  a  dinner- 
party in  an  ordinary  way,  but  this  one  was  something 
out  of  the  common.  Mine  host  was  a  Kurdish  chief, 
Shir  Khan  by  name,  and  governor  of  the  district.  He 
it  was  under  whose  superintendence  the  immuration 
already  mentioned  took  place.  Out  of  courtesy  to  me 
we  dined  at  a  table,  a  concession  which  I  appreciated 

H 


114  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 

all  the  more  when  he  informed  my  mterpreter  con- 
fidentially that  he  found  the  position — i.e.,  seated  on 
a  chair — insufferably  uncomfortable.  After  imbibing 
innumerable  cups  of  tea  and  coffee  between  6  p.m.  and 
8  P.M.,  a  cloth  was  laid,  and  large  flat  slabs  of  bread 
spread  all  round,  a  space  being  left  in  the  centre  for 
dishes.  Bowls  of  pilao  and  dishes  of  mutton  were  then 
placed  in  the  middle,  and  when  we  had  each  been  given 
a  plate,  spatchcocked  fowls  were  brought  in  on  skewers, 
pulled  off,  and  placed  on  the  table  in  front  of  us. 
Knives  and  forks  were  conspicuous  by  their  absence, 
but  at  the  invitation  of  our  host  to  set  to,  a  dozen 
hands  were  plunged  into  the  rice — rather  a  greasy 
performance,  since  it  was  cooked  in  butter — and  dis- 
membered the  fowls  which  lay  scattered  about  on  the 
table.  We  went  ahead  merrily,  stuffing  handfuls  of 
meat  and  rice  into  our  mouths  until  hunger  was 
appeased  and  thirst  satisfied  with  the  goats'  milk 
which  formed  the  staple  drink,  when  a  servant  came 
round  and  poured  water  over  our  hands  from  a  brazen 
ewer.  That  brought  the  meal  to  an  end.  Simple  but 
effective  was  my  reflection  after  it  was  finished. 
Personally  I  felt  that  I  was  clumsy,  from  being  un- 
used to  eating  everything  with  my  fingers,  I  suppose ; 
but  for  those  accustomed  to  it,  it  appears  possible  to 
dispose  of  a  maximum  of  food  in  a  minimum  of  time — 
if  I  may  judge  by  the  performances  of  my  fellow-guests, 
at  least ! 

After  leaving  Kasr  -  i  -  Shirin  the  track,  which  is 
abominably  stony,  passes  through  the  filthy  little 
villag-e  of  Sar  -  i  -  Pul,  identified  with  the  Halah  of 
2  Kings  xvii.  6,  up  a  broad  valley  for  a  short  distance, 
through  a  natural  cleft  in  an  abrupt  limestone  ridge, 
said  to  contain  the  tomb  of  David,  and  along  another 
valley,  at  the  extremity  of  which  rise  the  perpendicular 


THE  HIGHLANDS  OF  KURDISTAN.  115 

walls  of  rock  which  constitute  the  historic  Zagros 
Gates.  The  ascent  is  made  by  a  road  which  zigzags 
backwards  and  forwards  up  the  steep  mountain-side, 
and  before  reaching  the  summit  a  marble  arch  is  passed 
on  the  left-hand  side,  connected  in  the  popular  mind 
with  the  story  of  Ferhad  and  Shirin,  but  said  by 
Layard  to  be  Greek  or  Roman. ^ 

Having  reached  the  summit  you  find  that  you  have 
risen  by  one  gigantic  step,  as  it  were,  from  the  lowlands 
of  Chaldsea  to  the  highlands  of  Kurdistan,  and  I  also 
found  that  I  had  been  incontinently  hurried  from  the 
delightful  warmth  and  sunshine  of  early  spring  into 
the  gloomy  depths  of  an  abnormally  late  winter.  For 
the  next  four  days  we  ploughed  laboriously  through  a 
sea  of  mud  and  slush  underfoot,  while  rain,  wind,  hail, 
and  snow  raged  without  ceasing  overhead.  It  was 
consequently  with  feelings  of  intense  satisfaction  that 
I  marched  into  Kermanshah  on  the  11th  March,  to  be 
welcomed  and  hospitably  entertained  by  Mr  H.  E,abino, 
whom  I  found  in  charge  of  the  Kermanshah  branch  of 
the  Imperial  Bank  of  Persia,  opened  here  just  a  year 
before. 

Varahan  lY.,  at  one  time  Governor  of  Kerman,  and 
hence  styled  Kerman  Shah,  had  an  eye  to  the  strategic 
advantages  of  the  site  when  he  chose  the  position  now 
occupied  by  the  town  which  bears  his  name.  Situated 
midway  between  Teheran,  Tabriz,  Ispahan,  and  Baghdad, 
with  highways  from  all  of  these  places  meeting  at  a 
common  centre,  its  importance  as  a  strategic  position 
is  assured.  Being  the  first  town  encountered  on  the 
Baghdad-Teheran  trade  route,  all  goods  must  necessarily 
enter  it  before  they  are  distributed  to  the  various  towns 

^  "  At  about  two-thirds  of  the  ascent  there  is  a  small  square  building  of 
large  dressed  blocks  of  white  marble,  consisting  of  a  deep-vaulted  recess, 
which  is  Greek  or  Roman." — Early  Adventures,  vol.  i.  p.  220. 


116  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 


to  which  they  are  destined,  hence  its  additional  im- 
portance as  a  commercial  centre.  The  usual  discrepancy 
is  of  course  found  in  the  various  estimates  of  its  popula- 
tion. The  province  of  which  it  is  the  capital,  and  which 
bears  the  same  name,  is  said  to  have  a  total  population 
of  from  300,000  to  350,000,  and  the  town  itself  is  prob- 
ably responsible  for  about  50,000.  In  Lord  Curzon's 
'Persia'  it  is  put  at  20,000,  while  Mrs  Bishop,  writing 
about  the  same  time,  gives  25,000.  The  information 
from  the  three  different  sources  from  which  I  sought  to 
ascertain  the  approximate  figure  was  of  doubtful  value, 
as  may  be  judged  by  the  results  :  (l)  100,000  (Turkish 
Consul);  (2)  60,000  (Mr  H.  Babino) ;  (3)  40,000- 
50,000  (Baron  Weydel,  chief  of  the  customs  of  Western 
Persia).  The  bazaars  are  fairly  large  and  well  stocked 
with  goods  from  Europe,  though  of  the  whole  bulk  of 
the  trade  which  passes  through  only  a  small  proportion 
remains  in  the  city. 

At  one  end  of  the  town  is  an  open  space  known  as 
the  gun  square,  planted  with  trees,  some  of  which 
could  tell  unpleasant  tales.  Two  poplars  growing 
close  together  immediately  outside  the  bank  premises 
had  played  the  part  of  an  extemporary  scaffold 
three  years  before.  The  criminal,  suspended  upside- 
down,  with  one  leg  fastened  to  each  tree  trunk,  was 
slowly  cut  open  with  a  pair  of  scissors  !  This  was  in 
the  days  of  the  Ala-ed-Dowleh,  since  promoted  to  the 
governorship  of  Farz,  who  must  be  of  similar  stamp  to 
the  genial  governor  of  Arabistan,  who,  on  hearing  that 
the  British  Minister  had  lost  some  saddles  in  his 
district,  hastened  to  assure  him  that  there  was  no 
cause  for  annoyance,  since  in  the  event  of  the  saddles 
not  being  immediately  restored,  the  skins  of  the  villagers 
would  make  excellent  substitutes  !  I  was  only  in  the 
town  a  few  days,  but  felt  I  was  lucky  not  to  witness 


SALUTE   TO   THE  SUN.  117 


any  atrocity.  My  host,  while  reposing  on  his  balcony, 
had  witnessed  a  man  deprived  of  his  ears  and  nose  and 
then  led  round  the  bazaar  as  a  beauty  show  only  a 
short  time  before. 

The  town  is  the  seat  of  a  royal  governor,  a  fact  of 
which  I  was  constantly  reminded,  for  my  room  was 
immediately  under  the  nakarreh  Jchaneh,  or  drum- 
tower,  and  every  evening  at  sunset  my  ears  were 
deafened  by  a  wild  fanfaronade,  while 

"  For  leagues  and  leagues  around, 
The  brazen  sound 
Eolled  through  the  stillness  of  departing  day, 
Like  thunder  far  away."  ^ 

To  leave  Kermanshah  without  saying  something 
about  the  famous  rock-sculptures  of  Bostan  would  be 
as  unnatural  as  to  leave  Moscow  without  seeing  the 
Kremlin.  Four  miles  from  the  city  rises  the  perpen- 
dicular rock  face  in  which  are  hewn  the  arched  recesses 
known  as  the  Tak-i-Bostan.  Writers  have  laboured  to 
show  that  the  name  is  Tak-i-Bostan  or  arch  of  the 
garden  ;  but  I  believe  this  conclusion,  though  ingenious, 
is  wrong,  and  that  the  place  is  not  necessarily  named 
after  the  gardens  in  the  vicinity,  but  is  in  reality  Tak- 
i-Vastam,  which  is  the  reading  found  in  the  Persian 
manuscripts.  Immediately  in  front  of  the  rock  are 
two  tanks  of  water  surrounded  by  trees,  and  to  the 
right  as  you  face  it  an  ingeniously  constructed  villa, 
the  property  of  the  late  Yekil-i-Dowleh,  who  held  the 
office  of  British  agent.  The  largest  and  most  modern 
of  the  two  arches — the  third  set  of  sculptures  consists 
of  a  panel  and  is  not  surmounted  by  an  arch — has  a 
height  of  30  feet,  and  a  breadth  and  depth  of  24  and 
22  feet  respectively.     On  the  right-hand  side  there  is 

^  Robert  Southey. 


118  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 

a  large  panel  representing  a  stag-hunt,  while  a  corre- 
sponding scene  on  the  left  represents  a  boar-hunt.     The 
back  is  occupied  by  two  panels,  one  above  the  other, 
the  upper  showing  Khosroe   Par  viz  (590-628   a.d.)  in 
the  centre,  with  Shirin  and  the  Emperor  Mauritius  on 
either  hand.     This   is  the  generally   accepted  theory, 
though  it  must  also  be  said  that  there  is  another  which 
assigns  a  mythical  character  to  all  three  figures.     The 
lower  panel  is  occupied  by  a  gigantic  figure  of  Khosroe 
Parviz  on  horseback.     The  second  arch,  17  feet  high, 
1 9  feet  wide,  and  1 1  feet  deep,  contains  a  panel  on  which 
are  sculptured  the  figures  of  Shapur  II.  (310-379  a.d.) 
and   Shapur  III.    (385-390   a.d.),   with   inscriptions   in 
Pehlevi  on  either  side  which  leave  no  room  for  ingenious 
conjecture.     Here  it  is  set  down  unmistakably  who  the 
figures  are,  the  inscription  on  the  left  reading  :  "  Image 
of  the  worshipper  of  Mazda,  the  king  Shapur,  king  of 
kings,  of  Iran  and  Aniran,  whose  origin   is  from  the 
gods,  the  son  of  the  worshipper  of  Mazda,  the  king 
Shapur,  king  of  kings,  of  Iran  and  Aniran,  whose  origin 
is  from  the  gods,  the  grandson  of  the  king  Horamazda, 
king  of  kings" — and  that  on  the  right:  "This  is  the 
image  of  the  worshipper  of  Mazda,  the  king  Shapur, 
king  of  kings,  of  Iran  and  Aniran,  whose  origin  is  from 
the  gods,  the  son  of  the  worshipper  of  Mazda,  the  king 
Horamazda,  king  of  kings,  of  Iran  and  Aniran,  whose 
origin  is  from  the  gods,  the  grandson  of  Narcis,  king 
of  kings." 

The  third  set  of  sculptures  on  the  right  is  the  most 
ancient  of  the  three,  and  represents  Shapur  I.  (241-273 
A.D.)  being  invested  with  half  the  kingdom  by  Ardeshir, 
founder  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty  (211-241  a.d.)  At 
one  side  of  the  panel  is  a  representation  of  the  god 
Ormuz,  while  a  figure  lying  prostrate  beneath  Shapur 
and  Ardeshir  is  variously  described  as  Artabanus,  the 


EUROPEAN  VANDALISM.  119 

last    of    the    Parthian    monarchs,    and    the    Emperor 
Valerian. 

The  carving  in  the  largest  of  the  arches  is  excellent, 
and  in  many  parts  well  preserved ;  but  the  whole 
effect  is  marred,  firstly,  by  a  painted  sculpture  of  one 
Mohammed  Ali  Mirza,  Dowlet  Shah  (son  of  Fath  Ali 
Shah),  sitting  in  a  golden  chair,  with  his  son  Heshmet- 
ed-Dowleh  in  front,  and  another  son,  Emad-ed-Dowleh, 
behind,  which  his  chief  eunuch,  Agha  Ghani,  caused  to 
be  executed  above  the  boar-hunt ;  and,  secondly,  by  an 
extraordinary  vulgarity  which  has  led  innumerable 
travellers  to  inscribe  their  own  unimportant  names  all 
over  the  place.  It  is  absolutely  nauseating,  while  look- 
mg  at  the  excellent  carving  in  the  panel  representing 
the  stag-hunt,  to  find  your  eye  suddenly  arrested  by 
the  name  Polacco  chiselled  deep  in  large  letters  in  the 
very  middle  of  the  scene  !  One  wonders  whether  Mr 
Polacco  really  is  under  the  illusion  that  his  name  is  of 
such  vast  interest  to  posterity  that  it  must  be  inscribed 
among  the  finest  rock  -  sculptures  extant  in  Persia ! 
Among  other  names  I  remember  Williams  and  Barker ; 
but  these,  it  must  be  admitted,  are  but  specimens  of 
an  enormous  number  of  similar  disfigurements.  The 
late  Nasr-ed-Din  Shah  was  much  disgusted  with  the 
works  of  these  vandals,  as  is  attested  by  the  following 
passages  culled  from  his  Majesty's  diary  of  his  expedi- 
tion to  Kerbela,  1870-1871  :  "Above  this  panel  Agha 
Ghani,  a  native  of  Talish,  Gilan,  chief  eunuch  of 
Mohammed  Ali  Mirza,  took  the  trouble  of  having  an 
image  of  the  late  prince  sitting  on  a  throne,  and  that 
of  Heshmet-ed-Dowleh,  his  son,  and  that  of  another  of 
his  younger  sons,  sculptured  on  the  stone.  Ghani  him- 
self, with  his  despiseable  face,  is  standing  in  front  of  the 
prince.  It  is  so  badly  and  coarsely  done  that  he  has 
really  spoiled  the  arch.     It  was  so  badly  sculptured 


120  BAGHDAD   TO  KERMANSHAH. 


that  they  had  to  paint  it  with  various  colours.  Keally 
it  has  spoiled  the  arch."  There  is  likewise  something 
pathetic  in  the  plaint  which  occurs  farther  on  :  "  The 
inscriptions  of  people  on  the  rock  here  have  not  left  a 
single  place  free." 

Two  carved  stone  capitals,  or  possibly  fire-altars,  and 
the  upper  portion  of  an  enormous  stone  figure,  have 
been  set  up  on  the  far  side  of  one  of  the  tanks.  I 
have  seen  it  suggested  that  this  figure  fell  from  a  plat- 
form above  the  arches,  where  stone  stumps  supposed 
to  be  the  feet  are  still  visible.  I  think  this  is  quite 
out  of  the  question,  since  the  stone  stumps,  to  begin 
with,  are  of  an  absolutely  different  coloured  stone  to 
the  statue,  and  bear  no  resemblance  to  feet.  They 
were  probably  used  to  secure  the  scaffolding  at  the 
time  the  sculptures  were  executed.  The  statue  has 
been  invested  with  a  certain  magic  power  by  the  hill 
tribes,  who  regard  it  as  a  sort  of  panacea  for  every  ill. 
To  quote  his  Majesty's  diary  once  more  :  "  It  is  said 
that  the  Lur  has  this  statue  in  veneration,  and  when 
they  suffer  from  chills,  fever,  and  other  ailments  they 
place  at  the  foot  of  the  statue  peas  and  raisins  and 
other  offerings.  Most  of  the  time  they  go  away  un- 
happy.    They  are  foolish  and  stupid  men." 

To  the  right  of  the  sculptures  are  two  small  flights 
of  steps  cut  out  of  the  rock,  which  lead  on  to  a  sort 
of  platform  above.  Before  leaving  let  me  correct  the 
impression  which  I  received  when  I  read  of  them  as  a 
"  flight  of  several  hundreds  of  steps  "  !  Niches  would 
be  a  more  correct  term,  and  the  two  short  flights  are 
jointly  possessed  of  precisely  102.  A  far  more  accurate 
idea  is  gained  from  the  remark  of  his  late  Majesty  : 
"But  to  go  up  these  steps  is  not  free  of  danger!" 


A    TEMPLE   TO  ARTEMIS.  121 


CHAPTER  X. 


KERMANSHAH    TO    TEHERAN. 

Eemains  at  Kangavar — The  inscriptions  at  Bisitun — Deciphered  by  Sir  H. 
Rawlinson — Description  of  the  tablet'  above  the  inscriptions — Ker 
Porter's  surmise — Names  and  identities — Another  inscription — The 
country  between  Kermanshah  and  Hamadan — Hamadan — Population 
— Trade — The  tombs  of  Esther  and  Mordecai — The  tomb  of  Avi- 
cenna — A  beautiful  mosque — The  Ganjnameh — A  stone  lion — The  key 
to  the  decipherment  of  the  cuneiform  alphabet — Gold — -The  question 
of  the  site  of  Ecbatana  of  Deioces — The  debauches  of  Alexander  the 
Great — The  decay  of  Hamadan — The  country  between  Hamadan  and 
Teheran — Execrable  weather — Discomforts  of  travel — Reach  Teheran. 

Between  Kermanshah  and  Hamadan,  the  next  town 
of  importance,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  interest.  At 
Kangavar,  three  days'  journey  along  the  road,  I  noticed 
many  remains  of  ancient  buildings,  huge  square -cut 
stones,  and  in  one  place  portions  of  colossal  round 
pillars  built  into  a  modern  mud  building,  probably 
portions  of  the  temple  to  Artemis,  which  is  supposed 
to  have  stood  here.^  But  all  else  is  overshadowed  in 
importance  by  the  world-famed  inscriptions  of  Darius, 
which  stand  graven  in  three  languages  upon  a  sheer 
and  inaccessible  rock-face  of  the  mountain  Piru.     Im- 

1  See  Layard's  '  Early  Adventures  ' :  "  Kangowar  is  supposed  to  represent 
the  ancient  city  of  Pancobar,  where  the  Assyrian  queen  (Semiramis)  is  said 
to  have  erected  a  temple  to  Anaitis  or  Artemis,  and  to  have  established  an 
erotic  cult  in  which,  if  her  reputation  be  not  belied,  she  was  amongst  the 
most  ardent  worshippers." — Vol.  i.  p.  246. 


122  KERMANSHAH  TO   TEHERAN 

mediately  below  is  situated  the  squalid  village  of 
Bisitun  or  Behistun,  and  so  sheer  and  to  such  a  height 
does  the  rock  cliff  rise  above  it,  that  it  is  almost  with 
a  shock  that  one  looks  out  on  waking  in  the  morning 
to  see  so  stupendous  a  mass  seemingly  overhanging  one. 
The  inscriptions,  which  were  first  deciphered  by  Sir 
H.  Bawlinson,  and  record  the  achievements  of  Darius's 
reign,  are  at  a  height  of  about  300  feet  from  the 
ground.  I  climbed  up  to  within  about  30  yards,  but 
beyond  this  found  it  impossible  to  proceed  without  aid. 
Above  the  inscriptions,  which  occupy  a  space  of  150 
feet  in  length  by  100  feet  in  height,  is  a  sculptured 
panel  of  fourteen  figures.  On  the  left  are  tAvo  figures 
standing,  then  one  seated,  shown  by  his  superior  size 
to  be  Darius  himself,  and  then  nine  figures  standing, 
chained  to  one  another.  These  latter  represent  the 
impostors  who  led  the  different  revolts  in  Susiana, 
Babylon,  Media,  Sagartia,  and  Margiana.  The  last 
figure,  distinguished  from  the  rest,  who  are  bareheaded, 
by  a  high  cap,  is  the  leader  of  a  Scythian  revolt  con- 
quered by  Darius,  while  the  sculptures  were  in  progress 
of  construction.  Underneath  the  foot  of  Darius  is  the 
prostrate  figure  of  Pseudo-Smerdis,  the  Magian  usurper, 
and  hovering  over  all  is  a  representation  of  the  god 
Auramazda.  In  Ker  Porter's  description  of  Bisitun  I 
find  the  following  :  "  Should  the  discoveries  of  time 
prove  my  conjecture  to  be  right,  this  bas-relief  must  be 
nearly  two  hundred  years  older  than  any  which  are 
ascribed  to  Cyrus  at  Persepolis  or  Parsargadse."  But 
the  discoveries  of  time  have  failed  him,  for  his  con- 
jecture was  that  the  central  figure  was  Shalmanezer, 
and  the  rest  the  captive  tribes  of  Israel !  And  the 
elaborate  reasoning  which  he  gives  in  support  of  his 
theory  falls  to  the  ground  in  the  light  of  ascertained 
fact. 


A   HISTORICAL  DOCUMENT.  123 

When  one  examines  the  whole  carefully  with  a  glass, 
one  realises  what  a  wonderful  work  it  is.  The  labour 
which  must  have  been  spent,  first  in  rendering  so  large 
a  space  absolutely  smooth,  and  then  in  engraving  the 
gigantic  inscription  in  Persian,  Susian,  and  Assyrian  on 
the  hard  surface  of  the  rock,  must  have  been  enormous. 
A  coating  of  some  sort  of  varnish  seems  to  have  been 
placed  over  the  whole,  which  is  doubtless  responsible 
for  the  extraordinary  state  of  preservation  of  the  writ- 
ing to  this  day.  After  seeing  this  strange  writing  on 
the  rock  and  learning  the  great  story  which  it  tells,  it 
is  easy  to  agree  with  the  remark  of  Lord  Curzon  that 
here  stands  "  the  most  important  historical  document, 
albeit  in  stone,  next  to  the  Damietta  stone,  that  has 
been  discovered  and  deciphered  "  in  the  past  century.^ 

A  good  deal  of  perplexity  has  arisen  over  the  ques- 
tion of  names  and  identities.  Bisitun  is  said  to  mean 
"  without  pillars,"  and  has  also  been  supposed  to  be  a 
contraction  of  the  ancient  Bagistan.  I  may  mention 
that  eight  or  nine  miles  to  the  south  I  noticed  remains 
of  stone  pillars  and  capitals  at  a  village  called  Hadgia- 
bad,  which  might  w^ell  mark  the  site  of  Bagistan  of  the 
ancients,  since  the  distance  of  Hadgiabad  from  Bisitun 
agrees  with  the  distance  given  by  ancient  writers  of 
Bagistan  from  the  inscriptions. 

To  the  right  altogether  of  the  famous  inscriptions  is 
another  tablet  containing  some  rude  and  hardly  recog- 
nisable equestrian  figures,  with  an  inscription  declaring 
it  to  be  the  work  of  Gotarzes,  the  Parthian  king  (about 
50  A.D.) ;  and  in  the  centre  of  this  a  space  has  been 
smoothed  at  a  later  date,  and  an  Arabic  inscription 
inserted,  setting  forth  the  terms  on  which  the  revenue 
of  the  two  villages  has  been  assigned  to  the  upkeep  of 
the  caravanserai.      If  one  may  judge  by  the  state  of 

1  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  52. 


124  KERMANSHAH  TO   TEHERAN. 

preservation  of  the  said  caravanserai,  the  revenue  of  the 
two  villages  must  be  microscopic  !  Yet  one  more  relic 
is  to  be  seen  in  the  centre  of  the  village  in  the  form  of 
a  carved  stone  capital,  or  perhaps  fire-altar,  similar  to 
those  already  mentioned  at  Kermanshah. 

Little  more  need  be  said  of  the  journey  from  Kerman- 
shah to  Hamadan.  It  takes  you  through  an  elevated 
country,  along  wild  valleys  and  across  rugged  ridges, 
where  the  climate  even  at  this  time  of  the  year  is  apt 
to  be  cold  and  stormy.  ^  Five  days,  or  six  if  you  are 
content  with  moderate  marches,  will  take  you  from  one 
town  to  the  other,  the  distance,  given  by  the  muleteers 
as  twenty  -  six  farsakhs,  being  roughly  equivalent  to 
rather  more  than  100  miles.  I  reached  Hamadan  on 
the  19th  March,  to  find  the  surrounding  country  under 
snow  and  the  town  itself  a  quagmire  of  filth  and  slush, 
and  I  entered  into  the  feelings  of  Ker  Porter,  who, 
though  not  expecting  "  to  see  Ecbatana  as  Alexander 
found  it  ;  neither  in  the  superb  ruin  in  which  Timur 
had  left  it,"  has  yet  put  on  record  that  when  he  did 
actually  behold  it,  "  it  was  with  the  appalled  shock  of 
seeing  a  prostrate  dead  body  "  I 

The  population  is  variously  computed  at  from  40,000 
to  80,000,  but  my  host,  an  Armenian  gentleman  whose 
hospitality  and  kindness  I  shall  long  remember,  af- 
firmed that  it  was  not  less  than  50,000.  In 
'Persia'  Lord  Curzon  gives  it  as  "not  more  than 
20,000,"  but  he  must  have  been  misinformed,  for 
there  has  certainly  not  been  an  increase  of  30,000 
in  the  last  decade.  There  is  a  colony  of  from  3000 
to   4000    Jews,   and   about   50   families  of  Armenians. 

^  I  notice  that  Layard,  travelling  here  in  1840,  found  snow  on  the 
summits  in  July.  "  We  were  now  approaching  the  loftiest  part  of  the 
great  range  of  the  Luristan  Mountains,  and  the  highest  peaks  were 
still  covered  with  snow." — Early  Adventures. 


THE  BAZAARS  OF  HAMAVAN.  125 

The  bazaars  are  busy  and  fairly  spacious,  presenting 
the  long  covered-in  arcades  with  their  many  rami- 
fications, familiar  to  the  traveller  in  the  East.  Great 
impetus  was  given  to  the  trade  of  the  town  by  the 
stifling  of  the  transit  trade  through  Caucasia,  which 
has  resulted  in  much  of  the  trade  which  formerly 
went  to  Tabriz  now  reaching  Hamadan  via  Bagh- 
dad. I  walked  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
bazaars,  where  I  found  Manchester  prints  and  cottons 
everywhere  displayed,  Kussia  supplying  only  about 
10  per  cent  of  such  goods  at  the  present  time  (1903). 
With  regard  to  other  goods,  however,  Russia  sup- 
plies the  lion's  share.  Glass  ware,  crockery,  cutlery, 
&c.,  all  come  from  her,  while  whereas  fifteen  years 
ago  E-ussian  sugar  was  unknown  in  Hamadan,  80 
per  cent  now  bears  her  trade-mark.  I  did  not  see 
a  single  package  of  Marseilles  sugar  in  the  bazaar. 
The  chief  article  of  local  manufacture  is  leather, 
while  wine  is  made  from  the  grapes  which  grow 
abundantly  all  round,  and  has  a  considerable  local 
reputation.  With  praiseworthy  perseverance,  but 
quite  gratuitously,  more  than  one  writer  has  per- 
sisted in  extolling  the  excellence  and  widespread 
reputation  of  the  copper  ware  of  Hamadan.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  there  is  no  copper  work  in  Hamadan, 
or  at  any  rate  no  more  than  there  is  in  any  other 
Persian  town.  The  only  copper  -  ware  repositories 
that  I  saw  were  one  or  two  shops  in  a  small  side 
bazaar,  whose  copper  goods  admittedly  all  came 
from    Kashan. 

The  chief  objects  of  interest  in  the  town  are  the 
tombs  of  Esther  and  Mordecai,  and  of  Avicenna 
(Abu  ibn  Sena),  and  a  beautiful  little  mosque  of 
Seljuk  origin ;  and  through  a  snowstorm  and  the 
appalling  filth  of  the  narrow  streets   I  ploughed   my 


126  KERMANSHAH  TO   TEHERAN. 


way  to  see  them.  I  was  asked  if  I  did  not  find 
them — the  streets — the  worst  I  had  ever  seen,  but 
felt  obhged  to  reply  that  between  streets  of  the 
unredeemed  Orient  I  found  it  difficult  to  discrim- 
inate. It  is  sufficiently  obvious  that  no  great  degree 
of  cleanliness  can  be  postulated  for  any  street  that, 
in  addition  to  its  own  duties,  has  to  fulfil  the  office 
of  main  sewer !  And  in  no  part  of  Persia  that  I 
have  visited  have  I  found  any  indication  that  the 
Dea  Cloacina  finds  any  place  in  the  national 
hierarchy. 

The  tombs  of  the  Jewish  queen  and  her  uncle 
are  in  a  small  building  close  to  the  Musjid-i-Jama. 
Entering  by  a  low  stone  door  about  four  feet  high, 
one  finds  oneself  in  an  ante  -  chamber,  from  which 
a  still  smaller  door,  through  which  one  can  just 
squeeze,  gives  access  to  the  sacred  chamber.  Here 
in  the  centre,  beneath  a  domed  roof,  stand  two 
sarcophagi,  each  made  in  three  parts,  one  standing 
on  the  top  of  the  other,  of  some  dark  hardwood, 
carved  all  over  with  inscriptions  in  Hebrew.  In 
each  case  the  top  and  smaller  part  seem  to  have 
been  removed  at  the  time  of  the  Afghan  invasion, 
and  restored  at  a  later  date.  I  have  seen  it  written 
that  the  remains  of  the  deceased  repose  in  these 
sarcophagi,  but  this  is  incorrect,  and  the  informa- 
tion of  the  Jewish  custodian,  to  the  effect  that  they 
were  never  placed  in  them,  is  corroborated  by  the 
epitaph  on  that  of  Mordecai :  "  Those  whose  bodies 
are  now  beneath  in  this  earth,  when  animated  by 
Thy  mercy,  were  great."  The  italics  are  mine. 
Beneath  the  floor  of  the  chamber  is  a  vault,  and 
it  is  beneath  this  vault  that  the  corpses  are  sup- 
posed to  lie.  I  was  further  informed  that  a  lamp 
was   kept  continually  burning.      Being  an  inquisitive 


THE   TOMB  OF  AVIGENNA.  127 


Briton,  I  asked  to  be  shown  the  vault,  and  after 
a  stone  in  the  floor  had  been  raised,  I  peered  down 
into  a  sepulchral  chamber  to  see  a  lamp  indeed,  but 
a  lamp  in  which,  mirahile  dictu,  there  flickered  no 
ray  from  the  sacred  flame !  I  suggested  that  the 
fire  should  at  once  be  restored,  a  suggestion  which 
the  aged  custodian  agreed  must  immediately  be  acted 
upon.  At  one  side  of  the  central  chamber  is  a  small 
chancel,  recently  decorated,  beneath  which  are  said 
to  repose  the  bones  of  a  Jewish  doctor  of  some  fame, 
and  beneath  which  is  likewise  said  to  be  a  deep 
well  into  which  at  one  time  the  bones  of  deceased 
Jews  were  cast. 

The  other  tomb  of  interest,  that  of  Avicenna,  is 
situated  in  another  part  of  the  town,  and  is  marked 
by  a  small  monument  of  stone,  on  which  is  carved  the 
name  of  the  man  in  Turkish,  while  another  rather 
larger  tombstone  stands  beside  it  in  the  same  small 
domed  chamber.  The  '  Encyclopaedia  Britannica '  gives 
utterance  to  the  following  extraordinary  statement : 
"He  [Avicenna]  died  in  June  1037,  in  his  58th  year, 
and  was  buried  among  the  palm-trees  by  the  Kiblah  of 
Hamadan."  It  is  conceivable  that  there  may  have  been 
palm-trees  at  Hamadan  in  the  days  of  Avicenna,  though 
if  there  were  they  must  have  passed  away  very  soon 
after  the  famous  physician;  but  how  a  man  can  be 
buried  by  the  Kiblah  of  Hamadan  is  a  puzzle  which 
I  admit  I  am  unable  to  solve,  the  Kiblah  meaning 
simply  the  direction  of  Mecca. 

The  mosque  which  I  have  mentioned  as  the  other 
object  of  interest  is  now  roofless.  It  has  a  brickwork 
inscription  in  Kufic  round  the  outside,  and  the  walls 
inside  are  covered  with  most  beautiful  stucco-work  in 
gypsum.  The  design  is  intricate  and  involved,  but 
seems  to  be  largely  floral,  much  of  the  ornamentation 


128  KERMANSHAH  TO   TEHERAN. 


being  of  the  kind  known  as  honeycomb.  Beneath  the 
floor  is  an  underground  chamber  in  which  are  several 
tombs.  There  was  at  one  time  a  legend  that  from  this 
chamber  there  was  an  underground  passage  to  Mecca, 
but  a  member  of  the  usual  crowd  which  invariably 
collects  round  any  European  who  happens  to  stop  to 
inspect  anything,  taking  pity,  I  suppose,  on  my  cred- 
ulity, assured  me  that  this  was  not  the  case  ! 

Beyond  these  objects  of  interest  there  are  two 
tablets  with  trilingual  inscriptions  known  as  Ganj- 
nameh,  bearing  the  names  and  titles  of  Darius  and 
Xerxes ;  nor  must  I  forget  to  mention  an  ancient  stone 
lion  which  stands  near  the  Musallah,  a  mound  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  town,  and  is  said  to  have  been  set  up 
by  Belinas,  a  magician,  as  a  talisman  against  cold,  from 
which  the  city  suffers  severely.  I  was  unable  to  visit 
the  Ganjnameh  myself,  since,  being  situated  high  up  on 
the  side  of  Mount  Elvend,  it  was  deep  under  snow  ;  but 
according  to  the  accounts  of  others  there  are  two 
square  excavations  in  the  face  of  an  enormous  block 
of  red  granite,  cut  to  the  depth  of  a  foot,  about  5  feet 
in  breadth  and  much  the  same  in  height,  each  tablet 
containing  three  columns  of  engraved  arrow-headed 
writing — a  description  which  agrees  with  a  photograph 
which  I  have  in  my  possession. 

Layard  describes  them  as  being  of  special  interest,  as 
having  first  afforded  the  key  to  the  decipherment  of  the 
cuneiform  writing ;  but  in  this  he  is  incorrect.  The 
first  clue  w^as  given  by  the  inscriptions  of  Persepolis, 
accurate  drawings  of  which  were  made  by  Niebuhr  in 
1765,  and  the  first  man  to  discover  a  method  by  Avhich 
the  inscriptions  might  be  deciphered  w^as  the  German 
Grotefend,  who  presented  a  paper  upon  the  subject  to 
the  Gottingen  Academy  in  1802.  By  comparing  the 
inscriptions  copied  by  Niebuhr,  he  deciphered  the  names 


CUNEIFORM  INSCRIPTIONS  DECIPHERED.  129 

of  Hystaspes,  Darius,  and  Xerxes.  In  1835,  after 
correct  values  had  been  obtained  for  rather  more  than 
a  third  of  the  Persian  alphabet,  as  a  result  of  the  work 
of  Grotefend  and  his  successors,  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson, 
who  was  ignorant  of  the  details  of  Grotefend's  dis- 
covery, set  to  work  on  the  inscriptions  of  Hamadan. 
Thanks  to  his  knowledge  of  Zend  and  Pehlevi,  cognate 
dialects  to  the  old  Persian  language,  he  was  rewarded 
with  a  greater  measure  of  success  than  had  fallen  to 
his  predecessors  in  the  same  field,  and  after  working  for 
two  years  at  the  inscriptions  of  Behistun,  he  forwarded 
in  the  year  1837  a  translation  of  the  first  two  para- 
graphs to  the  Eoyal  Asiatic  Society,  to  be  followed  ten 
years  later  by  the  publication  of  a  complete  translation 
of  the  Persian  text  of  the  now  celebrated  inscriptions 
to  which  I  have  already  referred. 

The  land  all  round  the  town  is  frequently  washed  for 
gold,  which  is  now  found  chiefly  in  the  form  of  gold- 
dust.  Gold  ear-rings  and  ornaments  have  also  come  to 
light  in  the  process,  and  some  of  the  older  inhabitants 
have  found  bowls  containing  coins  when  digging  at  the 
foundations  of  their  houses,  relics  no  doubt  of  the  days 
when  the  Ecbatana  of  the  Achsemenian  kings  stood 
here.  A  question  still  to  solve  is  whether  the  Ecbatana 
of  Deioces  the  Mede,  with  its  seven  brilliantly  coloured 
circular  walls,  stood  where  Hamadan  stands  now,  in 
spite  of  a  reckless  statement  by  Layard  that  "  Hamadan 
is  known  to  occupy  the  site  of  Ecbatana,  the  ancient 
capital  of  the  Modes."  Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  it  is 
at  any  rate  agreed  that  here  stood  the  treasure  city  of 
the  Achsemenian  kings,  and  it  is  likewise  certain  that 
here  Alexander  indulged  in  the  most  riotous  living  on 
his  return  from  his  conquests  in  the  East.  In  the  midst 
of  the  wildest  scenes  of  feasting  and  debauchery  Hephaes- 
tion,  his  favourite  general,   died.     The  results  of  the 

I 


130  KERMANSHAH  TO   TEHERAN. 

king's  anger  and  grief  at  this  misfortune  were  terrible. 
To  quote  the  much -travelled  baronet  once  more,  "  He 
did  not  shed  tears  but  blood  1 "  Orders  were  given  that 
the  physician  who  had  allowed  his  beloved  Hephsestion 
to  die  should  be  crucified  :  all  merriment  was  brought 
to  an  end,  and  "  that  the  groans  and  anguish  of  multi- 
tudes might  accompany  his  own,  he  sallied  forth  at  the 
head  of  a  part  of  his  army,  attacked  a  defenceless 
neighbouring  district,  and  put  all  the  inhabitants  to 
the  sword  :  this  he  called  sacrificing  to  Hephaestion's 
ghost !  "  In  later  days  Hamadan  suffered  the  usual 
fate  of  cities  which  happened  to  lie  in  the  path  of 
Timur,  and,  as  though  this  was  not  enough,  Agha 
Mohammed  swept  down  upon  it  to  complete  the  de- 
vastation. As  one  gazes  upon  the  modern  town  one 
feels  that  it  has  indeed  experienced  a  blow  from  which 
it  has  never  recovered,  and  one  may  even  be  excused 
for  indorsing  the  saying  that  "  Hamadan  is  the  most 
hateful  of  towns ;  its  children  are  old  men  for  ugliness, 
and  its  old  men  are  children  for  silliness,"  though  it 
may  strike  one  as  invidious  that  such  a  description 
should  be  applied  to  Hamadan  in  preference  to  any 
other  Persian  town. 

From  Hamadan  the  track  lies  across  a  succession  of 
hills  and  elevated  valleys,  which  broaden  out  finally  into 
the  level  dust-coloured  plains  of  Central  Persia.  The 
weather  the  whole  way  was  execrable — an  almost  con- 
tinual blizzard  for  the  first  seven  days — and  the  lateness 
of  the  winter  was  spoken  of  on  all  sides  as  unusual. 
At  Teheran  itself  snow  lay  on  the  ground  so  late  as  the 
last  week  in  March,  and  the  villagers  all  round  were 
bewailing  the  rapidity  with  which  their  mud -houses 
were  returning  to  their  primary  element.  One  day  it 
took  us  three  hours  to  accomplish  four  miles  in  a  driving 
snowstorm,  while  underfoot  the  mud  and  slush  were 


REACH  TEHERAN.  131 

almost  up  to  the  mules'  bellies.  The  consequence  was 
they  were  perpetually  falling  down,  having  to  be  un- 
loaded, picked  up  again,  and  reloaded,  while  we  were  in 
imminent  peril  of  frost-bite.  On  another  occasion,  after 
braving  a  galling  wind  from  the  north  all  day,  we 
reached  a  small  village  where  I  found  a  room  with 
fireplace  and  chimney  that  did  not  smoke — a  great 
luxury.  The  huge  wood-fire  which  I  kept  burning  was, 
however,  of  little  avail,  and  the  thermometer  could  by 
no  means  be  induced  to  rise  above  30°  Fahr.  all  night. 
There  were  no  windows,  but  this  defect  was  made  up 
for  by  the  door,  which  when  closed  did  not  reach  the 
wall  on  one  side  by  several  inches,  leaving  a  gap  through 
which  the  wind  shrieked  a  high-pitched  threnody. 
These  are  the  occasions  on  which  one  ponders  some- 
what regretfully  on  the  discarded  comforts  of  civilisa- 
tion, which  appear  possessed  of  attractions  unsuspected 
until  now.  Teheran,  however,  lay  before  me,  and  on 
the  last  day  of  March,  thirty- three  days  after  setting 
out  from  Baghdad,  I  rode  into  the  capital  of  the  Shah. 


132  TEHERAN. 


CHAPTEK    XL 

TEHERAN. 

Eecent  improvements  at  Teheran — The  city  gates — Days  of  mourning — 
Interview  with  the  Shah  and  with  the  Prime  Minister — A  visit  to  the 
palace — A  motley  collection  ! — The  picture-gallery — An  extraordinary 
ceremony — Religious  plays — Nature  of  the  country  round  the  capital. 

Teheran  has  been  so  often  and  so  conscientiously 
described  that  to  give  any  detailed  account  of  it  to-day 
would  be  a  quite  superfluous  waste  of  time.  With  the 
exception  of  the  erection  of  a  large  barracks  for  the 
Persian  Cossacks,  which  extend  the  length  of  one 
side  of  a  spacious  parade-ground,  and  a  considerable 
increase  of  buildings  in  the  European  quarter  of  the 
town,  it  would  seem  that  little  change  has  taken  place 
since  the  late  Shah,  Nasr-ed-Din,  bethinking  him 
suddenly  that  "  the  '  Point  of  Adoration  of  the  Uni- 
verse '  was  framed  in  a  somewhat  inadequate  setting," 
bade  his  capital  to  "  burst  its  bonds  and  enlarge  its 
quarters."  ^  There  is  no  immediate  fear  of  the  city 
outgrowing  the  walls  which  were  then  erected,  and  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  town  I  noticed  quite  a  large 
area  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Meshed  gate  under  cultiva- 
tion !  The  city  gates,  of  which  tliere  are  a  consider- 
able number  at  intervals  in  the  walls,  are  one  of  the 
features  of  the  town,  being  ornamented  with  designs  in 

^  Persia.     Curzon. 


INTERVIEW   WITH  THE  SHAH.  133 

modern  Persian  tile-work,  but  the  care  with  which 
they  are  closed  and  barred  at  night  strikes  one  as 
being  a  wholly  unnecessary  precaution,  since  there  is 
absolutely  nothing  to  prevent  any  one  from  walking 
across  the  dry  ditch  and  mud  walls — ramparts  would 
be  a  more  correct  designation — should  he  feel  so  in- 
clined ;  indeed,  I  am  assured  that  in  places  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  crossing  them  on  horseback. 

Those  in  high  places  seemed  generally  exhausted — 
especially  the  Treasury — after  the  trip  to  Europe,  and 
the  fact  that  I  arrived  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ashura, 
the  first  ten  days  of  religious  mourning  of  the  Mohar- 
rem,  was  responsible  for  the  unwonted  quiet  which 
brooded  over  the  society  of  the  capital.  Under  these 
circumstances  I  appreciated  all  the  more  the  kindness 
which  prompted  both  the  Shah  and  the  prime  minister 
to  do  me  the  honour  of  inviting  me  to  an  interview. 
The  appearance  of  Mozuffer  a  Din  Shah  is  now  familiar 
to  the  English  public.  On  the  occasion  of  my  visit  he 
wore  a  plain  dark  uniform  with  jewelled  sword,  and 
the  national  crest  in  diamonds  on  the  ordinary  black 
sheepskin  kolah,  and  spoke  at  first  in  Persian  through 
an  interpreter  and  then  in  French  when  he  broached 
the  congenial  topic  of  sport.  As  is  his  custom,  he 
received  me  standing,  in  the  centre  of  a  small  room 
profusely  ornamented  with  the  cut-mirror  work  known 
as  aineli  kari,  at  one  end  of  which  stands  the  cele- 
brated jewel  globe,^  while  a  few  Court  officials  stood 
grouped  at  a  short  distance. 

On  another  occasion  I  was  shown  the  principal  halls 
and  chambers  of  the  palace,  which  contain  so  extra- 

1  See  Lord  Cnrzon's  Persia,  vol.  i.  p.  314:  "Upon  a  separate  stand 
appears  the  globe  of  jewels,  which  was  constructed  out  of  his  loose  stones 
by  the  reigning  Shah  (Nasr-ed-Din)  at  a  cost  (exclusive  of  the  gems  pro- 
vided by  himself)  of  £320,000.  The  alleged  value,  with  the  stones  (75  lb. 
of  pure  gold,  and  51,366  gems,  weighing  3656-4  grammes),  is  £947,000." 


134  TEHERAN. 


ordinary  a  collection  of  objects,  ranging  from  jewellery 
and  china  of  enormous  value  to  oleographs,  tooth- 
brushes, and  toys  !  The  greater  number  of  objects  of 
real  value  have  been  removed  to  the  inner  chambers 
of  the  palace,  which  are,  of  course,  sacred  from  the 
stranger's  gaze;  but  the  so-called  peacock  throne, 
which  has  been  so  ruthlessly  torn  from  its  high  estate 
by  the  practical  author  of '  Persia,'  stands  at  one  end 
of  the  great  hall,  which  is  a  perfect  museum  for  a 
heterogeneous  collection  of  the  products  of  the  West. 
Its  appearance  is  perhaps  rather  barbaric  than  beautiful, 
the  great  mass  of  badly  cut  gems,  indifferently  set  in 
plated  gold,  giving  a  somewhat  garish  effect.  A  picture- 
gallery  is  situated  in  another  part  of  the  palace,  which 
is  as  replete  with  eccentricities  as  it  is  with  pictures. 
Side  by  side  with  really  excellent  oil  -  paintings  I 
observed  an  advertisement  of  Brook's  cotton,  while 
a  little  farther  along  were  two  cards  covered  with 
samples  of  fish-hooks,  and  yet  again  was  to  be  seen  a 
Madonna  rubbing  shoulders  with  doubtful  illustrations 
from  a  French  comic  paper  !  There  was  one  landscape 
which  puzzled  me  for  a  long  time,  until  it  at  length 
dawned  upon  me  that  it  was  hung  upside-down  !  The 
picture  itself  was  perhaps  responsible  for  this  slight 
error,  and  I  admit  that  I  have  seen  daubs  to  which 
such  a  mishap  might  excusably  occur  in  other  countries 
besides  Persia,  though  it  is  not  usual  to  hang  them  in 
the  courts  of  royalty  or  the  palaces  of  kings. 

If,  as  I  have  already  suggested,  the  month  of 
Moharrem  is  a  quiet  one  at  the  Persian  capital,  it  is 
nevertheless  one  which  affords  the  stranger  an  oppor- 
tunity of  witnessing  a  spectacle  which  he  would  look 
for  in  vain  in  any  other  country  or  even  here  at  any 
other  time  of  the  year.  For  on  the  last  of  the  ten 
days  during  which  the  Persians  mourn  the  death  of 


A    WEIRD   CEREMONY.  135 

their  two  prophets,  Hassan  and  Hussein,  their  grief 
culminates  in  the  ceremony  of  the  katl  or  murder.  A 
large  number  of  people  of  the  lower  classes  robe  them- 
selves in  white,  and  then,  linked  arm  in  arm  and 
carrying  huge  knives,  parade  the  streets  calling  on 
the  names  of  their  prophets,  while,  urged  on  by  the 
stirring  strains  of  bands  of  music,  they  cut  and  gash 
themselves  horribly  about  the  head  and  face.  I  watched 
these  weird  processions  for  long  from  a  house-roof, 
while  the  bands  played  and  the  cry  "Hassan  !  Hussein  !  " 
rent  the  air,  and  the  blood  flowed  till  the  white  robes 
of  the  maddened  fanatics  were  dyed  crimson  from 
head  to  foot. 

It  was  a  nauseating  scene  in  spite  of  its  novelty, 
and  aflbrded  a  graphic  illustration  of  the  heights  to 
which  fanaticism  may  rise,  recalling  inevitably  the 
old-world  custom  of  the  prophets  of  Baal,  who  "  cried 
aloud,  and  cut  themselves,  after  their  manner,  with 
knives  and  lancets,  till  the  blood  gushed  out  upon 
them."  1 

Mourning  is  also  observed  by  the  performance  of 
religious  plays  known  as  tazziehs,  to  one  of  which  I 
was  invited.  I  found  it  a  little  difiicult  to  see,  as  I 
was  placed  behind  a  thick  perforated  curtain,  on  account, 
I  believe,  of  the  presence  of  the  royal  hareem.  The 
play  must  have  been  of  a  very  touching  nature,  judging 
from  the  loud  wailing  and  moaning  to  which  the 
onlookers  gave  vent ;  but  the  pathos  was  quite  spoilt 
for  me  when  the  band  suddenly  broke  into  the  familiar 
strains  of  the  "  Sourir  d'Avril ! "  This,  I  imagine,  was 
the  result  of  the  recent  trip  to  Europe,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  it  was  considered  to  be  an  excellent  funeral 
march ! 

Beyond  the  city  walls  the  country  is  bare,  brown, 

^  1  Kings  xviii.  28. 


136  TEHERAN. 


and  forbidding,  leading  one  to  suppose  that  the  author 
of  the  Baluchi  proverb,  "  When  God  created  the  world, 
Baluchistan  was  made  from  the  refuse,"  had  not  travelled 
as  far  as  the  present  site  of  the  Persian  capital.  The 
insignificant  tumuli  which  are  all  that  remain  of  the 
once  glorious  city  of  Bhages,  while  being  doubtless  of 
vast  interest  to  the  expert,  have  too  little  to  show  to 
attract  the  casual  traveller ;  and  though  the  Persian 
wild  goat  is  to  be  found  in  the  mountains  at  no  great 
distance  in  sufficient  numbers  to  afford  excellent  sport 
to  the  stalker,  it  is  undoubtedly  as  the  headquarters 
of  the  incalculable  intrigue  which  passes  in  Persia  for 
diplomacy,  rather  than  as  a  city  possessed  of  any 
material  attraction,  that  Teheran  appeals  to  the  visitor. 
It  may  be  well,  therefore,  if,  before  leaving  the  country, 
I  devote  a  few  words  to  reviewing  the  events  which 
formed  the  chief  topics  of  interest  and  discussion  in  the 
political  world  at  the  time  of  my  visit. 


A   NEW  COMMERCIAL    TREATY.  137 


CHAPTEH  XIL 

PERSIA   IN    1903. 

"Tariffs" — Negotiations  leading  to  a  revision  of  the  Custom  duties — 
Adverse  effects  upon  British,  trade  over-estimated — Present  state  of 
affairs  due  to  British  insouciance  in  the  past — The  treaty  of  Erzerum 
— Provisions  of  the  new  tariff — Effect  ujjon  Indian  trade — Great 
Britain's  reply  —  Events  on  the  Afghan  border  —  The  MacMahon 
mission — Russian  intrigue — Ways  and  communications — The  situa- 
tion in  the  capital — The  fall  of  the  Prime  Minister — A  tribute  to  the 
British  Minister. 

On  March  4,  1903,  I  entered  Persia.  On  February  14 
the  new  Customs  tariff  had  come  into  force,  and 
"tariffs"  proved  to  be  an  unfailing  source  of  con- 
versation from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  the  other. 
"  Tariff  reform,"  in  fact,  was  as  undoubtedly  the  topic 
of  the  hour  in  Persia  as  it  came  to  be  nearer  home  a 
very  short  time  after,  though  discussion  of  the  subject 
in  the  two  cases  was  of  a  widely  different  nature.  For 
in  Persia  it  was  an  accomplished  fact  that  had  to  be 
digested — the  fact  that  the  neutral  markets  of  the 
world  had  become  the  poorer  by  one. 

The  advent  of  a  change  in  the  fiscal  arrangements  of 
Persia  had  long  been  foreshadowed,  and  when  the  new 
commercial  treaty  between  Persia  and  Turkey  was  con- 
cluded, no  obstacle  remained  to  bar  the  way  to  such  an 
innovation.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  on 
this  occasion  the  Persians  displayed  a  wholly   unex- 


138  PERSIA   IN  1903. 


pected  capacity  for  holding  their  tongues  pending  the 
negotiations,  and  the  commercial  convention  which  was 
concluded  between  Russia  and  Persia  in  November  1901 
remained  a  profound  secret  for  more  than  a  year.  In 
December  1902  the  ratifications  were  exchanged,  and 
the  British  community  rudely  awakened  to  the  blow 
which  they  had  sustained.  For  a  blow  it  undoubtedly 
was,  though — thanks  to  the  Anglo-Persian  Convention 
which  was  hastily  concluded  in  February  1903 — not  of 
the  overwhelming  nature  that  those  responsible  for  it 
had  originally  hoped  and  intended. 

I  have  no  wish  whatsoever  to  minimise  the  adverse 
results  to  British  interests  of  this  the  latest  Russian 
diplomatic  coup  at  Teheran,  for  no  one  can  deny  that 
the  tariff  has  been  framed  more  especially  against 
British  trade ;  but  while  admitting  that  we  are  un- 
doubted losers  by  the  Russo-Persian  Convention  of 
December  1902,  I  refuse  to  attach  to  it  the  altogether 
disproportionate  significance  that  the  ultra-pessimists 
would,  from  their  utterances,  appear  to  do,  or  to  see  in 
this  modest  triumph  of  our  rivals  the  presaged  collapse 
of  British  empire  in  Asia. 

The  episode  may  yet  be  productive  of  good  if  we  are 
only  willing  to  learn  by  experience  and  to  observe, 
before  a  worse  thing  befall  us,  the  inevitable  results  of 
a  policy  of  drift.  For  it  is  thanks  only  to  our  ow^n 
want  of  foresight  in  the  past  that  British  interests  lay 
open  to  any  such  attack.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
Anglo-Persian  war  an  article  concerning  our  commercial 
relations  was  inserted  in  the  treaty  of  peace  concluded 
at  Paris  in  1857,  which  article  read  as  follows:  "The 
high  contracting  parties  engage  that,  in  the  establish- 
ment and  recognition  of  Consuls-General,  Consuls,  Vice- 
Consuls,  and  Consular  Agents,  each  shall  be  placed  in 
the  dominions  of  the  other  on  the  footing  of  the  most 


THE   TREATY  OF  EEZERUM.  139 


favoured  nation  ;  and  that  the  treatment  of  theh^ 
respective  subjects  and  their  trade  shall  also,  in  every 
respect,  be  placed  on  the  footing  of  the  treatment  of  the 
subjects  and  commerce  of  the  most  favoured  nation." 
And  the  most  favoured  nation  under  the  treaty  of 
Turkomanchai  was  Kussia,  our  bitterest  rival  in  the 
East !  Why,  it  is  natural  to  ask,  was  no  specific 
agreement  come  to  under  the  aforesaid  treaty  of  Paris  ? 

If  we  relied  upon  Turkey,  who,  after  Eussia  had 
agreed  to  the  Customs  duties  being  raised,  would,  under 
the  treaty  of  Erzerum,  have  been  the  most  favoured 
nation,  we  relied  upon  a  broken  reed ;  at  least,  the 
result  proves  that  if  British  influence  was  brought 
to  bear  at  Constantinople  with  a  view  to  preserving 
the  treaty  of  Erzerum,  it  was  not  strong  enough  to 
prevail  against  pressure  from  the  North.  It  is  always 
well  to  bear  in  mind  when  dealing  with  Turkey  that 
there  is  still  a  balance  of  something  like  £T24,000,000 
owing  to  Hussia  on  account  of  indemnity  for  war  !  The 
only  other  country  that  might  possibly  have  been  put 
forward  as  having  a  commercial  treaty  with  Persia  that 
would  hold  good  was  Egypt ;  but  that  Egypt,  which 
had  been  granted  the  right  of  concluding  commercial 
treaties  with  foreign  Powers  by  a  firman  issued  on 
June  8,  1873,  could  be  looked  upon  as  an  independent 
party  to  the  treaty  of  Erzerum  was  evidently  not 
entertained. 

So  the  way  was  clear,  and  the  tariff"  was  brought  in. 
Its  provisions  are  many  and  intricate,  and  any  enumera- 
tion of  the  different  charges  on  the  various  objects  of 
import  and  export,  and  the  different  methods  of  apply- 
ing them,  would  fill  many  pages,  and  serve  only  to 
weary  any  one  not  intimately  concerned  with  the  trade 
of  Persia.  Imports  are  divided  into  no  less  than 
forty-two  general  headings,  each  one  of  which  is  sub- 


140  PERSIA   IN  1903. 


divided  into  innumerable  minor  classifications.  The 
heading  matieres  textiles,  for  instance,  includes  no  less 
than  twenty-six  subdivisions,  the  majority  of  which 
require  a  paragraph  of  description,  and  some  of  which 
are  themselves  divided  up  again  into  lesser  groupings. 
For  a  large  number  of  imported  articles  there  is  a  fixed 
charge  by  weight,  the  recognised  unit  for  this  purpose 
being  the  hatman  of  Tabriz  (  =  640  Persian  miskals, 
7*27  Russian  pounds,  2  French  kilogrammes  970 
grammes,  6 '49  English  pounds),  while  there  is  a  new 
tariff  in  place  of  the  old  5  per  cent  for  such  goods  as 
are  still  charged  ad  valorem.  Most  Manchester  goods, 
such  as  cottons,  calicoes,  shirtings,  &c.,  are  charged 
according  to  weight,  the  duty  working  out  at  from 
4  to  10  per  cent  according  to  quality.  It  is  obvious 
that  under  such  a  system  the  more  expensive  class 
of  goods  is  greatly  favoured,  and  therein  is  visible  the 
part  that  was  played  by  Russian  influence  in  the  com- 
pilation of  the  tarifl",  for  it  is  the  more  expensive  goods 
that  form  the  bulk  of  Russian  imports.  The  cheaper 
goods,  which  come  almost  exclusively  from  Manchester, 
are  of  course  at  a  proportionate  disadvantage.  Again, 
the  duty  on  sugar,  which  under  a  liberal  system  of 
bounties  floods  the  Persian  market  from  Russia,  works 
out  at  about  2\  per  cent,  or  rather  less  than  half  that 
in  vogue  in  the  past,  whereas  the  duty  on  tea,  which 
comes  chiefly  from  India,  has  been  increased  by  95  per 
cent  ;  spices,  another  Indian  staple,  are  charged  at 
an  exorbitant  rate,  and  the  duty  of  10  krans  per  hat- 
man  on  indigo  is  almost  prohibitive.  One  might  almost 
suppose  that  these  figures  had  been  drawn  up  with  the 
deliberate  object  of  stifling  the  Nushki-Sistan  trade- 
route,  which  seems  to  have  become  an  absolute  night- 
mare to  Russian  politicians. 

The   following   table   of   the    imports    and   exports 


STATISTICS  OF  TRADE. 


141 


between  Persia  and  England  and  Persia  and  India  by 
the  Baghdad-Kermanshah  route  between  January  1902 
and  January  1903  shows  the  duty  paid  according  to  the 
old  arrangement  and  the  amount  that  would  have  had 


to  be  paid  under  the  new  tariff 


Articles. 

Where  from. 

Value  in 
kians. 

Duty             Duty 

under            under 

old  tariff,     new  tariff. 

Cotton  goods — 

Various 

Bleached     . 
Woollen  goods 
Silk  goods 

Sewing  thread,  cotton    . 
Woollen  thread 
Metals — 

Iron  and  steel  bars 

Tin  sheets  . 

Zinc  bars     . 

Copper  bars 

Worked  iron  and  steel 
Tea         ...        . 
Indigo    .... 
Spices  and  pepper  . 

Imports. 
England 

India 

20,066,000 

13,850,000 

53,200 

107,900 

196,000 

3,200 

107,600 

8,500 

187,500 

321,700 

39,800 

1,527,700 

73,700 

1,350,000 

993,3501 

692,000/ 

2,660 

5,300 

37,100 

160 

5,320 
420 

9,370 
16,400 

1,990 
76,380 

3,650 
68,000 

2,041,000 

4,250 

12,800 

66,000 

72 

4,600 

830 

6,650 

14,600 

2,520 

638,640 

50,000 

300,000 

37,892,800 

1,912,100 

3,141,962 

Gum,  native  . 
Grain  and  seeds 
Wheat    . 
Wool,  raw 
Opium    . 
Carpets  . 

Exports. 

England 

England  and  Hongkong 
England,  America,  and 
Baghdad 

2,434,980 

1,470 

164,700 

40,700 

2,387,500 

1,318,800 

121,740 

70 

8,450 

2,050 

119,350 

65,940 

no  duty 

160 

91,500 

no  duty 

430,300 

no  duty 

6,348,150 

317,600 

521,960 

From  the  above  table  it  will  be  seen  that  the  net 
increase  to  the  Persian  Government,  on  trade  valued 
roughly  at  £750,000,  would  have  been  1,434,222  krans, 
or  £28,684,  of  which  £15,959  w^ould  have  been  levied 
on  a  trade  of  £700,000  with  England,  and  £12,725  on 
a  trade   of  £50,000   with   India.     The   comparison    is 


142  PERSIA   IN  1903. 


sio-nilicaut,  and  shows  the  extent  to  which  India  suffers 
under  the  new  arrangement. 

Such  in  brief  is  the  new  tariff  as  it  exists,  and  it  is 
fortunate  that  British  diplomacy  was  successful  in  ex- 
tracting a  pledge  from  the  Persian  Government  that  it 
should  go  no  further.     For  it  was  common  property  in 
Teheran  that  the  tariff  of  1903  was  put  forward  ten- 
tatively— a  thin  edge  of  the  wedge — and  that  ere  long 
further  changes  were  to  have  been  made  which  could 
have  proved  nothing  less  than   disastrous   to  British 
trade.     The  convention  which  was  drawn  up  and  signed 
by  Sir  Arthur  Hardinge  on  behalf  of  Great  Britain,  and 
M.  Naus  on  behalf  of  Persia,  February   9,    1903,   has 
at  least  prevented  the  evil   from  spreading,  and  has 
locked  the  stable  -  door  upon  what  is  still  left.     The 
duties  levied  upon  British  goods,  in  common  with  those 
of  other  nations,  can  in  the  case  of  Great  Britain  be 
raised  in  the  future  only  with  her  consent ;  while  in  the 
event  of  any  other  country  at  any  time  securing  ad- 
vantageous treatment  she  will  be  entitled,  in  virtue  of 
the  most  favoured  nation  clause,  to  claim  equal  rights. 

But  Teheran  was  by  no  means  the  only  scene  of 
political  activity  during  the  opening  months  of  1903. 
Away  to  the  east,  on  the  nebulous  borders  of  Afghan- 
istan, the  Indian  Government  were  displaying  an  activ- 
ity which  left  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  part  which 
they  considered  themselves  entitled  to  play  in  those 
parts  of  Persia  which  abut  upon  the  outposts  of  their 
empire.  The  boundary  defined  under  such  difficulties 
by  the  Commission  of  1872,  under  the  able  direction  of 
Sir  F.  Goldsmid,  which  seems  to  have  possessed  the 
distinction  of  displeasing  the  Persians  only  a  degree 
less  than  it  did  the  Afghans,  had  ceased  to  constitute  a 
practical  line  of  division,  as  was  perhaps  only  to  be 
expected  when   so   unstable  a   quantity  as  the   river 


THE  MAGMAHON  MISSION.  143 

Helmund  formed  so  important  a  part  of  it.  So  far 
back  as  the  end  of  1900,  when  I  was  myself  in  Sistan, 
both  Afghans  and  Persians  were  indulging  in  hostile 
incursions  into  the  disputed  tracts  of  the  rapidly  dis- 
solving border,  which  led  to  highly  strained  relations,  if 
not,  indeed,  to  actual  bloodshed;  and  early  in  1903  a 
Commission  under  Colonel  MacMahon,  who  had  dis- 
tinguished himself  in  defining  the  Afghan  -  Baluch 
boundary  in  1896,  proceeded  from  India,  via  the  Hel- 
mund, accompanied  by  an  escort  and  a  large  number  of 
followers,  to  meet  the  Persian  Commissioner  on  the 
scene  of  actual  dispute. 

The  susceptibilities  of  the  Russians  were  of  course 
grievously  outraged,  and  it  was  whispered  that  when 
they  found  themselves  unable  to  adduce  any  adequate 
reason  for  being  represented  upon  the  Commission  them- 
selves, the  Persian  delegate  received  telegraphic  instruc- 
tions to  fall  ill,  and  to  summon  to  his  aid  a  E-ussian  doctor 
residing  at  the  Russian  consulate  at  Nasratabad  !  The 
immediate  result  was  that  a  deadlock  ensued,  and  the 
Persian  Government,  realising  that  the  situation  had 
become  absurd,  issued  instructions  for  the  recovery  of 
their  commissioner  once  more.  Like  most  thing's  in 
Persia,  the  operations  have  proceeded — if  indeed  such 
a  word  may  be  used  —  with  appropriate  dignity  and 
delay  ;  and  the  summer  of  1904  has  come  round,  to  find 
the  Commission  still  biding  in  Sistan,  in  thorough  en- 
joyment, no  doubt,  of  the  attractions  of  that  place  as 
provided  by  the  inconceivable  variety  of  the  insect 
world  which  it  displays  and  the  distracting  persistency 
of  the  "wind  of  120  days." 

In  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  ways  and  communica- 
tions seemed  to  be  attracting  some  attention — not  before 
it  was  needed,  would  be  an  appropriate  comment.  The 
difficulties  between   Messrs  Lynch  and  the  Bakhtiari 


144  PERSIA   IN  1903. 


chiefs,  with  regard  to  the  payment  for  the  new  Ahwaz- 
Ispahan  road,  were  amicably  settled,  and  a  "  Persian 
road  company,"  recently  formed  in  London,  gave  evid- 
ence of  an  intention  to  do  something  on  the  Teheran- 
Kum  road,  some  day  to  be  prolonged  to  Ispahan  and 
Shushter,  the  concession  for  which  was  taken  over  from 
the  original  holders,  the  directors  of  the  Imperial  Bank. 
In  another  direction  the  road  question  was  being  taken 
up  by  concessionaires  from  the  north,  and  Russian 
engineers  appeared  at  Tabriz,  in  connection  presumably 
with  a  road  from  Julfa  to  Kazvin.  Road  concessions 
here  include  ways  from  Kazvin  as  their  centre  to 
Teheran,  Hamadan,  and  to  Julfa  on  the  frontier,  the 
latter  having  the  prospect  of  developing  at  some  future 
time  into  a  railway.  In  this  connection  it  may  be  pointed 
out  that  a  branch  line  from  the  Batum-Tiflis-Baku 
Railway  already  runs  to  Erivan,  within  three  days' 
march  of  the  frontier ;  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  see, 
when  1905  comes  round,  whether  the  clause  in  the 
Russo-Persian  Railway  agreement,  giving  the  option  of 
a  further  five  years'  extension,  will  be  taken  advantage 
of.  Be  that  as  it  may,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
sooner  or  later  the  direct  road  to  Persia  will  run  via 
Julfa  and  Tabriz. 

In  the  capital  itself  the  Chancellor  of  an  exhausted 
exchequer  was  trembling  at  the  prospect  of  having  to 
find  the  wherewithal  for  a  proposed  royal  procession 
to  Meshed,  with  a  possible  repetition  of  the  European 
expedition  looming  like  a  nightmare  in  the  distance ! 
while  the  chances  of  his  being  able  to  maintain  a  hold 
upon  his  precarious  grasp  of  office  afforded  a  daily — 
almost  hourly — subject  of  discussion.  The  journey  to 
Meshed  has  so  far  been  staved  off",  nor  does  there  ap- 
pear to  be  any  immediate  prospect  of  a  return  of  the 


THE  FALL  OF  THE  PRIME  MINISTER.  145 

Shah  to  Europe  ;  nevertheless,  the  said  Prime  Minister, 
the  courteous,  if  ambitious,  Atabeg-Azam,  who  so 
kindly  granted  me  an  audience  while  at  Teheran,  has 
since  found  it  convenient,  as  it  is  euphemistically  put, 
to  embark  upon  a  prolonged  pilgrimage  to  Mecca ! 
And  the  Ain-ed-Dowleh,  formerly  governor  of  Teheran, 
now  reigns  in  his  stead. 

It  has  not  been  my  purpose  in  the  present  chapter 
to  portray  Persia  as  a  piece,  acting  in  conjunction  with 
other  pieces,  upon  the  international  chess-board  of  the 
East, — that  I  hope  to  do  in  a  subsequent  chapter.  I 
have  merely  made  mention  of  such  passing  events  as 
happened  to  take  place  during  my  visit  to  the  country 
in  the  spring  of  1903,  because  such  events,  however 
small  in  themselves,  are  the  factors  which  combine  to 
determine  the  direction  of  any  move — even  if  it  be 
but  the  move  of  a  pawn — which  may  subsequently  be 
made.  Let  me  dwell  but  one  moment  longer,  before 
leaving  the  country,  to  offer  praise  to  whom  praise  is 
due  for  those  signs  of  a  recrudescence  of  British  pres- 
tige which  it  was  impossible  not  to  observe.  If  Sir 
Arthur  Hardinge  had  done  no  more  than  to  force 
upon  the  British  Government  the  necessity  of  adopt- 
ing a  policy  with  regard  to  Persia,  he  would  indeed 
have  deserved  well  of  his  country ;  but  I  may  further 
add,  without,  I  hope,  incurring  a  charge  of  imperti- 
nence, that  all  those  whose  desire  it  is  to  see  Great 
Britain  assert  herself  once  more  in  the  councils  of  the 
East  may  congratulate  themselves  on  the  capable  way 
in  which  their  interests  in  Persia  are  at  the  present 
time  being  handled.  No  one  whose  lot  has  cast  him 
among  the  strange  places  of  the  East  can  fail  to 
have  had  brought  home  to  him,  as  never  before,  the 
real  significance  of  the  phrase,  "the  heart  and  fibre 

K 


146  PERSIA   IN  1903. 


of  the  British  people,"  or  to  have  learnt,  as  has 
been  said  by  a  well-known  writer,  that  it  is  indeed 
in  Asia  that  one  realises  best  what  Great  Britain  is, 
and  that  it  is  there  that  one  sees  "  the  pick  of  her 
sons  living  the  larger  and  nobler  life  that  men  should 
live."  1 

1  Mr  E.  F.  Knight. 


A   RUSSIAN  BO  AD.  147 


CHAPTER   XIIL 

THROUGH    THE    PORTALS    OF    PERSIA. 

The  highroad  to  Persia — A  contrast  in  scenery — Cost  of  the  cAa?me— Dis- 
advantages of— The  object  of  Russia— A  huge  advertisement— What 
the  Persian  thinks — Leave  Teheran — Persian  methods — TeherSn  to 
Resht— The  silk  industry— Obstacles  encountered  between  Eesht  and 
Enzeli — A  false  start — OS  at  last. 

You  cannot  pass  imperceptibly  out  of  Persia  into 
Russia,  as  you  would  out  of  Italy  into  Switzerland,  for 
instance.  She  makes  her  presence  undeniably  felt  right 
up  to  the  last,  and  you  inevitably  miss  something  when 
you  leave  her.  Though  I  had  entered  Persia  twice 
and  left  her  once,  I  had  never  passed  through  what  I 
suppose  may  be  described  as  the  usual  entrance,  and  I 
found  the  journey  instructive.  The  road  is  Russian, 
built  at  enormous  cost  and  so  far  at  considerable  loss, 
but  the  service  is  Persian — eminently  so. 

The  most  striking  feature  is  the  extraordinary  change 
in  the  scenery  as  one  enters  the  lower  slopes  of  the 
mountains  of  Ghilan.  Behind  lies  the  staring  sterility 
with  its  crude  outHnes  and  harsh  contours, — "a  vast 
rocky  horrid  wilderness," — which,  to  any  one  who  has 
seen,  and  who  therefore  accepts  the  rhapsodies  of  Moore 
with  the  indulgence  they  demand,  means  Persia.  A 
sudden  descent  down  a  precipitous  mountain  -  road, 
round  sharp  corners,  and  along  a  valley  where  flows  a 


148  THROUGH  THE  PORTALS  OF  PERSIA. 


mud-coloured  torrent,  and  behold,  the  sterility  is  gone ! 
All  round  vast  forests  have  sprung  up,  where  all  the 
trees  of  Europe  grow  in  wild  profusion.  Soft-coloured 
hills  melt  away  imperceptibly  into  space,  and  a  filmy 
blue  haze  fills  in  the  distance.  The  undergrowth  is 
tropical  in  luxuriance,  English  in  its  character.  Wild- 
flowers  which  thrive  in  the  woods  and  lanes  of  England 
crop  up  in  all  directions.  No  Aladdin's  lamp  or  genie's 
ring  could  transfer  one  more  effectually  from  one  world 
to  another  than  do  the  ragged  ponies  and  decrepit 
phaetons  of  the  Teheran-Resht  post-road. 

The  road,  as  I  have  said,  is  Russian ;  but  I  must 
admit  that  it  was  some  time  before  I  in  any  way 
realised  what  it  was  that  Russia  expected  to  gain  when 
she  embarked  on  an  undertaking  which  involved  an 
outlay  out  of  all  proportion  to  any  tangible  result. 
Nearly  £500,000,  three-fourths  of  which  were  found 
by  the  Russian  Government,  were  expended  in  the 
construction  of  an  indifferent  carriage-road  225  miles 
in  extent,  of  which  94  miles,  lying  over  a  level  plain, 
were  already  in  existence  prior  to  the  advent  of  Russian 
enterprise,  and  can  claim  to  have  received  but  scant 
attention  from  the  engineer  ever  since. 

As  a  military  highway  the  road  is  inadequate,  and, 
in  view  of  the  lines  of  entry  from  Russia,  both  on  the 
north-west  and  on  the  north-east,  superfluous ;  as  an 
adjunct  to  the  comfort  of  the  traveller  or  as  a  means  of 
reducing  the  time  expended  on  the  journey,  it  is  scarcely 
an  unqualified  success, — I  myself  had  to  spend  some 
time  kicking  my  heels  on  the  road,  while  wood-cutters 
were  engaged  in  removing  an  obstruction  in  the  shape 
of  a  large  tree, — and  as  an  instrument  for  assisting 
trade  it  can  only  be  looked  upon  as  a  failure,  since  the 
cost  of  transport  has  risen  by  fully  10  per  cent  since 
the  road  was  built. 


A   HUGE  ADVERTISEMENT.  149 


But  the  object  aimed  at — an  object,  too,  which  has 
undoubtedly  been  achieved — did  occur  to  me  at  last. 
The  whole  concern  from  beginning  to  end  is  a  huge 
advertisement.  From  the  time  that  you  set  foot  on  the 
road  at  one  end  to  the  time  that  you  leave  it  at  the 
other,  the  one  word  which  is  incessantly  brought  before 
your  mind  is  Russia.  At  every  turn  there  are  posts 
decked  out  in  the  colours  of  Eussia.  There  are  toll-bars 
at  which  you  are  confronted  with  toll- collectors — from 
Eussia.  When  you  drive  up  to  the  rest-houses  on  the 
road  you  pass  between  gate-posts  painted  with  the 
black-and-white  bands  which  you  instantly  recognise  as 
identical  with  the  same  objects  which  you  meet  with  on 
the  post-roads  in  Eussia,  and  it  is  even  said  that  in  the 
first  instance  the  flag  that  flew  from  every  suitable 
point,  until  the  practice  was  discontinued  owing  to  the 
awakened  susceptibilities  of  Persia,  was  the  flag  of 
Eussia. 

And  the  Persian  travelling  along  the  road  sees  the 
might  of  Eussia  flaunted  in  the  face  of  Persia,  and, 
seeing  it,  takes  it  for  granted  with  Persian  indiflerence. 
Kismet — it  is  fate  ;  and  if  anything  passes  through  his 
mind  at  all,  it  is  probably  the  thought  that  after 
all  he  would  not  be  any  worse  ofi"  under  any  other 
government,  while  he  might  possibly  be  better. 
Is  it  worth  the  money?  Well,  that  is  for  Eussia  to 
decide,  and  she  appears  to  think  that  it  is,  and  when 
Eussia  thinks  anything  worth  spending  money  on,  she 
does  not  hesitate  to  spend  it.  There  is  no  troublesome 
House  of  Commons  with  its  still  more  troublesome 
Opposition  to  put  spokes  in  the  wheels  of  autocratic 
ambition  in  Eussia. 

I  got  into  my  carriage  with  a  fourgon  in  tow  for  the 
luggage  on  April  14,  and  as  I  was  driven  at  reckless 
pace  down  the  "  Boulevard  des  Ambassadeurs,"  through 


150  THROUGH  THE  PORTALS  OF  PERSIA. 

the  gun  square  and  into  the  slums  beyond,  I  supposed 
that  I  had  started.  Not  at  all.  By  the  time  we 
reached  the  carriage  depot,  just  outside  the  town  walls, 
my  driver  (oh,  clever  one !)  discovered  that  we  had  no 
lamps,  and  when  the  lamps  were  found  to  be  missing 
it  was  further  discovered  that  there  were  no  brackets 
to  hold  them  even  if  there  had  been  any.  I  spent  an 
interesting  half- hour  watching  a  cautious  carpenter 
drilling  holes,  putting  in  screws,  and  finally,  when, 
more  Persico,  he  found  he  had  drilled  holes  too  large 
for  the  screws,  tying  everything  up  with  string,  and 
then  at  last  we  started.  It  was  all  a  silly,  useless 
waste  of  time,  because  the  lamps,  like  those  of  the 
foolish  virgins,  when  required  for  use  were  found  to 
contain  no  oil  !  These  are  the  little  matters  which 
keep  you  informed  that  you  are  in  Persia. 

For  the  first  half  of  the  journey  the  road  runs  over 
a  level  plain  and  passes  through  Kazvin,  a  fair-sized 
town,  and  centre,  so  to  speak,  of  recent  E-ussian  con- 
cessions for  road -making.  Thirty  miles  beyond,  one 
plunges  headlong  down  the  mountains  along  a  fairly 
well-planned  mountain  road,  which  presently  launches 
you  through  a  belt  of  olives  into  the  riotous  profusion 
of  the  woods  below,  and  finally  on  to  a  jungle-covered 
plain  which  stretches  from  the  mountain  base  to  the 
shores  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  At  one  end  of  this  plain  is 
situated  Resht,  the  capital  of  Ghilan,  a  town  of  70,000 
inhabitants  and  centre  of  the  silk  industry,  which  since 
its  recovery  in  1893,  after  a  period  of  extinction  due  to 
disease,  has  steadily  increased,  and  is  now  carried  on 
on  a  larger  scale  than  at  any  previous  period  of  its 
history,  the  disease  difiiculty  having  been  got  over  by 
importing  all  the  eggs  from  Europe  and  Asia  Minor. 
Here  the  carriage  service  ends,  which  again  calls  to 
your  mind  the  fact  that  you  are  in  Persia,  because  you 


EMBARKED  AT  LAST.  151 

are  still  a  long  way  from  where  you  want  to  get  to 
before  you  can  embark. 

In  order  to  get  from  Kesht  to  Enzeli  a  series  of 
operations  are  required.  First,  you  must  bargain  with 
a  carriage  owner  to  take  you  over  the  four  or  five 
miles  of  execrable  road  to  Pir-i- Bazaar,  a  crowded 
wharf  on  the  banks  of  a  small  river.  Here  more 
bargaining  with  a  perspiring  crowd  of  native  boat- 
owners,  the  possessors  of  an  extraordinarily  variegated 
vocabulary,  before  you  can  be  transferred  to  the  mouth 
of  the  river,  where  you  may  catch  a  small  steamer  if 
you  are  lucky  enough  to  hit  upon  its  moment  of  de- 
parture, which  will  then  take  you  across  the  lagoon  to 
Enzeli.  My  river -boat  failed  to  effect  a  connection 
with  the  steamer,  so  I  had  perforce  to  be  rowed  across 
the  lagoon.  Finally,  I  was  officiously  hurried  on  board 
a  small  steam-launch  which  lay  alongside  the  Custom- 
house at  Enzeli ;  there  was  a  piercing  screech  from  the 
steam-whistle,  and  we  pushed  pompously  off  for  our 
ship,  which  was  said  to  be  lying  anchored  in  open 
water  close  by. 

You  would  now  suppose  that  your  troubles  were 
really  at  an  end ;  but  no, — once  more  were  we  to  put 
up  with  hope  deferred.  After  steaming  aimlessly 
about  in  the  open  water  a  short  distance  from  the 
lagoon  in  a  vain  endeavour  to  find  our  ship,  it  was 
decided  that  she  had  not  arrived, — this  was  perfectly 
obvious  from  the  shore,  since  not  a  speck  was  visible 
on  the  water,  but  I  suppose  it  had  not  occurred  to 
any  one  to  look  first, — and  we  returned  once  more  to 
spend  another  weary  hour  or  two  on  the  landing-stage 
at  Enzeli.  It  was  not  till  near  10  p.m.  that  we  made 
another  attempt,  and  were  at  last  successful  in  our 
efforts  to  embark.  "  Alhamdu  lillah  ! "  breathed  a 
weary  passenger.      "  Amen,"  said  I. 


CENTKAL   ASIA 


"  'Tis  the  clime  of  the  East,  'tis  the  land  of  the  Sun, 
Can  he  smile  on  such  deeds  as  his  children  have  done  ? 
Oh  wild  as  the  accents  of  lovers'  farewell 
Are  the  hearts  which  they  bare  and  the  tales  which  they  tell." 

— Byron. 


CHAPTER    XIV. 

BAKU. 

Civilisation  again— The  commercial  aspect  of  Baku — A  weird  sight — 
Natural  fire — An  ancient  fire -temple — The  boilers  of  Balakhani — A 
hundred  tons  of  oil  a-day — "  Spouters" — The  interior  of  a  derrick — A 
calamity  at  an  oil-well — Statistics  of  the  oil  trade — A  high  excise 
duty — Price  of  oil  in  London  and  in  Russia. 

To  be  travelling  once  more  by  the  aid  of  steam,  after 
four  months  almost  incessant  caravanning,  was  certainly 
a  pleasant  sensation,  and  the  pleasure  was  infinitely 
added  to  by  the  extraordinary  interest  of  the  journey 
that  lay  before  me.  Behind  lay  the  bleak  stretches  of 
the  Mesopotamian  steppe,  the  crude  outlines  and  harsh 
contours  of  the  Persian  mountains,  the  long  days  of 
monotonous  marching,  the  hard  fare  of  the  wanderer 
in  desert  lands,  and  the  miserable  accommodation  of 
the  Turkish  khan  and  the  Persian  serai.  The  tran- 
sition from  such  surroundings  to  Baku  is  positively 
startling.  A  short  journey  in  a  comfortable  little 
steamer  up  the  Caspian,  and  behold,  you  step  ashore 
amid  what  appears  to  you  after  your  long  exile  the 
acme  of  civilisation.  Imposing  stone  buildings  confront 
you  in  whichever  direction  you  turn,  commodious  shops 
display  their  wares  behind  plate-glass  windows,  a  strik- 
ing green  spire  with  gilded  cupola  glittering  in  the 
sun  rises  high  above  the  rest  from  a  spacious  cathedral, 
— unmistakable  evidence    that    you    are  in   a  Bussian 


156  BAKU. 

town, — and,  above  all  for  you,  an  excellent  hotel,  with 
first-class  restaurant  and  most  of  the  appliances  which 
modern  civilisation  has  devised  to  make  life  livable, 
extends  a  cordial  welcome  to  the  traveller. 

That  is  one  aspect  of  Baku,  but  there  is  another 
far  more  important,  because  it  represents  the  sole 
excuse  for  the  city's  existence.  As  all  the  world 
knows,  Baku  and  its  150,000  inhabitants  exist  upon 
oil.  If  there  were  no  oil  there  would  be  no  Baku. 
So,  in  addition  to  the  Baku  of  lofty  houses,  well-stocked 
shops,  and  spacious  streets,  there  is  a  ville  noire,  where 
thousands  of  tons  of  crude  oil  are  daily  reduced  to 
kerosene,  benzine,  lubricating  oil,  and  residues  for  fuel ; 
and  there  are  also  at  a  little  distance  from  the  town 
vast  forests  of  derricks,  queer  grimy -looking  pyramidal 
erections,  under  cover  of  which  are  carried  on  those 
mysterious  operations  of  boring  and  pumping  which 
disgorge  the  wealth-bringing  oil  from  the  bowels  of 
the  earth.  I  think  Balakhani,  with  its  2000  derricks 
packed  as  closely  to  one  another  as  the  trees  of  a  forest, 
presents  one  of  the  weirdest  sights  it  has  ever  been 
my  fortune  to  behold. 

A  curious  feature  connected  with  the  oil-fields  is  the 
escape  of  inflammable  gas  which  is  observable  in  various 
places.  It  is  possible  literally  to  set  the  Caspian  on  fire 
on  a  calm  night  in  certain  spots  near  the  peninsula, 
and  there  are  places  where  it  is  only  necessary  to  make 
a  hole  in  the  ground  with  your  stick  to  let  loose  a  jet 
of  gas  giving  a  flame  of  several  feet  in  height.-^  This 
phenomenon  was  observed  and  recorded  of  old  by  one 
Guthrie,  a  traveller  in  Persia,  who  wrote  that  "in 
Taurida,  in  any  piece  of  ground  where  springs  of  naphtha 

^  In  '  Telegraph  and  Travel '  Sir  F.  Goldsmid  writes  :  "  To  say  that  these 
fires  are  curious  or  worth  seeing  is  to  say  nothing.  They  are  marvellous, 
and  worthy  of  classification  among  natural  wonders." 


THE  FIRE-TEMPLE  AT  SURAH  KHANI.  167 

obtain,  by  merely  sticking  an  iron  tube  in  the  earth 
and  applying  a  light  to  the  upper  end,  the  mineral  oil 
will  burn  till  the  tube  is  decomposed,  or  for  a  vast 
number  of  years."  Small  wonder  that  in  such  sur- 
roundings the  creed  of  the  Zend  Avesta^  took  root 
and  flourished,  or  that  a  glamour  of  romance  should 
still  hang  over  the  old  fire-temple  at  Surah  Khani, 
where  there  abound  fissures  in  the  earth  where  the 
mere  application  of  a  lighted  match  is  all  that  is 
required  to  restore  the  once  holy  flame  of  the  disciples 
of  Zoroaster ;  but  the  revered  figure  of  the  aged  high 
priest,  a  once  familiar  sight  in  the  precincts  of  the 
temple,  is  now  no  more  seen,  and  with  the  removal  of 
the  last  of  the  fire-worshippers  twenty  years  ago,  the 
care  of  the  sacred  flame  came  to  an  end,  all  sentiment 
being  finally  destroyed  by  an  enterprising  company, 
who  now  collect  the  gas  and  send  it  by  a  pipe  to 
Balakhani,  there  to  be  used  as  required  at  the  wells ! 
There  is  something  pathetic  in  the  sight  of  the  hallowed 
places  of  the  past  converted  into  a  means  of  assisting 
the  universal  craze  of  modern  money-making,  and  I 
hastened  from  this  scene  of  dissipated  religious  fervour 
to  the  noisy  activity  of  the  wells  themselves,  which  at 
least  are  devoid  of  illusion,  and  make  no  pretence  to 
having  ever  been  anything  else  but  what  they  are. 

As  I  have  said,  the  oil-fields  present  an  extraordinary 
sight,  and  as  you  breathe  in  the  lurid  atmosphere  of 
Balakhani  and  gaze  on  the  weird  scene  which  sur- 
rounds you  while  you  listen  to  the  uncanny  noises 
which  proceed  from  the  interior  of  the  grimy  derricks, 
you  might  well  be  excused  for  supposing  that  you  had 
inadvertently  tumbled  prematurely  into  some  peculiar 

^  The  Bible  of  the  Parsees,  by  whom,  however,  it  is  called  simply  Avesta, 
the  word  Zend  being  especially  employed  to  denote  the  translation  and 
exposition  of  a  great  part  of  the  Avesta  which  exists  in  Pehlevi. 


158  BAKU. 

form  of  Hades.  This  impression  is  in  no  way  lessened 
by  a  visit  to  the  boiler-house,  where  steam  for  working 
the  drills  and  pumps  is  generated.  Here  stand  a  row 
of  cylindrical  boilers,  very  much  the  same  as  boilers  any- 
where else,  but  with  this  difference — there  is  no  coal 
and  there  are  no  ashes,  and  there  is  no  dirt.  At  the 
mouth  of  the  furnace,  where,  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary 
boiler,  coal  is  put  in  and  ashes  are  raked  out,  are  fixed 
the  mouth-pieces  of  two  small  pipes.  By  means  of  these 
a  spray  of  petroleum  is  driven  into  the  furnace  by  a  jet 
of  steam,  and  a  roaring,  all-devouring  tongue  of  fire 
races  from  one  end  of  the  chamber  to  the  other.  The 
flame  thus  produced  is  possessed  of  a  violent  vitality, 
and  the  roar  and  hiss  is  as  of  the  sound  of  the  rushing 
of  many  waters. 

Mere  prosy  facts,  however,  are  here  as  astonishing  as 
abstract  impressions.  I  stood  and  watched  the  rich, 
slimy,  dark-green  fluid,  with  its  pink  glittering  froth, 
being  discharged  by  the  great  baler  of  one  of  the  bor- 
ings on  the  Bibi  Eibat  field,  and  became  fascinated 
when  I  learnt  that  I  was  watching  an  implement  which 
was  alone  raising  upwards  of  100  tons  of  oil  a-day  t 
Later  I  learned  something  of  "  spouters,"  and  the  plod- 
ding: baler  Avith  its  hard-earned  reward  of  100  tons 
seemed  a  poor  thing  in  comparison.  I  was  not  fortu- 
nate enough  to  see  one  myself,  but  I  caught  something 
of  the  enthusiasm  of  those  who  had.  A  spouter  is 
gloriously  indifferent  to  restraint,  and  often  blows  the 
derrick  to  matchwood  ;  but  then  it  throws  up  anything 
from  7000  to  10,000  tons  of  marketable  oil — say 
roughly  from  £350,000  to  £500,000  i— in  the  course  of 
twenty-four  hours,  and  what  is  the  cost  of  a  mere 
derrick  as  compared  to  this  ?     Some  one  who  thought 

^  On  the  basis  of  8'11  kopecks  a  pood,  the  average  price  of  raw  naphtha 
at  the  wells  in  1901. 


INSIDE  A   DERRICK.  15& 

it  a  pity  that  anything  should  be  lost — a  Scotsman 
no  doubt — invented  an  apparatus  for  controlling  the 
spouter.  It  took  the  form  of  a  steel  cap,  against 
which  the  spouter  was  to  play,  but  the  spouter  simpl}^ 
laughed  at  so  puerile  a  device.  At  least  I  know  of 
one  which  bored  a  hole  as  clean  as  a  drill  through  a 
9-inch  steel  plate  in  three  hours  ! 

Having  seen  the  raw  product  discharged  into  re- 
servoirs constructed  for  the  purpose,  I  next  entered  a 
derrick  to  see  what  was  happening  inside.  The  boring 
is  quite  small,  only  a  few  inches  in  diameter,  growing 
smaller  too  as  it  descends,  and  when  you  come  to  con- 
sider that  it  will  as  likely  as  not  go  down  2000  feet 
or  more  into  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  you  realise  the 
extraordinary  difficulties  which  may  beset  the  searcher 
for  oil.  One  of  the  worst  calamities  that  can  befall 
him  is  for  something  such  as  an  implement  to  fall  clown 
the  narrow  shaft  and  get  stuck  at  the  bottom.  Days 
of  patient  and  anxious  labour  may  be  expended  in  an 
endeavour  to  fish  it  up  again  or  pound  it  to  powder  if 
this  proves  impracticable,  and,  if  the  worst  comes,  the 
well  may  have  to  be  abandoned  and  the  work  begun 
all  over  again.  One  company  fished  for  implements 
thus  fallen  for  five  months,  and  then  gave  it  up  and 
bored  a  new  well.  It  is  on  record  that  the  remarks  of 
the  said  company  on  the  subject  of  choked  wells  were 
not  good  to  hear.  The  average  cost  of  boring  a  well  is 
£5000. 

It  is  difficult  to  give  any  adequate  idea  of  the  air  of 
bustle  and  activity  which  pervades  the  oil-fields  which 
surround  the  town.  Perhaps  the  following  facts  may 
serve  to  assist  the  imagination.  In  1902  the  aggregate 
depth  bored  in  sinking  new  wells  and  deepening  old 
ones  reached  a  total  little  short  of  46  miles,  a  fiofure 
which  was   surpassed   in   each  of  the  four  preceding 


160 


BAKU. 


years,  and  actually  reached  the  astonishing  amount  in 
1900  of  94  miles  84  yards !  In  the  course  of  the  year 
1902,  1895  wells  on  the  Ansheronsk  peninsula  yielded 
10,266,594  tons  of  naphtha — an  average,  that  is  to  say, 
of  5417f  tons  per  well.  Of  this  amount  l,528,706j- 
tons  were  given  by  fountains. 

Statistics  for  the  year  1901  show  an  output  of 
10,822,580|  tons  from  1924  wells,  of  which  7,837,096f 
tons  were  exported  in  the  form  of  kerosene,  lubricants, 
naphtha  residues,  and  raw  naphtha,  in  the  following 
amounts:  kerosene  2,075,806j  tons,  lubricants  206,451|- 
tons,  naphtha  residues  4,988,709f  tons,  and  raw  naphtha 
566,129  tons.i 

The  number  of  inactive  wells  must  necessarily  increase 
rapidly,  and  of  late  years  this  increase  has  been  very 
marked,  as  many  as  1273  wells  having  become  ex- 
hausted in  the  course  of  1901,  as  compared  with  842 
in  the  previous  year  and  594  in  1899,  the  average 
yearly  number  thrown  out  of  work  from  1892  up  to 
that  time  being  about  400.  Nevertheless,  the  supply 
exhibits  small  signs  of  becoming  exhausted,  the  output 


1  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  sufficiently  interested,  I  append  the 
following  comparison  between  the  Baku  and  American  oil-fields  :— 


Output  of  Baku  oil-fields,  1901, 


Exports  from  Baku,  1901— 
Kerosene 
Lubricants     . 
Naphtha  residues  . 
Raw  naphtha 


Average  daily  yield  of  the 
wells  of  the  Ansheronsk 
peninsula,  1901   . 


Tons. 
10,822,5805 


2,075, 806J 
206, 451 J 

4,98S,709| 
566,129 


7,837,0961 


29,661 


Tons. 


Output  of  American    oil-flelds 
1901— 
Pennsylvania 
Lima      .... 


Exports  from  America,  1901 
Kerosene  . 
Lubricants 
Naphtha  residues     . 
Raw  naphtha    . 
Benzine  and  gaseous 


Average  daily  yield  of  the 
wells  of  the  United  States, 
1901 


4,116,129 
2,393,54SJ 

6,509, 677J 


2,453,225f 

250,000 

90,322^ 

377,419J 

135,4831 

3,306,451^ 


18,198 


STATISTICS  OF  THE  OIL   TRADE.  161 

for  1901  showing  an  increase  of  1,145,161  tons  on  the 
previous  year,  and  of  10,467,742  tons  on  the  output  of 
twenty  years  ago.  The  capital  sunk  has  of  course 
largely  increased,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in 
December  1902  there  were  1423  wells  yielding  oil,  as 
compared  with  324  in  the  same  month  ten  years  ago, 
564  new  wells  being  bored  in  the  course  of  the  year 
1902,  as  compared  with  200  in  1892,  while  in  1900  as 
many  as  1010  wells  were  sunk. 

Oil  from  Baku  naturally  travels  far,  the  rival  wells 
of  Pennsylvania  and  Lima  being  situated  at  a  comfort- 
able distance  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe ;  and  the 
first  thing  I  saw  on  the  outskirts  of  Irkutsk,  in  far-off 
Siberia,  was  a  large  oil-tank  bearing  the  name  of  Nobel 
of  Baku,  and  one  of  the  last  things  I  noticed  at  the 
end  of  my  journey  was  an  office  of  the  same  firm  at 
Dalni  on  the  confines  of  the  Far  East.  The  huge 
export,  soon  to  be  further  assisted  by  means  of  a 
government  pipe  laid  from  Baku  to  Tiflis,  similar  to 
the  one  already  existing  between  Tiflis  and  Batum — 
in  1901,  1,198,387  tons  of  naphtha  products  were 
exported  abroad  from  Batum  as  compared  with  51,613 
tons  to  Russia — is,  however,  to  a  certain  extent  arti- 
ficial, the  high  excise  duty  of  60  kopecks  per  pood 
(about  4|d.  per  gallon)  being  responsible  for  the  prices 
in  Russia  being  as  high  and  sometimes  higher  than 
they  are  in  London !  Thus,  though  the  average  price 
of  kerosene  at  Baku^  in  1901  was  about  Id.  a  gallon, 
the  excise  duty  brought  it  up  to  over  5d.,  the  price  in 
London  in  December  of  that  year  varying  from  6^d. 
to  6|-d.  a  gallon.  For  further  comparison  take  the 
prices  of  kerosene  in  December  1900,  which  were  at 
Baku  2  1  J-d.  a  gallon,  at  Tzaritzin  in  South  Russia  6|^d. 
a  gallon,  and  in  London  5|-d.  to  6^d.  a  gallon.     At  the 

^  Actual  price  free  on  waggon.  2  ibid. 

L 


162  BAKU. 

same  time,   the  price  of  kerosene  in   New  York  was 
Sjd.  a  gallon. 

I  have  been  at  some  pains  to  give  statistics  of  the 
oil  trade,  partly  because,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
obtaining  reliable  data,  they  are  seldom  placed  be- 
fore the  public,  and  partly  because,  without  adducing 
figures,  it  is  impossible  to  give  any  idea  of  the 
magnitude  and  importance  of  the  industry.^  Let  me 
now  invite  any  one  who  is  wearied  by  the  contem- 
plation of  so  imposing  an  array  of  statistics  to  accom- 
pany me  across  the  Caspian  to  that  land  where  facts 
and  figures  have  ever  been  shrouded  by  a  veil  of 
mystery  and  romance. 

1  It  is  worth  while  drawing  attention  to  the  rapidly  increasing  demand 
for  liquid  fuel  Engines  on  the  Transcaspian  railway  and  steamers  on  the 
Volga  have  long  been  driven  by  naphtha  residues.  It  is  already  in  use  in 
the  Russian  navy,  and  is  being  experimented  with  in  more  than  one  ship 
in  our  own. 


GENERAL  ANNENKOFF'S   VIEWS.  163 


CHAPTER    Xy.^ 

THE   TRANSCASPIAN    RAILWAY    IN    1903. 

Origin  of  the  idea  of  railway  communication  with  Central  Asia — The 
chimerical  conception  of  M.  de  Lesseps — With  the  defeat  of  Lomakin, 
railway  schemes  are  revived — Lack  of  suitable  transport — General 
AnnenkoflF's  line  —  England  suspicious  —  The  Pendjeh  incident  — 
Renewal  of  work  on  the  Transcaspian  railway — Completion  of  the 
line — Leave  Baku — Krasnovodsk — On  board  the  train — Geok  Tep^^e 
— A  false  report — The  steppe  in  spring — Khiva — Merve — The 
Murgab  branch  to  the  Afghan  frontier — A  desert  of  sand — The 
bridge  over  the  Oxus — Eeach  Bokhara. 

"  The  great  difficulty  Russia  has  to  contend  with 
in  Central  Asia  consists  in  immense  distances,  inter- 
sected by  waterless  wastes,  which  impede  the  progress 
of  armies.  In  overcoming  this,  the  camel,  however 
useful  for  peaceful  caravan  purposes,  has  been  tried 
and  found  utterly  wanting."  ^  And  Russia  wanted 
above  all  things  to  send  armies  into  Central  Asia, 
so  with  commendable  wisdom  she  lost  no  time  in 
making  such  arrangements  as  would  enable  her  to 
do  so. 

^  For  the  facts  concerning  the  construction  of  the  railway  I  am 
indebted  to  Lord  Curzon's  'Eussia  in  Central  Asia,'  Messrs  Skrine 
and  Ross's  '  Heart  of  Asia,'  and  Mr  C.  Marvin's  '  Russians  at  Merve 
and  Herat ' ;  while  to  the  proprietors  of  '  The  Times '  I  am  also  indebted 
for  permission  to  make  use  of  an  article  of  my  own  descriptive  of  the  rail- 
way at  the  present  day,  which  has  already  appeared  in  their  columns. 

-  '  The  Akhal  Tekke  Oasis  and  Roads  to  India.'  General  Annenkoff. 
Translated  by  Charles  Marvin. 


164  THE   TRANSGASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

The  idea  of  rapid  communication  between  Russia 
and  her  recently  acquired  possessions  in  Central 
Asia  had  been  mooted  long  before  the  days  of  the 
advance  from  the  Caspian,  it  is  true ;  but  it  was 
the  lack  of  suitable  transport  required  by  the 
expedition  which  was  to  be  hurled  against  the 
Turkoman  horde  to  revenge  the  defeat  of  Lomakin 
in  1879  that  was  responsible  for  the  actual  con- 
struction   of  the   Transcaspian   railway. 

When  Tashkent  became  a  Russian  possession  in 
1865,  the  streams  of  the  Sir  Daria,  and,  after  the 
conquest  of  Khiva  and  practical  absorption  of  Bok- 
hara in  1873,  of  the  Oxus  were  looked  to  to  supply 
the  need  of  rapid  communication  between  Russia 
proper  and  Turkestan,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
difficulties  of  navigation  on  these  rivers  proved  the 
scheme  impracticable  that  the  project  of  a  Central 
Asian  railway  was  seriously  thought  of  With 
Tashkent,  in  the  heart  of  Turkestan,  in  the  hands 
of  the  Russians,  and  the  fierce  and  unruly  tribes 
of  Transcaspia  still  beyond  the  zone  of  Russian 
ambition,  it  was  only  natural  that  that  place  should 
have  been  the  objective  of  the  earlier  schemes  of 
railway  extension,  and  in  1873  a  Russian  official  was 
ordered  to  prepare  a  report  on  the  possibility  of  a 
line  from  Orenburg.  Out  of  these  suggestions  grew 
the  chimerical  conception  of  M.  de  Lesseps  of  a  rail- 
way from  Calais  to  Calcutta  —  a  project,  however, 
which  soon  sank  into  oblivion  with  the  cold  re- 
ception of  England,  and  the  departure  of  its  origin- 
ator to  Panama.  The  less  ambitious  though,  never- 
theless, costly  undertaking  of  uniting  Orenburg  and 
Tashkent  by  a  line  across  the  many  hundreds  of 
miles  of  unpopulated  and  unproductive  desert,  in 
spite    of    the   patronage   of  General    Kaufmann,    was 


THE   TRANSPORT  DIFFICULTY.  165 

likewise  regarded  with  little  favour  by  the  Gov- 
ernment at  St  Petersburg,  and  soon  fell  into  the 
background,  where  it  was  doomed  to  slumber  till 
wakened  thirty  years  later  by  the  powerful  hand 
of  M.   Witte. 

With  the  failure  of  such  schemes  the  idea  of  a 
railway  to  Central  Asia  was  for  the  time  being 
banished,  and  it  was  not  until  1879,  when  Lomakin 
suffered  a  severe  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the  Turk- 
omans, that  the  project  was  again  brought  to  the 
forefront  of  Russian  policy  in  Asia,  this  time  to 
take  definite  form,  and  to  come  into  being  in  after- 
years  in  the  shape  of  the  military  Transcaspian 
railway. 

The  reverse  suffered  by  the  Russians  at  the  hands 
of  an  Asiatic  foe  was  one  which  shook  the  whole 
fabric  of  Muscovite  power  in  Central  Asia,  requir- 
ing an  immediate  and  decisive  campaign  of  revenge 
to  re-establish  the  shaken  structure  on  a  firm  base 
once  more,  and  operations  were  at  once  taken  in 
hand  to  repair  the  damage  which  had  been  sustained. 

The  chief  difficulty  encountered  was  occasioned  by 
the  want  of  suitable  transport,  the  utter  futility  of 
relying  upon  camels  for  this  purpose  having  already 
been  amply  demonstrated  by  the  expeditions  of  1879 
and  1880,  in  the  former  of  which  two-thirds  of  the 
camels  used  had  succumbed,  while  only  350  out  of 
a  total  of  12,596  had  survived  the  advance  of  1880.^ 
To  overcome  this  difficulty  a  service  of  traction-engines 
was  proposed  by  General  Petrusevitch,  and  later  on 
the   construction   of  a   tramway  between   Tchikishlar 

1  These  are  the  figux^ea  given  in  Lord  Curzon'a  'Eussia  in  Central 
Asia.'  In  General  Annenkoff's  'Akhal  Tekke  Oasis,'  already  quoted,  he 
says:  "During  the  Akhal  Tekke  expedition  of  1879  as  many  as  9600 
camels  perished  out  of  10,000." 


166  THE   TRANSCASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

and  the  edge  of  the  Tekke  oasis  was  mooted ;  but 
a  far  more  important  project  came  into  being  when 
General  Skobeleff,  who  had  taken  with  him  General 
Annenkoff,  the  controller  of  military  transport,  decided 
in  favour  of  Krasnovodsk  as  aofainst  Tchikishlar  as 
his  base  of  operations.  A  hundred  miles  of  steel  rails, 
lying  idle  at  Bender,  which  had  been  purchased  and 
stored  "for  use  in  the  Balkan  peninsula  in  1878  in 
the  event  of  the  collapse  of  the  Congress  of  Berlin,"  ^ 
were  transported  to  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Caspian, 
and  the  first  link  of  the  railway  which  now  runs 
for  over  1200  miles  to  Andijan  and  Tashkent,  and 
is  destined  in  the  future  to  join  hands  with  the 
great  trans  -  continental  railway  in  the  north,  was 
forged  under  the  powerful  influence  and  able  direc- 
tion of  General  Annenkoff. 

The  line  which  had  thus  been  built  solely  w4th  a 
view  to  affording  the  transport  necessary  for  the  army 
advancing  against  the  Turkomans  failed  in  its  im- 
mediate object,  since  Skobeleff"  had  secured  his  great 
victory  of  Geok  Teppe  before  the  line  was  completed. 
But  the  far-reaching  possibilities  of  a  railway  running 
east  along  the  frontiers  of  Persia  and  Afghanistan  had 
at  length  begun  to  dawn  on  the  minds  of  Russian 
statesmen,  and  though  the  original  reason  for  its  con- 
struction was  no  longer  there,  the  building  of  the  line 
was  nevertheless  carried  out;  and  in  December  1881, 
eleven  months  after  the  collapse  of  the  Turkoman 
power,  the  first  train  steamed  into  Kizil  Arvat. 

At  this  point  the  railway  rested  for  three  and  a  half 
years,  the  suspicions  of  England,  aroused  by  the 
surveys  of  Lessar  on  the  Afghan  borderland,  and 
the  opposition  of  the  Turkestan  party,  headed  by 
the   governor  of  Tashkent,   General  Tchernaieff,   who 

^  Russia  in  Central  Asia.     Lord  Curzon. 


THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  RAILWAY.  167 

regarded  with  unconcealed  disfavour  a  scheme  which 
could  not  fail  to  enhance  the  importance  of  the  Trans- 
caspian  territories  at  the  expense  of  their  own,  consti- 
tuting the  chief  obstacles  to  a  further  advance  ;  but  in 
the  spring  of  1885  occurred  the  Pendjeh  incident  on 
the  Afghan  frontier,  which  determined  once  for  all  the 
future  of  the  Transcaspian  railway,  and  from  this  time 
the  policy  of  railway  extension  in  this  part  of  the  world 
"emerged  as  a  menace  to  England  and  a  warning  to 
Asia." 

And  so  it  happened  that  while  the  British  were  con- 
structing the  railways  of  Hurnai  and  the  Bolan  in 
Baluchistan,  the  Russians  were  steadily  pushing  their 
long  steel  arm  into  the  heart  of  Asia. 

Work  began  on  June  30,  1885,  the  rolling  camp 
which  carried  the  staff,  workmen,  and  material  moving 
forward  at  the  rate  of  four  miles  a-day  as  the  line 
was  laid.  Beyond  Kizil  Arvat  22,000  Tekke  labourers 
levelled  the  soil,  with  a  result  that  Merve,  which  had 
succumbed  to  the  intrigues  of  Alikhanoff  and  the  bravado 
of  Komaroff  early  in  1884,  was  reached  in  a  period  of 
fourteen  months.  In  August  1886  work  was  begun  on 
the  section  between  Merve  and  Chardjui  on  the  Oxus, 
and  in  spite  of  the  terrible  difficulties  experienced  from 
driving  sand,  the  whole  distance  of  141  miles  was  com- 
pleted in  little  more  than  four  months,  and  the  railway 
brought  into  working  order  throughout  the  664  miles 
from  the  Caspian  to  the  Oxus. 

The  river  here  is  at  the  present  time  spanned  by  a 
fine  steel  girder  bridge ;  but  such  an  undertaking  was 
considered  out  of  the  question  in  1887,  and  a  huge  and 
cumbrous  wooden  viaduct  was  carried  across  the  water 
on  piles  driven  into  the  river-bed.  The  engineer  who 
was  responsible  for  this  extraordinary  structure  was  a 
Pole,  Bielinski  by  name — and  when  it  comes  to  be  con- 


168  TEE   TRANSGASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

sidered  that  he  laid  a  way  4600  yards  in  length,  includ- 
ing 2270  yards  of  water-way,  resting  upon  no  less  than 
3330  wooden  piles,  between  June  1887  and  January 
1888,  for  the  very  moderate  sum  of  £44,000,^  he  must 
certainly  be  credited  with  an  excellent  performance. 

In  September  1887  the  216  miles  between  the  Oxus 
and  Samarkand  were  taken  in  hand,  the  latter  place 
being  reached  in  May  1888,  and  by  June  1  trains  were 
running  regularly  from  the  Caspian  to  the  ancient 
capital  of  Timur,  a  distance  of  879  miles.  Here  for 
the  moment  the  railway  halted;  but  in  1895  works 
were  begun  for  the  prolongation  of  the  line  to  Andijan 
and  Tashkent,  a  distance  altogether  of  401  miles,  and 
at  the  present  time  trains  run  regularly  to  both  these 
places.  In  addition  to  the  main  line,  a  branch  of  192 
miles  has  been  built  from  Merve  to  Kushk  on  the 
Afghan  frontier,  which  has  been  open  to  traffic  since 
1899. 

Such  in  brief  is  the  history  of  the  construction  of 
the  Transcaspian  railway  ;  let  me  now  invite  the  reader 
to  accompany  me  in  a  journey  over  it  as  it  exists  at 
the  present  day. 

At  five  o'clock  one  evening  towards  the  end  of  April 
I  boarded  the  steamship  Skoheleff,  a  new  vessel  belong- 
ing to  the  Mercury  and  Caucasus  Steam  Navigation 
Company,  lit  throughout  with  electric  light,  and  pos- 
sessed of  comfortable  cabins  and  an  excellent  cuisine, 
and  two  hours  later  we  left  noisy,  smelly,  money- 
making  Baku  behind  and  steamed  eastward  into  the 
night.  Seventeen  or  eighteen  hours  is  ample  time  to 
cross  the  Caspian  in  fine  weather,  and  by  midday,  the 

1  This  is  the  sum  given  in  Messrs  Skrine  and  Eoss's  '  Heart  of  Asia '  as 
the  actual  cost,  without  the  pay  of  transport,  and  of  the  railway  battalion 
engaged  in  erecting  it.  In  Lord  Curzon's  '  Eussia  in  Central  Asia '  the  cost 
is  stated  to  have  been  only  £30,000. 


,.rfA^A-<  ^-'> 


'^iJ-M 


KRASNOVODSK.  169 


day  following  we  were  disembarking  on  the  landing- 
stage  at  Krasnovodsk,  the  point  of  departure  of  the 
Transcaspian  railway,  with  whose  clean-looking  white 
houses,  pretentious  railway  -  station,  and  forbidding 
setting  of  bare  brown  hills  previous  wanderings  had 
made  me  familiar.  There  is  no  cause  to  envy  any  one 
whose  fate  dictates  a  sojourn  at  Krasnovodsk.  Just  as 
oil  is  the  raison  d'etre  of  Baku,  so  the  necessity  for 
the  Transcaspian  railway  having  a  starting-point  some- 
where is  alone  responsible  for  the  existence  of  Krasno- 
vodsk. They  have  another  point  in  common — namely, 
entire  absence  of  fresh  water,  and  in  both  towns  the 
whole  population  is  supplied  from  a  huge  distillery. 
Of  course,  there  is  not  a  blade  of  grass  or  sign  of  vege- 
tation of  any  sort,  while  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine 
a  spot  into  which  the  noonday  rays  could  beat  down 
with  greater  fury,  or  where  you  could  receive  a  more 
vivid  impression  of  a  land  parched  and  stricken  by  the 
sun.  If,  as  is  commonly  reported,  you  can  cook  eggs 
by  merely  laying  them  on  the  sands  of  Baluchistan, 
you  should  find  no  difficulty  in  frying  bacon  on  the 
pavements  of  Krasnovodsk ! 

Towards  evening  the  white  carriages  of  the  train,  so 
soon  about  to  start  on  its  wonderful  journey,  drew  up 
alongside  the  platform,  and  a  short  inspection  revealed 
the  fact  that  innovations  had  lately  been  made.  Until 
quite  recently  there  were  no  first-class  carriages  on  the 
line,  and  loud  have  been  the  complaints  by  travellers  of 
the  inconveniences  they  have  suffered.  Now,  however, 
I  found  a  first-class  carriage  and  restaurant  car  attached, 
and  as  we  steamed  out  of  the  station  punctually  at  five 
o'clock  everything  promised  well  for  a  comfortable  jour- 
ney. The  blue  waters  of  the  Caspian  remained  in 
sight  till  dark,  and  then  we  turned  east  and  held  our 
way  steadfastly  for  the  heart  of  Asia. 


^: 


170  THE   TRANSGASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

In  the  small  hours  of  the  morning  the  great  railway 
depot  and  workshops  of  Kizil  Arvat  were  passed,  and 
dawn  revealed  a  desolate  land  all  round,  broken  only 
by  a  chain  of  sullen  mountains  on  the  Persian  frontier 
to  the  south.  At  ten  o'clock  we  steamed  slowly  into  a 
small  wayside  station — Geok  Teppe.  What  a  tumultu- 
ous whirl  of  thought  the  two  small  words  set  going. 
We  were  passing  through  the  district  which  held  out 
to  the  last  against  the  advance  of  the  great  white 
power  from  the  North.  One  by  one  the  khanates  had 
succumbed.  Turkestan,  Tchimkent,  and  Tashkent  fell 
within  a  single  year,  Samarkand  and  the  rich  province 
of  Zerafshan  were  long  since  gone,  then  came  Khiva  and 
Khokand.  But  the  fierce  Turkomans,  brought  up  in  an 
atmosphere  of  blood  and  pillage,  fought  desperately  to 
the  end.  Here,  within  50  yards  of  the  railway-station, 
the  Russian  general  Lomakin  was  defeated  with  heavy 
loss.  The  result  was  a  severe  blow  to  Russian  prestige 
and  a  check  in  their  advance.  The  day  of  reckoning 
went  back  two  years,  but  when  it  came  it  was  decisive. 
What  need  to  recall  the  elaborate  precautions  of  the 
Russians  as  they  advanced  under  the  genius  SkobelefF, 
or  the  terrible  three  weeks  during  which  35,000  Tekke 
Turkomans  were  besieged  in  their  stronghold  Dengil 
Teppe?  It  is  now  over  twenty  years  ago,^  but  the 
horror  of  the  death-grip  when  Russians  attacked  and 
Turkomans  attacked  back,  and  the  ghastly  terror  of 
the  last  pursuit,  will  live  for  centuries.  Twelve  hundred 
Russian  soldiers  lay  dead  or  wounded ;  nine  thousand 
Turkoman  warriors  went  where  dead  Turkomans  go. 
Inside  the  ramparts  the  ground  is  now  covered  with 
grass  and  scrub.  A  monument  surmounted  by  a  cross, 
and  smaller  crosses  at  other  points,  stand  in  memory  of 

1  The  Eussians  captured  the  fort,  if  it  can  be  described  as  such,  on 
January  24,  1881. 


THE  STEPPE  IN  SPRING.  171 

the  Russian  slain.  All  is  now  perfect  peace.  The 
Turkoman  of  to  -  day  examines  the  mouldering  mud 
walls  curiously,  and  saunters  through  the  museum,  a 
small  building  of  white  stone  containing  Turkoman 
arms,  pictures  of  the  onslaught,  and  portraits  of  the 
leading  men  concerned,  erected  between  the  ramparts 
and  the  station.  The  train  is  an  odd  accessory  and 
seems  out  of  place,  but  it  is  an  unmistakable  sign  of 
the  times. 

Close  upon  Geok  Teppe  comes  Ashkabad,  the  capital 
of  Transcaspia.  From  here  there  is  a  highroad  to 
Meshed.  I  have  seen  it  somewhere  described  as 
good, — in  a  Foreign  Office  report  I  think, — and  so  it 
is  as  far  as  the  frontier.  Let  the  man  who  would 
eulogise  the  Persian  section  travel  over  it.  I  have, 
and  the  memory  lives  !  There  is  another  fallacy  about 
Ashkabad  and  the  Persian  frontier,  that  they  are  con- 
nected by  rail.  ■  I  was  myself  under  this  delusion  not 
so  very  long  ago,  having  been  informed  of  the  fact  by 
an  eyewitness  !  There  is  no  branch  line  from  Ashkabad 
or  any  other  point  on  the  railway  until  the  famous 
Murofab  is  reached. 

After  Ashkabad,  quiet  for  a  space ;  one  requires  it 
after  the  sensation  of  Geok  Teppe.  Looking  out  of  the 
window  the  mountains  still  run  parallel  on  the  south, 
the  lower  slopes  covered  with  grass,  the  higher  peaks 
patched  with  snow.  Everywhere  else  a  vast  sea  of 
waving  grass,  scarlet  poppies,  and  other  flowers.  This 
is  the  steppe  in  spring,  and  is  but  a  transient  phase  of 
the  wild  limitless  plain.  A  little  later  the  riotous 
verdure  will  be  gone  and  the  land  will  revert  to  its 
usual  state,  a  parched  white  wilderness.  That  is  in- 
evitable in  a  land  where  the  sun  beats  for  six  months 
from  an  unflecked  sky. 

As  you  steam  steadily  on,   your  mind  ponders  on 


172  THE   TRANSGASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

many  things.  You  remember  that  far  away  across  the 
desert  to  the  north  lies  Khiva,  A  man  once  made  a 
reputation  by  riding  there  :  no  one  would  do  so  now — 
save  perhaps  for  folly.  For  Khiva,  like  Bokhara,  has 
had  its  day,  and  the  revolving  wheel  of  fortune  has 
consigned  its  khan  to  the  unambitious  position  of  a 
nonentity.  When  the  world  forces  come  to  be  summed 
up  in  Asia,  Khiva  need  no  longer  be  taken  into  account 
even  as  a  pawn  upon  the  board.  Still  it  was  not 
always  thus,  as  the  records  of  Russian  expeditions 
could  tell.  Three  centuries  ago  the  Yaik  Cossacks, 
pirate  scourges  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  set  forth  for  the 
rich  province  called  Khowarizm  or  Khiva,  to  sack  its 
capital  Organtsh.^  But  they  reckoned  without  their 
host.  Cut  off  from  water  by  the  exasperated  Khivans, 
they  fell  fighting  desperately  against  overwhelming 
odds,  quenching  their  thirst  while  life  remained  with 
the  blood  of  the  slain.  A  second  expedition  met  with 
no  better  fortune,  but  the  culminating  disaster  was 
left  for  yet  a  third  under  the  leadership  of  the  ataman 
Schemai.  Lost  in  the  pathless  steppe,  stranded  finally 
on  the  inhospitable  shores  of  the  Aral  Sea,  their  pro- 
visions exhausted,  they  found  themselves  in  a  sorry 
plight.  It  is  on  record  that  "  at  first  the  unhappy 
ones  killed  each  other,  in  order  to  have  human  flesh 
to  eat ;  but  at  last,  when  brought  to  the  very  verge  of 
perishing,  they  summoned  the  Khivans  and  voluntarily 
surrendered  themselves  as  slaves." 

The  early  years  of  the  eighteenth    century  saw  a 
whole  Bussian  army  cut  up  and  its  leaders  massacred 

1  Organtsh,  the  town  we  speak  of  as  Khiva,  described  by  one  M'Gregor, 
Secretary  to  the  Board  of  Trade  in  the  'Forties,  as  "a  town  of  mud  huts, 
with  three  stone  mosques  and  a  mud  palace."  Dr  Wolflf  describes  how 
when  he  was  travelling  in  Bokhara  he  heard  the  cry  from  the  watch- 
towers  of  that  country,  "  "Watch  !  watch  !  for  the  people  of  Organtsh  may 
come,  kill  your  cattle,  and  destroy  the  child  in  the  mother's  womb  ! " 


EXPLOITS  OF  THE  KHIVANS.  173 

by  the  cunning  of  its  khan.  The  head  of  its  leader, 
Prince  Bekovitch,  was  despatched  as  a  gift  to  a  neigh- 
bouring khan,  while  those  of  his  staff  served  for 
ornaments  to  the  city  walls.  It  is  further  said  that 
the  khan,  actuated  no  doubt  by  the  same  desire  for 
a  vindictive  revenge  which  led  Agha  Mohammed  to 
have  the  bones  of  his  persecutor  Nadir  Shah  removed 
from  their  resting-place  at  Meshed  and  placed  beneath 
the  threshold  of  his  palace,  in  order  that  he  might  have 
the  exquisite  delight  of  walking  over  them,  caused  a 
large  drum  to  be  made  of  the  prince's  skin,  that  he 
might  have  the  supreme  satisfaction  of  hearing  his 
enemy  beaten !  While  the  expedition  under  Perovski 
was  retreating  to  Orenburg  in  1839,  having  ignomini- 
ously  failed  to  get  more  than  half-way,  two  English 
officers.  Captain  Abbott  and  Sir  Eichmond  Shakespeare, 
who  had  penetrated  to  the  khanate,  effected  the  chief 
object  of  the  ill-starred  expedition  from  the  north,  by 
obtaining  the  release  of  the  Russian  prisoners  by 
diplomacy,^  and  a  few  years  later  Khiva  was  given  a 
certain  international  importance  as  being  one  of  the 
countries  which  the  Tsar  Nicholas  agreed  to  leave 
"  to  serve  as  a  neutral  zone  interposed  between  Russia 
and  India,  so  as  to  preserve  them  from  dangerous 
contact." 

So  late  as  1872  a  Russian  force  under  General 
Markosoff  suffered  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the  Khivans 
at  Igdy ;  and  in  the  following  year  the  now  historic 
expedition,  which  was  "  to  punish  acts  of  brigandage, 
to  recover  fifty  Russian  prisoners,   and  to  teach   the 

1  According  to  Dr  Wolff  it  was  thanks  to  the  diplomacy  of  Sir  R. 
Shakespeare  that  the  Russian  prisoners  were  liberated.  In  his  '  Bokhara ' 
he  writes  :  "  Mr  Abbott,  who  preceded  him  (Shakespeare),  was  foolish 
enough  to  advise  the  King  of  Khiva  not  to  give  up  the  Russian  slaves 
until  he  had  treated  with  the  Russian  emperor  ;  but  Shakespeare  was 
wise  enough  to  recommend  their  immediate  cession." 


174  THE   TRANSCASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

khan  that  such  conduct  on  his  part  could  not  be  con- 
tinued with  impunity,"  brought  about  that  ruler's 
downfall.  So  great  was  the  stir  caused  in  England 
by  the  advance  of  Kaufmann's  expedition  that  it  was 
deemed  necessary  to  reassure  the  British  Government, 
and  Count  Schouvaloff  was  instructed  to  inform  Lord 
Granville  that  "  not  only  was  it  far  from  the  intention 
of  the  emperor  to  take  possession  of  Khiva,  but  positive 
orders  had  been  prepared  to  prevent  it."  Nevertheless, 
Khiva  fell  ;  a  most  unjustifiable  massacre  of  the  Yo- 
raud  Turkomans  was  indulged  in  by  way  of  an  extra 
military  flourish,  and  a  treaty  signed  with  Bokhara, 
which  gave  over  to  Russia  all  Khivan  territory  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Oxus,  opened  the  river  to  free 
navio-ation,  and  the  whole  of  the  khanate  to  Eussian 
trade. 

At  11  P.M.  I  awoke  with  a  start.  We  were  just 
drawing  up  alongside  of  a  brightly  lit  platform.  I 
knew  in  a  moment  where  we  were — we  were  at  Merve. 
Merve  is  a  name  which  has  rung  through  England. 
Not  the  Merve  of  ancient  splendour  as  capital  of 
the  world  of  Islam,  when  the  Kalifs  ruled  from  the 
Mediterranean  to  Tibet,  and  from  the  Caspian  Sea 
to  the  Persian  Gulf— though  the  ruins  of  this  Merve, 
too,  may  be  seen  ten  miles  away  from  the  present 
town,  close  to  the  station  of  Bairam  Ali — but  the 
Merve  where,  in  1881,  O'Donovan  saw  from  7000  to 
8000  Turkomans  working  daily  on  the  vast  earth- 
works of  Kushid  Khan  Kala,  which  was  to  raise  an 
impenetrable  barrier  to  the  Russian  advance.  But 
neither  the  Turkomans  nor  the  frightened  protests 
of  an  awe-struck  Cabinet  in  London  saved  the  strong- 
hold of  the  Turkomans  from  the  Russian  maw.  In- 
dignant denials  of  any  intention  to  take  it,  from  St 
Petersburg,  were  thankfully  swallowed  by  the  trem- 


THE  MURGAB  BRANCH.  175 


bling  politicians  at  Westminster,  and  Merve  was  left 
to  her  fate.  Nor  had  she  very  long  to  wait,  for  the 
expedition  of  the  disguised  Russian  officer,  AlikhanofF,  to 
Merve  in  1882  was  followed  by  another  of  a  similar 
nature  in  the  early  days  of  1884,  when  England  had 
her  hands  conveniently  full  elsewhere,  which  resulted  in 
the  fall  of  the  place  with  the  firing  of  scarcely  a  shot. 
And  that  is  how  it  happens  that  Merve  is  to-day  a 
Russian  town,  and  an  important  cantonment  for  Rus- 
sian troops. 

Beyond  the  zone  of  light  afforded  by  the  station 
lamps  all  was  dark,  silent,  and  mysterious,  and  then 
suddenly  out  of  the  darkness  and  silence  of  the  night 
loomed  a  ghostly  engine  speeding  from  the  south. 
Here  was  material  for  another  train  of  thought,  for 
that  line  to  the  south  runs  to  the  Afghan  frontier, 
and  is  as  jealously  guarded  from  foreign  gaze  as  is 
the  Tibetan  oracle  of  Lhassa.  The  Russian  advanced 
post  at  Kushk  corresponds  exactly  to  our  own  at 
Chaman,  and  without  a  doubt  Russian  rails  could  be 
laid  to  Herat  as  soon  as  ever  our  own  could  be  to  Kan- 
dahar. It  is  whispered  that  the  terminus  of  the  line 
is  to  be  found  inside  the  walls  of  a  heavily  armed  fort, 
garrisoned  by  a  number  of  troops  which  at  least  reaches 
four  figures,  and  with  barrack  accommodation  for  even 
more.  There  is  also  said  to  be  a  light  railway  running 
over  the  twelve  miles  between  Kushk  post  and  Chehel 
Duckteran,  while  it  is  asserted  that  the  length  of 
rails  stored  within  the  fort  is  greater  than  is  the 
distance  to  Herat.  Some  day,  when  Afghanistan  as 
such  has  ceased  to  exist,  here  will  lie  the  direct  over- 
land route  to  India — but  not  yet. 

After  Merve,  peace  again  ;  and  when  I  wake  up  in 
the  morning  miles  upon  miles  of  sand !  Sand  as  far 
as  the  eye  can  see — and  a  great  deal  farther.     Parallel 


176  THE   TBANSCASPIAN  RAILWAY  IN  1903. 

with  the  Hne  on  either  side  runs  a  small  quick-set 
fence,  or  rather  the  top  of  one,  for  the  roots  are  far 
down  in  the  sand,  binding  it  and  keeping  it  from 
burying  the  line.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  curious 
properties  of  this  shrub — saxsaul — it  would  have  been 
wellnigh  impossible  to  have  built  and  held  the  line ; 
even  as  it  was  it  must  have  been  heart-breaking  work. 

Suddenly  the  sand  gives  way  to  a  cultivated  oasis, 
and  ere  long  we  pull  up  at  Chardjui  on  the  banks  of 
the  Amu  Daria  (ancient  Oxus).  I  remember  reading 
recently  that  it  had  been  rechristened  Amu  Daria 
after  the  famous  river  on  whose  banks  it  stands ;  but 
Chardjui  is  still  writ  in  large  letters  over  the  centre 
of  the  building.  Here  the  engineer  has  been  recently 
at  work,  for  the  old  wooden  viaduct,  on  its  3330  wooden 
piles,  has  been  replaced  by  a  fine  steel  girder  bridge  a 
verst  and  a  half  in  length,  which  we  crossed  in  four 
minutes — a  great  improvement  on  the  twenty  minutes 
required  for  the  passage  of  the  older  construction. 
Having  with  much  difficulty  and  labour  driven  the 
huge  wooden  stakes  into  the  bed  of  the  river,  they 
would  give  a  good  deal  now  to  remove  them  again, 
but  some  few  have  up  to  the  present  time  resisted 
every  effort  to  displace  them,  and  stand  a  source  of 
constant  irritation  to  the  helmsman  responsible  for  the 
safe  passage  of  the  craft  of  the  Oxus  flotilla. 

Once  beyond  reach  of  the  life-giving  water,  sand 
again.  Not  an  even  yellow  expanse,  but  great  ugly 
corrugated  bluffs  and  hummocks,  like  the  churning 
pits  and  mountains  of  an  angry  sea,  the  small  isolated 
stone  buildings  forming  the  stations  looking  terribly 
lonely  in  the  vast  reaches  of  the  desert ;  but  before 
very  long  we  run  into  an  oasis  once  more,  thanks 
to  the  proximity  of  the  Zerafshan,  and  by  midday  I 


REACH  BOKHARA.  177 


have  alighted  at  the  station  over  which  stands  the 
word  Kagahn.  Kagahn  suggests  Uttle  enough,  but 
Bokhara  suggests  a  great  deal,  and  Kagahn  is  the 
name  given  to  the  station  at  New  Bokhara  since  the 
Russians  took  courage  and  constructed  a  branch  line 
two  years  ago,  which  now  deposits  the  traveller  under 
the  very  walls  of  Old  Bokhara  itself. 


M 


178  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 


CHAPTER  XYI. 

BOKHARA    THE     NOBLE. 

New  Bokhara — The  fascination  of  Old  Bokhara — Its  bazaars — A  picture 
for  an  artist's  brush — A  scourge  of  the  East — Monuments  of  the  past 
— The  power  of  the  King  of  Bokhara — The  citadel — Its  ancient  clock 
— A  piteous  tale — Violent  death — The  State  prison — Its  jailer — The 
scene  inside ^Khanikoff's  description  of  the  lower  dungeon — The 
story  of  Stoddart  and  Conolly — Nasrullah,  King  of  Bokhara — The 
journey  of  Dr  Wolff — The  notorious  vermin  pit — Bokhara  described 
as  it  is  to-day — Authoritative  writers  on  Bokhara. 

I  THINK  Bokhara  is  one  of  the  most  fascinating  places 
which  I  have  seen  in  the  East — real  Bokhara,  of  course, 
that  is.  There  is  nothing  in  the  smallest  degree 
fascinating  about  New  Bokhara,  which  is  simply  a 
Russian  town.  It  has  its  conveniences  certainly,  and 
that  is  something  to  be  thankful  for,  even  though  they 
be  devoid  of  attraction.  For  there  is  a  hotel  at  New 
Bokhara,  and  it  is  even  tolerably  clean.  It  is  not  kept 
by  a  Russian  if  I  remember  right,  but  you  at  once 
realise  that  you  are  in  a  Russian  town  by  the  huge 
penny-in-the-slot  musical-box,  which  is  the  most  con- 
spicuous piece  of  furniture  in  the  apartment  set  aside 
for  meals.  It  does  not  seem  to  matter  to  a  Russian  in 
the  least  what  the  music  is  like,  so  long  as  there  is 
music  of  some  sort  to  accompany  him  through  his 
repast. 

But   to  return  to  Old  Bokhara,   eight   miles   away 


THE  BAZAARS  OF  BOKHARA.  179 

across  the  plain.  I  do  not  know  why  it  is  that  it 
should  attract  one  more  than  other  cities  of  the  Orient ; 
I  only  know  that  it  is  so.  There  is  an  atmosphere  per- 
vading it  which  defies  analysis.  For  from  the  moment 
that  you  pass  through  its  mouldering  gates  to  stroll 
through  the  dust  of  its  time-worn  streets,  or  stand 
beneath  the  domes  of  its  sombre-lit  bazaars,  you  live 
in  another  world.  No  breath  of  the  West  penetrates 
the  musty  atmosphere  that  you  breathe  here,  heavy 
with  the  weight  of  years. 

It  is  pleasant  enough  in  the  softened  light  of  these 
same  bazaars,  and  cool,  too,  compared  with  the  glare 
and  the  heat  outside.  A  dark-skinned  Hindu,  with 
bright  orange  caste-mark  flaming  upon  his  brow,  sits 
solemnly  surveying  the  scene.  You  may  purchase  odd 
coins  of  the  country  from  him,  for  the  Hindu  is  the 
money-changer  of  the  East.  All  round  you,  sitting  or 
reclining  after  the  manner  of  their  kind  in  the  box-like 
little  shops  of  the  Arcade,  are  the  merchants  and  their 
clerks,  ready  to  bargain  with  you  for  their  silks  and 
their  velvets,  their  khelats  and  their  souzayiis,  their 
nahs  boxes  and  ornaments,  their  kalians  and  beauti- 
fully worked  ewers  of  brass.  And  on  all  sides  rises 
that  hum  which  is  an  inseparable  accompaniment  of  an 
Eastern  crowd. 

Side-walks  branch  off  in  all  directions,  where  the 
stranger  might  soon  be  lost,  but  we  have  a  native 
jliigit  to  guide  us,  kindly  lent  by  the  Russian  resident 
at  New  Bokhara,  and  we  follow  him  as  he  picks  his 
way  nimbly  through  the  crowd,  to  emerge  presently  in 
an  open  square  surrounded  by  shops  and  shady  trees, 
while  stone  steps  lead  down  to  a  large  tank  of  water, 
which  fills  the  whole  of  the  centre  of  the  enclosure. 

What  a  picture  for  an  artist's  brush !  What  a 
perfect   presentation   of  the   unregenerate   East !      A 


180  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

white -turbaned  Mullah  brushes  haughtily  by;  little 
groups  of  Bokharans,  picturesque  in  long  gaudy- 
coloured  robes,  squat  on  the  house -roofs  or  on  the 
stone  steps  in  the  shade  of  the  trees,  leisurely  sipping 
green  tea  and  smoking  the  kalian.  Here  and  there  a 
scantily  clad  figure,  attracted  by  the  cool  depths  of  the 
water,  sits  dangling  a  not  too  clean  foot  in  it,  while  he 
performs  sundry  ablutionary  operations  for  an  equally 
not  too  clean  body.  Presently  he  is  joined  by  a  friend 
with  his  water-skin,  who  passes  the  time  of  day  with 
him  as  he  allows  it  to  fill.  The  water  is  for  drinking, 
and  might  suggest  unpleasant  thoughts  elsewhere,  but 
you  see  nothing  strange  in  it  here. 

It  does  not  do,  indeed,  to  look  too  closely  or  too 
critically  at  the  men  and  manners  of  the  East.  You 
look  here  for  the  whole  effect  of  the  picture,  not 
individually  at  its  component  parts.  It  is  the  golden 
sunshine  from  an  azure  sky,  the  brilliant  colouring 
and  graceful  outline,  the  deep  contrasts  in  light  and 
shade  that  fill  the  imagination  and  delight  the  eye. 
To  look  too  closely  would  be  to  reveal  the  brazen 
sky  of  an  Eastern  summer,  the  dirt  and  squalor  of 
mud-built  shanties,  the  ghastly  horror  of  unthinkable 
disease. 

For  here  more,  perhaps,  than  elsewhere  have  the 
people  been  chastised  for  the  abomination  of  their  lives 
and  the  unutterable  evil  of  their  ways.  The  scourge  of 
the  rishta  lies  heavily  upon  them,^  the  terrible  wasting 
and  putrefaction  of  the  flesh  caused  by  leprosy  and  other 
kindred  disease  is  only  too  painfully  in  evidence,  and  men 
sink  prematurely  to  the  grave,  stricken  with  that  "curse 

^  A  worm  which  installs  itself  under  the  skin,  causing  unsightly  dis- 
figurement unless  carefully  and  adroitly  extracted.  "  So  common  is  this 
malady  in  Bokhara,"  writes  Lord  Curzon,  "  that  every  fifth  person  suff'ers 
from  it." — Eussia  in  Central  Asia. 


VICISSITUDES  OF  BOKHARA.  181 

from  God,"  under  stress  of  which  it  is  said  that  "the 
skin  becomes  dry  and  shrivelled,  the  hair  of  the  body- 
falls  off,  the  nails  and  teeth  tumble  out,  and  the  whole 
body  assumes  a  horrible  and  unseemly  appearance."  ^ 
And  this  is  the  city  of  which  its  priests  delight  to 
declare  that  whereas  in  all  other  parts  of  the  globe  light 
descends  upon  earth,  it  ascends  from  holy  Bokhara ! 

But  the  bazaar  and  its  inmates  are  not  solely  re- 
sponsible for  the  fascination  of  Bokhara.  There  are 
monuments  which  recall  stirring  tales  of  the  past.  On 
one  side  of  the  Bigistan  or  market  square  rise  the 
massive  walls  and  gateway  of  the  ark  or  citadel,  built 
more  than  eight  centuries  ago  by  Alp  Arslan,  "  the 
valiant  lion,"  and  it  is  borne  in  upon  you  that  this  is 
"Bokhara  the  Noble,"  the  city  which  has  seen  great 
days,  and  whose  rulers  have  made  whole  pages  of  the 
strange  history  of  the  ancient  world.  There  is  some- 
thing which  inevitably  appeals  to  you  in  the  strange 
vicissitudes  through  which  it  has  passed.  Here,  long 
ago,  in  the  days  of  the  Amir  Ismail,  was  the  capital  of 
a  vast  empire  and  far-famed  seat  of  learning  and  cul- 
ture. Nine  centuries  passed,  and  great  changes  were 
sweeping  across  the  map  of  Asia  :  rival  Powers  from 
the  West  were  bidding  for  the  ancient  kingdoms  of  the 
East,  and  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  saw 
both  British  and  Russian  aspirants  at  the  Court  of 
Bokhara. 

Those  were  the  days  of  the  bloody  Nasrullah.  The 
prolonged  torment  undergone  by  the  two  English  emis- 
saries, Stoddart  and  Conolly,  as  they  languished  in  the 
foul  depths  of  a  vermin-infested  dungeon,  and  their 
eventual  decapitation  in  the  market-place  in  1843, 
caused  the  name  to  stink  in  the  nostrils  of  Englishmen. 

^  Travels  into  Bokhara.     Sir  A.  Burns.     He  describes  this  disease  as  a 
peculiar  kind  of  leprosy,  which  he  calls  mukkom  or  kolee. 


182  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

No  light  has  ever  been  thrown  on  the  mystery  of  the 
inaction  of  the  Government  on  that  occasion,  who,  not 
content  with  doing  nothing  of  themselves  to  inquire 
into  the  fate  of  their  two  emissaries,  put  every  sort  of 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  others  who  were  willing  to  under- 
take the  task  of  discovery.  The  description  of  the 
adventurous  journey  eventually  made  with  this  object 
by  the  eccentric  missionary,  the  Rev.  Joseph  Wolff,  is 
one  which  is  of  unsurpassed  interest  even  at  the  present 
day,  though  his  arrival  was  too  late  to  effect  their 
release. 

There  is,  I  believe,  no  actual  reason  why  such  atroci- 
ties should  not  occur  at  the  present  day,  for  the  reigning 
Amir  has  the  power  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own 
subjects.  Indeed,  Lord  Curzon,  writing  in  1889,  tells 
of  a  captive,  who  had  himself  committed  a  cold-blooded 
murder  in  the  town,  having  his  eyelids  cut  off  and  his 
eyes  gouged  out,  and  being  then  tied  to  the  tail  of  an 
ass  and  dragged  to  the  market-place  to  be  quartered 
and  thrown  to  the  dogs,  only  a  short  time  before  his 
visit.  ^  But  beyond  the  privilege  of  disposing  of  his 
own  subjects,  little  real  power  is  left  to  the  ruler  of 
Bokhara,  for  when  Bokhara  is  spoken  of  as  an  inde- 
pendent State,  it  is  but  in  name,  be  it  understood, 
that  its  independence  exists. 

There  was  a  rumour  current  in  native  circles  when  I 
was  in  those  parts  that  the  lord  of  Bokhara  had  decided 
to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  The  difficulties  and 
fatigue  of  such  a  journey  were  pointed  out  to  him  by 
his  kind  friends  the  Russians,  and  he  was  strongly 
advised  not  to  go.  With  reflection,  however,  the  desire 
of  his  soul  to  behold  the  great  centre  of  the  Moham- 
medan universe — towards  which  he  turned  in  daily 
prayer — increased  many  fold,  and  he  at  length  made  it 

^  Russia  in  Central  Asia. 


THE  PRESENT  STATUS  OF  BOKHARA.  183 

known  that  he  would  go.  What  happened  then  ? 
Why,  the  iron  showed  through  the  velvet  of  the  glove, 
and  he  was  peremptorily  forbidden  to  leave  his  king- 
dom !  And  the  Amir  now  realises — what  all  the  rest  of 
the  world  realised  long  ago — that  the  ruler  of  Bokhara 
the  Noble  has  fallen  from  his  high  estate. 

I  have  mentioned  this  because  it  gives  a  correct  idea 
of  the  status  of  Bokhara  to-day.  There  is  no  reason 
why  it  should  not  remain  independent  to  this  extent  for 
many  years  to  come — indeed  there  are  two  very  good 
reasons  why  it  should  :  firstly,  because  it  suits  the 
Russians  to  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of  practical  pos- 
session while  they  suffer  none  of  the  disadvantages 
entailed  by  the  responsibility  of  actual  occupation  ;  and, 
secondly,  because  it  is  affirmed  that  at  the  time  of  his 
coronation  the  reigning  Emperor  gave  his  word  to  the 
Amir  that  the  position  of  Bokhara  should  remain  un- 
changed so  long  as  he  was  Tsar  of  all  the  Bussias, 

But  I  am  wandering  away  from  the  citadel  which 
rises  straight  in  front  of  us  as  we  cross  the  Biofistan. 
The  accompanying  illustration  shows  the  great  gateway 
which  gives  access  to  it,  constructed  by  Nadir  Shah  in 
1742,  and  high  above  the  entrance,  midway  between 
the  two  round  towers  which  support  it,  may  be  seen 
the  dilapidated  dial  of  an  ancient  clock.  It  is  a 
curiosity  in  Bokhara,  and  it  ticks  out  a  piteous  tale 
of  woe. 

An  Italian  of  Parma,  Giovanni  Orlandi  by  name,  had 
the  misfortune  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Nasrullah,  King 
of  Bokhara.  It  is  said  that  he  was  sold  with  the  con- 
nivance of  a  Bussian  of  Orenburg,  who  grew  rich  on 
the  profits  of  an  illegal  and  infamous  slave  traffic.  On 
his  refusing  to  become  a  convert  to  Islamism,  he  was 
thrown  into  prison  and  condemned  to  die ;  but  on 
promising   to   construct  for    the  Amir  a  machine  for 


184  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

measuring  time,  he  was  pardoned,  and  the  clock  which 
he  then  made  still  stands  as  a  witness  to  his  mechanical 
genius.  For  a  time  all  went  well,  Orlandi  was  granted 
his  liberty,  and  became  the  artificer  of  the  king.  But 
it  chanced  that  one  day,  when  in  a  state  of  intoxica- 
tion, he  offended  his  master,  by  whom  he  had  been 
summoned  to  repair  a  telescope  which  he  had  recently 
made  for  him.  Imprisonment  for  a  second  time  now 
became  his  lot,  and  a  renewal  of  the  command  that  he 
should  join  the  followers  of  the  Prophet  was  issued. 
This  time  his  fate  was  sealed,  and  in  the  year  1851  he 
was  led  out  to  execution.  As  a  foretaste  of  what  was 
to  come  the  skin  of  his  throat  was  first  cut,  and  he  was 
taken  back  to  his  cell  to  ponder  during  the  long  hours 
of  darkness  on  the  advisability  of  his  renouncing  his 
religion.  It  speaks  volumes  for  his  stoutness  of  heart 
that  even  now  he  remained  steadfast  in  his  faith,  and 
on  the  following  day  the  sentence  which,  with  fiendish 
cruelty,  had  already  been  in  part  carried  out,  was  com- 
pleted.^ 

At  no  very  great  distance  another  building  catches 
the  eye  in  the  shape  of  a  gigantic  tower  called  the 
Minar  Kalan.  Of  course  it  has  horror  connected  with 
it — what  building  is  there  in  Bokhara  that  has  not  ? 
It  rises  to  a  height  of  upwards  of  200  feet,  is  circular, 
tapering  slightly  towards  the  top,  and  is  covered  with 
beautiful  designs  in  carved  brick.  Imagine  a  flight 
through  200  feet  of  air,  bound  hand  and  foot,  with  the 

^  There  seems  to  be  some  confusion  as  to  the  exact  story  of  the  ill- 
starred  watchmaker.  Modesto  Gavazzi,  an  Italian  who  visited  Bokhara  in 
1863,  and  who  is  responsible  for  the  above  details,  says,  "  Twelve  or  fifteen 
years  back  there  lived  at  Orenburg"  the  Russian  who,  he  says,  was  re- 
sponsible for  Orlandi's  captivity.  But  Wolif  speaks  of  Orlandi  as  being  in 
Bokhara  when  he  was  there  in  1843,  and  whereas,  according  to  Gavazzi,  he 
was  unwavering  in  his  determination  not  to  renounce  Christianity,  Wolff 
speaks  of  him  as  having  turned  Mussulman. 


THE  PRISON  OF  BOKHARA.  185 


hard  ground  and  a  yelling  mob  at  the  end  of  it !  That 
is  what  criminals  in  the  Bokhara  of  old  had  to  look 
forward  to ;  for  they  were  taken  to  the  summit,  bound, 
and  precipitated  from  one  of  the  apertures  which  look 
out  over  the  market-place  beneath.  I  was  not  so 
fortunate  as  to  observe,  as  did  Mr  Henry  Norman,  the 
depression  in  the  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  tower, 
caused  by  the  fall  of  generations  of  victims,  but  I 
shuddered  as  I  stood  and  gazed  up  all  the  same. 

But  there  is  another  building  which,  could  it  speak, 
would  tell  tales  which  might  well  wring  tears  from  a 
stone,  and  that  building  is  the  zindan  or  state  prison. 
Built  on  the  top  of  a  low  mound,  surrounded  by 
crumbhng  brick  walls,  with  low  unpretentious  wooden 
doors,  it  presents  no  imposing  appearance,  but  the 
scene  which  confronts  you  within  is  not  good  to  see. 
The  jailer  was  corpulent  and  altogether  evil-looking, 
and  an  unpleasant  smile  stole  over  his  vicious  physiog- 
nomy as  he  invited  me  to  come  in.  Perhaps  he  was 
thinking  of  the  excruciating  torture  which  the  accursed 
infidel  had  gone  through  in  Bokhara  in  the  past ;  but 
the  smile  w^hich  such  recollections  conjured  up  served 
only  to  illuminate  the  peculiar  villainy  which  shone 
from  what  Sheridan  would  no  doubt  have  described  as 
"  an  unforgiving  eye  and  a  damned  disinheriting  coun- 
tenance ! " 

The  scene  which  presents  itself  at  the  present  day  is 
enough  to  make  one's  flesh  creep  at  the  thought  of 
what  was  in  the  past.  After  passing  through  a  sort  of 
guard-room  and  across  an  open  yard,  I  came  upon  two 
cells,  one  opening  out  of  the  other.  Both  were  small, 
absolutely  bare,  filthily  dirty,  and  sepulchrally  gloomy— 
for  light,  it  would  appear,  is  not  considered  a  necessary 
element  in  the  existence  of  the  criminal  of  Bokhara. 
But   it  was  the  inmates  that  afforded  the  crowning 


186  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

spectacle  in  this  picture  of  inconceivable  misery.  Packed 
tightly  together,  occupying  every  inch  of  the  bare  mud 
£oor,  lay  a  reeking  mass  of  worn-out,  hope-forsaken 
humanity.  The  moment  that  the  low  door  was  opened 
and  I  stood  hesitating  on  the  threshold,  a  dozen 
wretches  pushed  themselves  up  into  a  sitting  posture 
to  stare  vacantly  at  the  intruder,  and  whenever  any 
one  moved  there  was  a  grim  rustling  and  clanking  of 
chains,  for  one  and  all  were  burdened  with  huge  fetters 
and  manacles  of  iron. 

I  am  not  of  a  particularly  squeamish  disposition — I 
have  seen  too  much  of  what  has  been  described  as  the 
"  frank  indecency  of  the  East "  to  be  that — but  I  admit 
that  as  I  picked  my  way  among  the  piteous  inmates  of 
this  foul  cell  and  peered  into  the  gloom  of  the  dungeon 
beyond,  conscious  all  the  time  of  the  presence  of  the 
hateful  personality  of  the  jailer,  who  stood  surveying 
his  victims  with  a  cruel  leer,  I  experienced  a  sensation 
of  extreme  repugnance.  The  inner  cell  was  a  replica  of 
the  outer,  only  more  so,  and  in  the  centre  was  a  sug- 
gestive depression  in  the  floor,  to  which  a  heavily 
chained  criminal  drew  my  attention,  with  every  sign  of 
satisfaction  at  my  evident  discomfort.  Here  was  the 
lower  dungeon  which  was  filled  up  twenty  years  ago 
at  the  instigation  of  the  E-ussian  Tcharikoff,  and  it 
was  while  gazing  at  this  that  I  realised  that  bad  as 
is  the  present  there  had  yet  been  a  state  of  affairs 
incomparably  worse  in  the  past. 

Let  me  quote  the  description  of  this  den  given  by  the 
Russian  Khanikoff,  who  resided  in  Bokhara  for  eight 
months  in  the  'Forties  :  "  The  zindan  or  dungeon  is  to  the 
east  of  the  ark,  with  two  compartments  :  the  zindan- 
i-bala  (the  upper  dungeon)  and  the  zindan-i-poin  (the 
lower  dungeon).  The  latter  is  a  deep  pit,  at  least  three 
fathoms  in  depth,  into  which  culprits  are  let  down  by 


NASRULLAH,   KING   OF  BOKHARA.  187 

ropes ;  food  is  lowered  down  to  them  in  the  same 
manner.  The  sepulchral  dampness  of  the  place  in 
winter  as  well  as  in  summer  is  said  to  be  insupportable, 
according  to  the  testimony  of  eyewitnesses."  Such 
was  the  place ;  imagination  will  supply  the  details  as 
to  the  condition  of  its  victims. 

Was  this  the  den  where  the  two  Englishman,  Stoddart 
and  ConoUy,  dragged  out  the  last  miserable  days  of 
their  lives  ?  It  may  be  that  it  was,  though  the  evidence 
would  seem  to  point  to  an  even  more  refined  chamber 
of  torture  within  the  walls  of  the  citadel  itself  as  the 
scene  of  their  confinement. 

The  whole  story  is  one  of  supreme  interest  for  English- 
men, and  I  cannot  pass  from  Bokhara  without  giving  in 
brief  outline  the  facts  of  the  case  as  far  as  they  have 
ever  been  ascertained. 

In  the  year  1826  died  Seyid  Haydar  Tura,  Amir  of 
Bokhara,  and  Hussein  Khan  reigned  in  his  stead.  But 
Hussein  was  cursed  with  a  brother,  Nasrullah,  who 
had  set  his  heart  upon  the  throne,  and  after  a  reign 
of  fifty  days  the  king  died — not  without  suspicion  of 
poison.  The  summary  methods  characteristic  of  Eastern 
despots  now  showed  themselves  in  Nasrullah.  Omar, 
who  had  succeeded  the  deceased  Hussein,  was  betrayed 
by  his  prime  minister  and  cast  into  prison;  thirty  of 
his  partisans  were  instantly  put  to  death,  his  three 
remaining  brothers  expelled  from  the  city  and  murdered, 
and  a  chief  of  the  city  hurled  to  his  destruction  from 
the  palace  gates.  Thus  was  the  man  who,  to  quote  a 
recent  historian,^  "  epitomised  the  vices  which  flourished 
unchecked  in  Bokhara,"  borne  through  a  sea  of  blood  of 
his  own  making  to  the  throne  which  he  stained  with 
his  presence  for  a  period  of  thirty-four  years. 

The  cruelty  and  depravity  of  his  character  is  attested 

1  Professor  E.  D.  Ross. 


188  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

by  all  who  had  occasion  to  come  into  contact  with  him. 
Thus  the  eccentric  missionary,  Dr  Wolff,  who  had 
ample  opportunity  of  forming  an  opinion,  wrote  that 
"  he  delights  to  hear  the  people  tremble  at  his  name, 
and  laughs  with  violence  when  he  hears  of  their  appre- 
hensions ";  and  he  throws  further  light  upon  the  matter 
when  he  quotes  the  remark  of  a  Turkoman  that  "  he 
(Nasrullah)  drank  the  milk  of  a  man-eater;  for  the 
Cossacks  in  the  desert  are  accused  of  eating  the  bodies 
of  dead  men,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  that  he  is  such  a 
bloodhound."  It  was  an  evil  hour  for  Bokhara  when 
the  priests  gave  their  sanction  to  the  lust  of  their  king, 
and  from  the  day  when  the  High  Priest  caused  it  to  be 
cried  from  the  house-tops  that  "  the  king  is  the  shep- 
herd :  the  subjects  are  the  sheep.  The  shepherd  may 
do  with  the  sheep  as  he  thinks  proper ;  he  may  take 
the  wife  from  the  husband,  for  the  wife  is  the  sheep  of 
the  king  as  well  as  of  her  husband,  and  he  may  make 
use  of  any  other  man's  wife  just  as  he  pleases,"  he 
plunged  into  a  career  of  reckless  and  indescribable 
debauchery.  It  is  not  surprising  that  such  a  monster 
of  iniquity  should  be  found  indulging  in  his  lust  for 
blood  up  to  the  very  last,  or  that  the  closing  scene  of 
his  life  should  display  the  beheading  of  his  own  wife  in 
his  presence  as  he  lay  upon  his  deathbed. 

Such  was  the  monarch,  advised  and  assisted  by  his 
prime  minister  and  brother  in  iniquity,  the  inhuman 
Persian,  Abd  us-Samad,  into  whose  hands  fell  the  luck- 
less Englishmen,  Stoddart  and  Conolly.  Despatched 
by  the  Indian  Government  to  enter  into  negotiations 
with  the  ruler  of  Bokhara,  they  were  treated  as  the 
basest  of  criminals.  At  length  came  the  rumour  of 
their  death.  Indignation  at  the  callous  behaviour  of 
the  Government  ran  high  ;  and  when  at  length  the 
already-mentioned  traveller  and  missionary,  Dr  Wolff, 


THE  FAMOUS   VERMIN  PIT.  189 


came  forward  and  volunteered  to  go  in  person  to  Bok- 
hara, he  met  with  a  ready  support.  The  last  authentic 
news  of  the  condition  of  the  missing  officers  was  sup- 
plied by  a  letter  from  Captain  Conolly  to  his  brother,  in 
which  he  stated  that  "for  four  months  they  had  no 
change  of  raiment,  their  dungeon  was  in  a  most  filthy 
and  unwholesome  state,  and  teemed  with  vermin  to  a 
deo-ree  that  rendered  life  a  burden.  Stoddart  was 
reduced  to  a  skeleton,  and  his  body  was  covered  with 
putrid  sores."  ^  It  appears  that  the  first  rumours  of 
their  death  were  incorrect,  though  they  were  eventually 
taken  from  their  cell  and  beheaded  in  the  market-place 
some  time  later,  and  prior  to  the  arrival  of  their  would- 
be  rescuer.  "  For  the  quietude  of  soul,"  wrote  the  rever- 
end doctor,  "  of  the  friends  of  those  murdered  officers. 
Colonel  Stoddart  and  Captain  Conolly,  I  have  to  observe 
that  they  were  both  of  them  cruelly  slaughtered  at  Bok- 
hara, after  enduring  agonies  from  confinement  in  prison  of 
the  most  awful  character — masses  of  their  flesh  having 
been  gnawn  off  their  bones  by  vermin,  in  1843." 

I  have  said  that  the  evidence  points  to  a  dungeon, 
no  longer  existent,  but  which  formerly  stood  within 
the  walls  of  the  citadel  itself,  as  the  scene  of  their 
confinement.  Let  me  call  to  witness  the  Russian 
KhanikofP  once  more  :  "  From  hence  to  the  right  of 
the  entrance  [i.e.,  of  the  Ab-Khaneh  in  the  ark]  a 
corridor  leads  into  another  prison,  more  dreadful  than 
the  first,  called  the  Kana-Khanah,  a  name  which  it  has 
received  from  the  swarms  of  ticks  which  infest  the  place, 
and  are  reared  there  on  purpose  to  plague  the  wretched 
prisoners.  I  have  been  told  that  in  the  absence  of  the 
latter  some  pounds  of  raw  meat  are  thrown  into  the 
pit  to  keep  the  ticks  alive ! "  This,  then,  was  the 
notorious  vermin  pit,  and  from  Conolly's  information 

1  Bokhara.     Wolff. 


190  BOKHARA    THE  NOBLE. 

that  "  their  dungeon  was  in  a  most  filthy  and  un- 
wholesome state  and  teemed  with  vermin,''  and  from 
Wolff's  statement  that  "  masses  of  their  flesh  had  been 
gnawn  off  their  hones  by  vermin,''  one  is  led  to  the  con- 
clusion that  it  was  in  this  loathsome  hole  that  they 
dragged  out  the  terrible  days  of  their  confinement. 
Whether  it  was  in  the  one  or  the  other,  however,  is 
after  all  a  matter  of  small  importance — the  glaring  fact 
remains  that  two  British  officers  on  official  duty  were 
foully  done  to  death  without  so  much  as  a  protest 
being  raised  by  the  Government  that  had  sent  them 
to  their  doom ;  and  no  amount  of  explanation,  had 
explanation  been  given,  could  have  wiped  out  the  foul 
blot  which  must  for  ever  cast  a  stain  upon  the  annals  of 
British  government. 

I  have  written  of  Bokhara  as  I  saw  it,  as  any  traveller 
would  see  it  who  chanced  to  visit  there  to-day,  and  I 
have  recalled  some  of  those  stories  which  are  insepar- 
ably connected  with  its  name.  I  have  made  no  attempt 
to  give  any  comprehensive  description  of  the  town,  or 
to  enumerate  its  mosques  and  madressahs,  or  its  baths, 
or  its  bazaars.  All  this  has  been  done  before,  often 
and  well,  and  any  one  who  is  desirous  of  detailed  in- 
formation concerning  them  will  find  it  in  the  works  of 
men  so  well  qualified  to  give  it  as  Burnes,  Wolff, 
Khanikoff,  Vambery,  Schuyler,  or  Lansdell,  to  mention 
but  a  few  of  those  who  have  written  upon  the  subject. 
Nor  have  I  amassed  statistics  of  its  trade,  for  such 
trade  is  of  little  interest  to  Englishmen  to-day.  Once 
upon  a  time  Bokhara  enjoyed  a  trade  to  the  amount 
of  3000  tons  a-year  with  India,  importing  indigo,  tea, 
and  English  manufactures  along  the  trade-routes  of 
Afghanistan,^  but  the  Transcaspian  railway  and — to 
make  use  of  the  most  euphemistic  appellation — a  scien- 

^  AH  the  Eussias.     Henry  Norman. 


RUSSIAN  MANUFACTURES  AT  BOKHARA.  191 

tific  tariff  have  altered  all  that.  To-day  there  is  no 
room  for  European  merchants  other  than  Russian  in 
those  countries  which  lie  immediately  north  of  the 
Pamirs  or  the  Hindu  Kush,  where  '*  Russian  prints, 
calicoes,  and  cottons  are  successfully  competing  with 
the  far  more  beautiful  native  materials,  and  hideous 
brocades  from  Moscow  debauch  the  instinctive  good 
taste  of  the  East !  "  ' 

^  Eussia  in  Central  Asia.     Lord  Curzon. 


192  SAMARKAND. 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

SAMARKAND. 

Samarkand  one  of  the  great  cities  of  Central  Asia — The  vicissitudes  through 
which  it  has  passed — Timur's  capital— Description  of  Timur — Samar- 
kand taken  by  the  Russians — A  brilliant  episode — The  buildings  of 
Samarkand — The  market  square — A  meal  in  the  bazaar — The  tomb  of 
Tamerlane — The  mosque  of  Bibi  Khanum — The  mosque  of  "the 
living  king" — Ishak  Khan — The  end  of  the  railway. 

"  Samarkand  is  the  face  of  the  earth  :  Bokhara  the 
marrow  of  Islam  :  were  there  not  in  Meshed  an  azure 
dome  the  whole  world  would  be  merely  a  ditch  for 
ablution,"  —  which  saying  testifies  to  the  honour  in 
which  were  held  the  two  great  cities  of  Central  Asia. 
For  if  Bokhara  is  one  of  the  great  names  which  ring 
through  the  history  of  Central  Asia,  Samarkand  is 
assuredly  the  other,  the  fame  of  which,  suffused  with 
a  halo  of  glory,  comes  echoing  from  a  remote  antiquity 
clown  the  dim  corridors  of  time. 

A  large  and  flourishing  city,  with  walls  70  stadia  in 
circumference  when  it  succumbed  to  the  military  genius 
of  Alexander  the  Great,  the  victim  of  the  wildest 
vicissitudes,  it  passed  by  fire  and  sword  from  one 
conqueror  to  another  till,  adorned  and  beautified  as 
the  capital  of  Timur,  it  reached  the  highest  pinnacle 
of  its  magnificence.  Alexander  the  Great,  Seyid  ibn 
'Othman,    Harthama,    Jengis    Khan,    Tamerlane,    and 


THE  CAPITAL   OF  TAMERLANE.  193 

Baber, — such  are  the  names  which  stand  emblazoned 
upon  the  victorious  scroll  of  its  conquerors.  Small 
wonder,  then,  that  though  the  day  of  its  greatness  is 
long  passed,  it  should  even  in  its  ruin  remain  one  of 
the  most  impressive  cities  upon  earth. 

The  journey  thither  from  Bokhara  is  to-day  one  of 
the  simplest  things  in  the  world.  You  step  into  the 
train  at  midday  and  you  reach  Samarkand,  if  you  are 
lucky,  some  hours  before  midnight — how  long  before 
depending  of  course  upon  the  punctuality  or  lack  of  it 
of  your  train.  I  arrived  at  11  p.m.,  but  then  we  had 
started  two  hours  late. 

It  is,  of  course,  as  the  immortal  capital  of  Tamerlane 
that  you  think  of  Samarkand  to-day,  because  it  is 
the  ruins  of  the  great  mosques  and  madressahs  and 
mausolea  which  he  built,  and  which  merit  the  appli- 
cation of  the  encomium  of  a  Persian  poet  that  "  even  in 
this  broken  state  they  are  still  better  than  100,000 
intact  ones,"  which  are  responsible  for  its  world-wide 
fame.  You  may  look  ujDon  a  jumble  of  insignificant 
debris  close  by  and  be  told  that  you  are  in  the  pre- 
cincts of  the  city  of  Afrasiab,  that  hero  of  ancient 
myth,  "  strong  as  an  elephant,  whose  shadow  extended 
for  miles,  whose  heart  was  bounteous  as  the  ocean,  and 
his  hands  like  the  clouds  when  rain  falls  to  gladden  the 
earth,"  or  you  may  pause  for  a  moment  to  think  of  the 
Marcanda  that  fell  to  the  hero  of  Macedon ;  but  when 
you  stand  before  the  great  buildings  which  are  the 
glory  of  Samarkand,  it  is  to  their  renowned  founder 
that  your  thoughts  are  inevitably  recalled. 

Tamerlane,  we  are  told,  was  a  man  of  an  inordinate 
ugliness,  though  enjoying,  it  would  seem,  as  Cardinal 
De  Betz  says  of  De  Bouillon,  "  with  the  physiognomy  of 
an  ox  the  perspicacity  of  an  eagle."  He  was  certainly 
lame,  as  his  name  suggests, — Timur  leng,  Timur  the 

N 


194  SAMARKAND. 


lame,  whence  our  Tamerlane, — and  he  was  blind  in  one 
eye.  One  day  while  being  waited  upon  by  the  barber 
he  chanced  to  catch  sight  of  himself  in  the  glass,  and 
was  so  struck  by  his  appearance  that  he  began  to  weep 
violently,  in  which  he  was  joined  by  his  companion 
Chodscha.  At  the  expiration  of  two  hours  the  king 
ceased  weeping,  but  Chodscha  then  began  wailing  in 
good  earnest.  Timur,  surprised,  demanded  the  reason 
of  his  renewed  lamentation,  to  whom  Chodscha  replied, 
"  If  thou  hast  only  seen  thy  face  once,  and  at  once 
seeing  hast  not  been  able  to  contain  thyself,  but  hast 
wept,  what  should  we  do — we  who  see  thy  face  every 
day  and  night ! "  So  say  the  Persians.  It  would  seem 
from  the  above  that,  as  the  Persian  poet  Saadi  once 
said  of  a  compatriot,  he  was  "so  ugly  and  crabbed 
that  a  sight  of  him  would  derange  the  ecstasies  of  the 
orthodox ! "  In  which  respect  he  resembles  another 
great  monarch,  who  was  so  adverse  to  seeing  his  own 
likeness  that  he  was  at  last  unwilling  that  it  should 
appear  on  his  country's  coins.  Wherefore  it  is  the 
two-headed  eagle  of  Byzantium  that  is  stamped  on 
the  rouble  of  Russia. 

But  whatever  can  be  said  against  Tamerlane  on  the 
grounds  of  his  personal  appearance,  nothing  can  be  said 
against  his  success  as  a  conqueror  or  against  his  accom- 
plishments as  an  architect,  whereby  his  city  became 
one  of  the  proudest  in  the  world  and  the  beloved  resort 
a  century  later  of  the  renowned  Sultan  Baber. 

The  city  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Russians  under 
General  Kaufmann  in  May  1868,  and  was  the  scene  of 
what  has  been  described  as  being  "  one  of  the  brightest 
and  most  glorious  pages  in  all  the  history  of  the 
Russian  advance  in  Asia.''^  A  small  garrison  under 
Major  Stempel,  left  to  hold  the  city  by  General  Kauf- 

^  Turkestan.     Schuyler. 


THE  MONUMENTS  OF  SAMARKAND.  195 

maim,  who  had  set  out  with  the  main  army  in  pursuit 
of  the  Amir  of  Bokhara,  found  itself  surrounded  by  a 
hostile  force  of  20,000  men  from  Shahrisabs.  For  five 
days,  during  which  the  greatest  heroism  was  displayed 
by  the  beleaguered  party,  the  position  remained  critical ; 
but  at  length  the  one  messenger  who  escaped  with  his 
life  out  of  seven  who  were  sent,  succeeded  in  apprising 
General  Kaufmann  of  the  desperate  plight  of  the  de- 
fenders. No  time  was  lost ;  the  general  returned  post- 
haste with  his  troops,  and  the  enemy  were  smitten  hip 
and  thigh.  Thousands  of  prisoners,  we  are  told,  were 
massacred  in  cold  blood,  and  the  city  was  given  over 
for  three  days  to  pillage. 

The  city  of  to-day  is,  of  course,  not  the  city  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  when,  embellished  by  its  Tartar 
king,  its  glory  was  at  its  height ;  but  nevertheless,  in 
spite  of  the  vandalism  of  Usbeg  and  Turk,  of  the  shock 
of  earthquakes  and  of  the  Russian  occupation,  its  monu- 
ments even  in  their  ruin  stand  unique  and  whisper 
faintly  of  a  greatness  that  is  past.  The  most  celebrated 
buildings  are  the  three  stupendous  madressahs  which 
form  three  sides  of  the  E,igistan, — the  noblest  public 
square,  according  to  Lord  Curzon,  in  the  world, — the 
mosque  of  Shah  Zindeh,  the  madressah  of  Bibi  Khanum, 
the  Chinese  wife  of  Timur,  and  the  Gur  Amir,  or  tomb 
of  Tamerlane  himself  All  these  buildings  originally 
were,  and  to  a  great  extent  still  are,  covered  with  a 
network  of  designs  in  brilliantly  coloured  enamel  tile- 
work,  presenting  a  picture  of  kaleidoscopic  beauty  in 
the  flashing  rays  of  an  Eastern  sun. 

The  three  madressahs  above  alluded  to  are  known, 
as  has  been  set  forth  by  every  writer  upon  Samarkand, 
as  those  of  Ulug  Beg  the  grandson  of  Timur,  of  Shir 
Dar  the  lion-bearing,  and  of  Tillah  Kari  the  gold- 
plated,  and  date  from  the  years  1421,  1601,  and  1618 


196  SAMARKAND. 


respectively.  Their  massive  proportions  and  grandeur 
of  design  compel  the  gaze  and  burn  a  picture  upon  the 
tablets  of  the  brain  which  can  never  be  effaced.  Grand, 
solemn,  impressive,  are  the  epithets  they  conjure  up, 
and  all  round,  in  the  space  which  they  enclose,  the 
thronging  multitudes  and  noisy  booths  seem  small, 
puny,  inconsequent  in  comparison. 

Yet  there  is  much  that  attracts  here  also,  when  the 
mind  has  had  its  fill  of  these  enduring  monuments,  and 
can  focus  itself  upon  the  trivialities  of  the  present. 
Seated  upon  the  ground  in  a  corner  of  this  colossal 
square  was  a  specimen  of  that  strange  genus  the  story- 
teller of  the  East.  As  his  voice  rose  on  the  still  morn- 
ing air,  a  little  crowd  of  long-robed  gaudy-coloured 
humanity  thronged  round  him,  jostling  one  another, 
chattering  trivialities,  or  listening  wide-eyed  to  the 
speaker's  tale.  I  listened,  and,  understanding  not, 
took  a  surreptitious  photograph  (see  illustration),  and 
passed  on.  A  cook-shop  suggested  food  and  refresh- 
ment. Was  there  any  place  where  I  could  lunch  ? 
Certainly  not.  I  was  pressed  for  time,  and  had  not 
delivered  my  letters  of  introduction  to  Russian  officials. 
What  did  that  matter  ?  I  was  in  Rome,  and  would  do 
as  Rome  did,  so  I  ate  shashlik  in  the  bazaar,  alternate 
nobs  of  mutton  and  fat  roasted  on  skewers,  one  skewer 
to  each  mouthful,  and  drank  sherbet  out  of  small  incon- 
venient handleless  bowls.  It  was  all  eminently  in  keep- 
ing with  my  surroundings,  and  I  would  not  have  had  it 
otherwise. 

I  feel  that  I  ought  to  say  something  about  the  other 
striking  ruins  of  Samarkand,  though  it  has  all  been 
said  far  better  than  I  can  say  it  many  times  before.  I 
visited  them  all,  of  course  :  the  tomb  of  Timur,  the 
mosque  of  Shah  Zindeh,  the  mosque  and  madressah  of 
Bibi  Khanum,  and  even  a  gigantic  cenotaph  at  some 


THE   TOMB   OF  TAMERLANE.  197 

distance  from  the  city,  reputed  to  mark  the  tomb  of 
Daniel.  I  mildly  suggested  that  it  was  Daniyal  Bi,  of 
the  house  of  Mangit,  who  ruled  over  Bokhara  in  the 
eighteenth  century  that  was  meant,  but  was  indig- 
nantly scoffed  at,  and  informed  that  it  was  the  prophet 
Daniel. 

In  the  Gur  Amir  a  vast  slab  of  green  jade  stands  in 
his  memory  on  the  floor  above  the  vault,  beneath  which 
the  last  remains  of  the  great  Tamerlane  lie.  A  great 
crack  in  the  block  shows  where  it  was  once  cut  in  half 
by  some  avaricious  khan,  I  was  told,  who  expected  to 
find  treasure  inside,  though  this  desecration  has  also 
been  attributed  to  Nadir  Shah.  The  two  pieces  have 
been  joined  with  cement ;  but  only  two  years  ago  the 
mausoleum  was  broken  into  once  more,  certain  tomb- 
stones being  carried  off,  and  the  cenotaph  of  Timur 
itself,  though  not  removed,  coming  in  for  rough 
handling. 

The  gigantic  proportions  of  its  arches  and  dome  are 
perhaps  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  great  building 
which  bears  the  name  of  Bibi  Khanum,  as  is  the  ex- 
quisite tile  work  of  the  mosque  of  Shah  Zindeh,  the 
living  king.  This  latter  structure  was  raised  by  Timur 
in  the  year  1323  on  the  spot  where  one  Kasim  Ibn 
Abbas  preached  Mohammedanism,  and  was  martyred 
1266  years  ago.  So  at  least  said  the  Mullah  in  charge. 
There  w^as  a  prophecy  that  he  would  appear  to  defeat 
the  Russians  when  they  came ;  but,  as  Mr  Schuyler 
remarks,  "  Samarkand  was  occupied,  and  Shah  Zindeh 
appeared  not,  so  that  his  fame  has  of  late  somewhat 
fallen  off."  ^  Nevertheless,  it  is  still  supposed  that 
Shah  Zindeh  will  come  again  when  the  triumph  of 
Islam  shall* have  extended  to  the  uttermost  ends  of 
the  earth. 

^  Turkestan.     Schuyler. 


198  SAMARKAND. 


Of  quite  another  kind  is  the  interest  which  attaches 
to  Samarkand  as  the  home  of  Ishak  Khan,  pretender 
to  the  Afghan  throne,  and  compulsory  guest  of  his 
Russian  hosts.  The  feeHngs  of  the  small  party  of 
Russian  officers  who  were  inspecting  land  on  the  Oxus 
banks  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  late  Amir  Abdur 
Rahman  Khan,  himself  a  former  refugee  at  the  same 
city,  must  have  been  of  a  mixed  description  when  the 
rumour  reached  them  that  Ishak  had  escaped.  Happily 
the  rumour  proved  untrue,  and  Ishak  still  lingers  at 
Samarkand. 

Beyond  here  the  railway  penetrates  to  Andijan,  in 
the  heart  of  the  cotton  country,  passing  by  Tcher- 
nayevo,  Khokand,  and  Marghilan,  and  from  Tcher- 
nayevo  a  branch  runs  north  to  Tashkent,  the  capital 
of  Turkestan,  and  for  the  time  being  terminus  of  a 
railway  which  has  played  a  part  in  the  pacification  of 
the  wild  peoples  of  Central  Asia,  the  development  of 
their  country,  and  the  consolidating  of  the  Russian 
power,  which  may  well  surpass  even  the  sanguine 
hopes  of  its  enterprising  promoter. 


TASHKENT.  199 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

ACROSS   THE   STEPPES   OF   TURKESTAN. 

A  Russian  capital  in  Asia — Old  Tashkent — Its  capture  by  the  Russians — 
Railway  projects — The  Tashkent-Orenburg  line — The  Tomsk-Tash- 
kent line — Advantages  of  post-roads — Carriages  purchased — Method 
of  travelling — A  post-house — Rate  of  speed  attainable — The  steppes  of 
Turkestan — The  life  of  the  steppe — Tchimkent — The  Chinese  frontier 
— Through  Semirechensk — The  Siberian  frontier — Monotony  of  travel 
—  The  character  of  the  steppe  borderland  —  Semipalatinsk  —  From 
Semipalatinsk  to  Barnaul — Reach  Barnaul. 

When  one  speaks  of  Tashkent  at  the  present  day,  one 
refers  to  a  modern  Russian  town  with  a  population  of 
between  40,000  and  50,000,  which  has  not  yet  seen  its 
fortieth  anniversary.  Broad,  airy  streets,  with  channels 
of  running  water  and  avenues  of  tall  poplar- trees,  behind 
which  rise  rows  of  well-built  houses  and  excellent  shops, 
everywhere  meet  the  eye  ;  while  shady  public  gardens, 
an  imposing-looking  college,  where,  among  other  accom- 
plishments, the  rising  generation  are  taught  the  English 
tongue,  and  an  excellent  Government  House,  which  has 
sheltered  men  with  names  writ  large  in  the  records  of 
Russian  expansion  in  Asia,  and  where  now,  beloved 
and  respected  by  all  around  him,  General  Ivanoff 
resides  in  his  capacity  of  Governor-General  of  the 
vast   district   of  Turkestan,   further   serve   to   apprise 


200  ACROSS   THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

one    that    he    has    reached    a    capital   and    centre   of 
administration.^ 

Adjoining  the  modern  town  is  the  old  Tashkent  of 
100,000  inhabitants,  close  to  which  rise  the  earthern 
ramparts  of  the  old  fort  stormed  and  captured  by 
General  Tchernaieff  in  1865 — the  ardent  general  hav- 
ing carefully  omitted  to  read  the  despatch  from  Tsar 
Alexander  11.  forbidding  him  to  attack  the  city  until 
after  he  had  captured  it ! — and  now  occupied  by  Russian 
soldiers ;  but,  unlike  Bokhara  or  Samarkand,  it  can 
boast  of  no  historic  buildings  or  mosques  and  madres- 
sahs  of  special  note,  so  that,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  of  the 
chief  town  of  a  Russian  province  that  one  thinks  when 
mention  is  made  of  Tashkent.  For  similar  reasons  there 
is  little  to  be  found  there  of  any  great  interest  for  the 
traveller ;  and  after  the  best  part  of  a  week  spent  at 
the  chief  numera — the  very  moderate  substitute  for  a 
hotel  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  chief  Russian  towns 
in  Asia — owing  to  unavoidable  delay  in  obtaining  the 
conveyances  necessary  for  my  further  journey,  I  was 
glad  enough  to  take  my  leave  of  the  capital  and  to 
start  on  my  journey  once  more.  I  should,  however,  be 
guilty  of  gross  ingratitude  were  I  to  fail  to  acknow- 
ledge before  leaving  the  kindness  and  hospitality  of 
the  Russian  officials  whose  acquaintance  I  was  fortun- 
ate enough  to  make.  Should  these  lines  ever  chance  to 
meet  the  eye  of  the  gentleman  to  whose  genial  company 
are  due  my  pleasantest  recollections  of  Tashkent,  may 
he  read  in  them  the  sincere,  though  wholly  inade- 
quate, expression  of  gratitude  of  a  wanderer  in  a 
strange  land. 

For  the  present,  unless  you  wish  to  return  the  way 

1  It  may  be  of  interest  to  the  advocates  of  afforestation  to  leam  that 
since  the  Eussian  occupation,  when  trees— poplars  and  Turkestan  elms — 
were  largely  planted,  the  rainfall  has  increased  by  250  per  cent. 


THE   TASHKENT  -  ORENBURG  LINE.  201 


you  came— ^.e.,  along  the  Transcaspian  railway — you 
must  give  yourself  up  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the 
tarantass  and  the  post-road.  I  say  for  the  present, 
because  the  railways  which  Eussia  has  built  in  Asia  m 
the  course  of  the  last  twenty-five  years  will  ere  long  be 
increased  by  lines  which  will  connect  her  vast  terri- 
tories in  Central  Asia  with  European  Russia  on  the 
one  hand  and  with  the  great  Trans-Siberian  railway 
system  on  the  other. 

The  first  of  the  two  great  lines  of  railway  which  she 
has  in  view  is  the  Tashkent- Orenburg  Hne,  to  be  com- 
pleted by  January  1  (14),  1905.     Running  north  from 
Tashkent  to  Tchimkent,   and  thence  north-west  via 
Turkestan  to  Orenburg,  where  it  will  join  the  railway 
system  of  European  Russia,  it  will  cover  in  all  a  dis- 
tance of  1600  versts,  or  1056  miles.     It  will  be  seen 
that,  in  constructing  this  line,  Russia  is  merely  giving 
material  shape  to  her  original  scheme  of  a  railway  to 
Central  Asia,  the  project,  that  is,  which  was  ofiicially 
reported  upon   in  1873,  and  vigorously  advocated  by 
General  Kaufmann,  the  Governor  of  Tashkent  at  that 
time,  and  which  was  taken  up  with  feverish  energy  in 
the  more  grandiose  guise  of  an  overland  route  to  India 
by  the  indefatigable  de  Lesseps,  long  before  the  present 
Transcaspian  railway  had  even  been  thought  of     The 
large  outlay  which  it  was  at  that  time  recognised  would 
be  necessary  to  construct  and  maintain  a  railway  across 
many  hundred  miles  of  unpopulated  and  unproductive 
steppe  no  longer  appears  to  constitute  an  obstacle  to  its 
construction,   while  the  objection  to  the  line  on   the 
grounds  of  its  becoming  a  damaging  rival  to  the  Ivans- 
caspian  railway  seems  to  have  disappeared,  or  at  any 
rate  to  have  been  overruled,  since  it  is  now  well  on  the 
road  to  completion.     The  necessity  of  bringing  water 
from  a  distance  has  proved  a  source  of  difticulty  and 


202  ACROSS  THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

delay  at  the  Tashkent  end  of  the  line,  where  130 
versts  had  been  finished  at  the  time  of  my  visit, 
while  I  was  informed  that  at  the  Orenburg  end  a 
distance  of  200  versts  had  been  completed  and  was 
ready  for  traffic.^ 

The  second  great  line  which  is  being  discussed  is 
that  known  as  the  Tomsk-Tashkent  line,  which  will 
follow  the  direction  of  the  post  -  road  over  which  I 
travelled  via  Tchimkent,  Verni,  Semipalatinsk,  and 
Barnaul,  whence  it  is  suggested  that  it  should  make  a 
bend  in  order  to  take  in  the  government  coal  and  iron 
mines  at  Salaiire.  From  here  a  branch  would  be  built 
to  Kunetzsk,  and  the  main  line  would  have  its  junction 
with  the  Siberian  system  at  the  station  of  Polonosh- 
naya.  It  is  not  proposed,  however,  to  embark  upon 
this  line  until  the  Tashkent-Orenburg  line  is  finished, 
when  the  Minister  of  Finance  has  promised  the  scheme 
his  serious  consideration.  I  may  point  out,  that  in 
addition  to  the  obvious  strategic  importance  of  such 
lines,  they  will  possess  the  further  advantage  of  putting 
the  valuable  cotton -growing  lands  of  Ferghana  into 
close  touch  with  the  great  corn-growing  districts  of 
Siberia,^  and  then,  when  no  apprehension  need  be  felt 

*  A  telegram  from  Orenburg  at  the  end  of  June  of  the  present  year 
(1904)  states  that  the  navvy ing  work  on  the  section  of  the  line  linking 
the  northern  and  southern  stretches  is  approaching  completion,  and  that 
900  versts  of  the  line  have  already  been  successfully  laid  from  the  Oren- 
burg end,  virhile  540  have  been  laid  from  the  Tashkent  end.  Passenger 
trains  run  twice  a- week  from  Orenburg  to  Aktiubinsk,  and,  adds  the 
telegram,  in  a  few  days'  time  the  railway  will  be  opened  to  "  commercial  " 
traffic  between  Tashkent  and  Perovsk. 

'  The  system  of  charges  on  Russian  railways,  whether  for  passengers  or 
goods,  is  known  as  the  zone  system,  which  necessarily  favours  long  journeys, 
the  charges  for  long  distances  being  relatively  much  lower  than  those  for 
short  ones.  To  such  an  extent  did  this  system  favour  the  corn-growers 
of  Siberia,  that  it  was  found  necessary,  in  the  case  of  the  Siberian  railway, 
to  break  the  tariff  at  Cheliabinsk,  to  prevent  an  outbreak  among  the 
farmers  of  the  Volga  basin,  owing  to  the  market  being  upset  by  the  low 


CARRIAGES  PURCHASED.  203 

on  the  score  of  famine,  and  the  whole  of  the  lands  of 
Ferghana  can  consequently  be  given  up  to  the  pro- 
duction of  cotton,  Russia  will  be  on  the  highroad  to 
realising  one  of  her  ambitions — namely,  to  supply  from 
her  own  dominions  the  whole  of  the  increasing  demand 
of  those  cotton  factories  which  have  sprung  up  in  recent 
years  to  make  Moscow  a  modern  manufacturing  city. 

Until  these  lines  are  built,  however,  recourse  must 
be  had  to  the  post-roads  to  carry  one  over  the  huge 
expanse  of  steppe -land  of  Turkestan  and  Southern 
Siberia.  Let  me  try  and  give  some  idea  of  what  travel- 
ling on  a  post-road  in  Asia  is  like. 

First,  if,  as  in  my  case,  you  have  much  baggage,  it 
is  advisable  to  purchase  vehicles  for  yourself  and  your 
belongings.  For  any  one  travelling  light  these  can  be 
found  at  each  post-station ;  but  if  not,  unpacking  and 
packing  up  the  baggage  involves  much  trouble  and 
delay,  and  it  is  better  to  have  your  own.  I  bought  a 
tarantass  and  another  cart  of  similar  construction  for 
£10  apiece,  and,  as  I  subsequently  drove  close  upon 
2500  miles  in  them,  consider  that  they  were  cheap  at 
the  price.  The  tarantass  is  not  an  ideal  carriage  for 
comfort,  being  possessed  neither  of  seats  nor  of  springs  ; 

prices  of  Siberian  corn.  The  system  is  explained  by  Vladimir  in  his 
'  Eussia  on  the  Pacific ' : — 

"  The  price  of  tickets  on  Eussian  railways  is  charged  per  verst  only  up 
to  a  distance  of  300  versts ;  greater  distances  are  charged  according  to 
zone, 

of  25  versts  for  distances  from  301  to  500  versts. 
30  M  ..  501  II  710      II 

35  n  11  711  II  990      II 

40  II  II  991  II  1510    II 

For  distances  above  1510  versts,  the  zones  are  of  50  versts.  Above  325 
versts  the  price  of  each  zone  is  20  kopecks  third  class,  30  kopecks  second, 
and  50  kopecks  first  class.  As  the  zones  increase,  the  cost  therefore  rela- 
tively decreases  :  thus  to  travel  1000  versts  (over  660  English  miles),  from 
1510  to  2510  versts  in  first,  second,  and  third  class,  costs  respectively  10,  6, 
and  4  roubles." 


204  ACROSS  THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

but,  like  everything  else,  to  get  used  to  it  is  merely  a 
matter  of  time.  I  frequently  travelled  day  and  night, 
and  found  that  with  a  little  practice  I  was  even  able 
to  sleep  tolerably  well. 

The  recognised  method  of  travelling  is  with  the 
troika — three  horses  abreast — and  the  charge  is  3 
kopecks  per  horse  per  verst  (a  fraction  over  a  penny 
a  mile)  in  Turkestan  and  1|-  kopecks  in  Siberia,  with 
an  additional  payment  of  10  kopecks  per  horse  per 
stage,  as  government  dues.  The  post-houses  exist  at 
intervals  of  from  15  to  30  versts — say  10  to  20  miles — 
and  are  quite  innocent  of  any  attraction.  A  room  with 
a  screen  or  partition,  behind  which  will  be  found  a 
hard  couch,  or  sometimes,  at  the  larger  stations,  two 
rooms  with  bare  whitewashed  walls,  form  the  accom- 
modation which  awaits  the  traveller.  A  huge  stove 
built  into  the  wall  is  the  feature  of  the  furniture,  the 
remainder  being  made  up  of  a  table,  bench — sofa  is  too 
euphemistic  a  term — and  two  or  three  chairs.  The 
bareness  of  the  whitewashed  walls  is  in  every  case 
accentuated  by  coloured  prints  of  the  Tsar  and  Tsarina, 
a  photograph  of  the  governor -general  of  the  province, 
a  few  sets  of  rules  and  regulations  in  black  wooden 
frames,  and  the  inevitable  ikon.  Occasionally  to  these 
adornments  was  added  an  advertisement  proclaiming 
the  excellence  of  the  MacCormick  reaper  and  other 
agricultural  implements  manufactured  by  that  company. 
In  the  rooms  which  form  the  remainder  of  the  house 
live  the  postmaster  and  his  wife  and  family.  Nothing 
is  obtainable  except  eggs,  milk,  and  hot  water — the 
samovar  is  found  everywhere — and,  unless  you  happen 
to  arrive  at  a  post-house  when  the  postmaster  is  taking 
his  daily  meal  of  broth,  you  must  live  on  tea  and  eggs, 
supplemented  by  such  provisions  as  your  forethought 
may  have  prompted  you  to  bring  with  you. 


^  ^  V  .ir  ^\'  K 


^'^^ 


•  •  •% 

CI. 

^^'-f 

•>^ 

K.-'!. 
•* 

,v 

^-♦v 

■"^v>. 

* 

v."- 

<  ^ 

<  o 


O    -5 
"^     2 

O     ■? 


SPEED  ATTAINABLE   ON  POST- ROADS.  205 

The  rate  of  speed  attainable  varies  according  to 
circumstances.  If  you  are  a  Russian  official  you  travel 
fast,  for  both  postmaster  and  driver  stand  in  awe  of 
officialdom,  and  you  have  preference  over  ordinary 
travellers  in  the  matter  of  horses.  One  gentleman  in 
an  official  position  told  me  that  before  the  days  of  the 
railway  in  Siberia  he  once  travelled  1000  versts  (660 
miles)  in  forty-eight  hours !  And  a  lady,  the  wife  of 
an  official,  travelled  from  Verni  to  the  Chinese  frontier, 
a  distance  of  237  miles,  in  thirty-five  consecutive  hours, 
while  I  was  at  Kulja.  My  own  rate  of  speed,  however, 
rose  little  above  an  average  of  100  versts  a-day,  horses 
being  scarce  in  parts,  and  long  dreary  waits  at  the  miser- 
able post-houses  frequent.  Thus  I  find  that  I  occupied 
thirteen  days  and  two  hours  in  driving  from  Tashkent 
to  Kulja,  a  distance  of  1224 J  versts,  or  808  miles,  of 
which  time  124|-  hours  were  spent  waiting  for  horses 
at  various  post-stations,  including  a  wait  of  17|-  hours 
at  Verni  while  my  passports  were  undergoing  exam- 
ination. Allowing  a  further  average  wait  of  an  hour 
at  each  post-station  while  horses  were  being  changed, 
meals  taken,  and,  as  was  often  the  case,  the  convey- 
ances being  repaired,  I  was  on  the  move  for  133|- 
hours,  which  gives  an  average  speed  while  actually 
travelling  of  a  fraction  over  six  miles  an  hour;  this 
low  rate  of  speed  being  due  chiefly  to  the  badness  of 
the  road  and  to  the  slow  progress  we  made  at  nights. 
I  remember  reaching  a  post-station  one  evening  with 
both  carriages  in  urgent  need  of  repairs.  On  arrival 
I  immediately  requested  the  postmaster  to  send  for 
the  blacksmith.  "  Very  good,"  he  replied ;  "I  will 
bring  him  if  he  is  not  drunk  ! "  I  suppose  he  was — it 
was  Sunday  evening — as  nothing  was  done  till  next 
morning. 

The  country  which  one  traverses  is  possessed  of  a 


206  ACROSS  THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

terrible  monotony.  Day  after  day  the  far-reaching 
steppes  of  Turkestan  spread  out  their  carpet  of  luxuriant 
grass  before  one,  splashed  here  and  there  with  patches 
of  brilliant  colour,  formed  by  masses  of  poppies  and 
magnificent  tulips ;  but  it  is  only  at  long  intervals, 
where  a  settlement  has  grown  up  round  a  post-station, 
that  trees  or  houses  appear  to  give  any  variety  to  the 
uninterrupted  landscape.  Kanges  of  mountains  are 
always  visible  to  the  south,  now  nearer,  now  farther 
away — at  first  the  Alexandrovski  Mountains,  and  farther 
on  the  spurs  of  the  Alatau ;  and  looking  out  to  the 
right  after  passing  Verni,  you  might  imagine  that  you 
were  gazing  at  the  Grampians,  until  a  glance  to  the 
other  side  dispels  the  illusion — there  is  no  room  in  Scot- 
land for  the  endless  expanse  which  here  meets  the  eye. 

Sometimes  you  see  in  the  distance  collections  of  what 
you  take  to  be  trim  little  hay-cocks,  until  a  nearer 
acquaintance  apprises  you  of  the  fact  that  they  are 
Kirgiz  yurts,  the  curious  tents  of  grey  felt,  stretched 
over  wooden  frames,  in  which  these  nomads  live.  At 
others  you  meet  long  strings  of  camels  carrying  away  a 
whole  village  of  yurts  on  their  backs,  a  desire  for  change 
having  prompted  their  owners  to  seek  new  lands  and 
pastures  for  their  flocks.  Indeed,  camels  were  the 
beasts  most  in  evidence — they  were  even  being  used 
in  the  plough  in  one  or  two  places;  but  large  flocks 
of  sheep,  droves  of  cattle,  and  herds  of  horses  are 
also  to  be  seen,  though  hardly  in  the  quantities  one 
would  expect  in  so  magnificent  a  pastoral  country. 
In  addition  to  the  Kirgiz,  one  may  see  long  lines  of 
wooden  carts  moving  along  at  funereal  pace,  or  out- 
spanned  by  the  roadside  —  Russian  emigrants  these, 
seeking  new  homes  and  fortunes  in  the  East. 

After  leaving  Tashkent,  the  road  runs  north  for  a 
distance  of  seventy-six  miles  to  Tchimkent,  stormed  by 


THE  CAPTURE  OF  TGHIMKENT.  207 

the  combined  forces  of  Colonels  Tchernaieff  and  Veref- 
kin  in  the  days  of  the  Kussian  advance,  and  then  turns 
east,  passing  through  the  small  towns  of  Aulie  Ata  and 
Pishpek  to  Verni,  now  a  considerable  town  grown  up 
round  the  original  fort  constructed  in  1854  between 
Lakes  Balkash  and  Issi  Kul,  distant  from  Tashkent  509 
miles.  The  old  fort  still  stands  at  Tchimkent,  and 
made  an  impressive  picture  as  I  gazed  at  it  in  the  grey 
light  of  dawn  from  the  vicinity  of  the  post-house. 
There  is  a  story  of  a  curious  mistake  which  led  to  its 
capture  by  the  Russians.  A  soldier  who  had  been 
slightly  wounded  at  the  beginning  of  the  operations 
called  out  for  the  surgeon,  "  Dok-tu-ra."  His  comrades, 
hearing  only  "u-ra!"  —  the  Russian  hurrah  —  flung 
themselves  to  the  assault,  and  carried  the  citadel  with 
a  loss  of  only  five  men.^ 

After  leaving  Verni  the  road  turns  north  to  the  Hi 
river,  which  it  crosses  555  miles  from  Tashkent,  and 
then  north-east  into  the  mountainous  country  on  the 
east  of  Semirechensk — the  land  of  seven  rivers.  At 
Altin  Imel,  a  small  station  632  miles  from  Tashkent, 
the  road  to  the  Chinese  frontier  at  Khorgos  branches 
off,  and  after  passing  the  frontier  proceeds  to  the 
Chinese  town  of  Kulja,  62  miles  farther  on,  and  808 
miles  from  Tashkent. 

Of  the  chequered  history  in  recent  years  of  this 
remote  appanage  of  the  "  Son  of  Heaven,"  and  of  its 
present  position,  I  shall  have  something  to  say  in  a  sub- 
sequent chapter,  omitting  to  do  so  now  in  order  that, 
for  the  sake  of  convenience,  I  may  here  complete  the 
sketch  of  my  journey  along  the  post-road. 

From  Altin  Imel,  then,  you  travel  on  northwards 
through  mountainous  country  for  some  distance,  passing 
the  small  town   of  Kopala,  a  short  distance   beyond 

^  See  Schuyler's  Turkestan,  vol.  ii.  p.  75. 


208  ACROSS   THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

which  you  emerge  on  to  the  level  plains  east  of  Lake 
Balkash.  Here  a  stretch  of  sandy  desert  is  crossed, 
where  the  various  scrub  and  herb  life  which  one  learns 
to  look  for  in  sandy  soil  take  the  place  of  grass  ;  but 
after  the  zone  of  sand  is  passed  the  scene  again  pre- 
sents the  same  grass-covered  treeless  expanse  which  has 
accompanied  you  the  whole  way.  The  last  town  in 
Turkestan  is  Sergiopol,  and  17  miles  farther  on,  and  1003 
from  Tashkent,  the  frontier  of  Siberia  is  reached.  The 
next  160  miles,  as  far  as  the  town  of  Semipalatinsk, 
are  perhaps  the  most  dreary  of  the  whole  journey,  if, 
indeed,  it  is  possible  to  discriminate  in  such  a  country. 
I  often  drove  20  miles  at  a  stretch  without  seeing  a 
sign  of  life  beyond  an  occasional  vulture  soaring  high 
overhead,  or  sitting  brooding  on  a  telegraph-pole,  and  I 
was  consequently  not  in  the  least  surprised  to  learn 
that  the  population  of  Semipalatinsk  averages  only  1*7 
to  the  square  verst.  The  intense  monotony  of  journey- 
ing across  a  country  such  as  this  can  easily  be  con- 
ceived. As  hour  after  hour  went  by,  the  quaint 
refrain  of  one  of  Whyte  -  Melville's  songs  thumped 
and  hammered  through  my  brain,  keeping  exaggerated 
time  with  the  perpetual  jolts  and  bumps  of  my  crazy 
carriage : — 

"  Kext  came  the  Moor-land, 

The  Mooi'-land,  the  Moor-land — 
Next  came  the  Moor-land, 

It  stretched  for  many  a  mile." 

Substitute  Steppe-land  for  Moor-land,  and  you  have  an 
exact  presentation  of  the  scene. 

The  soil,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  Siberian  steppe 
border-land,  varies  from  fertile  black  earth  to  sands, 
clay,  gypsum,  marl,  and  salt  marshes,  with  a  flora 
characterised  by  dwarf  bushes,  often  thorny  and  some- 
times covered  with  grey  foliage,  dwarf  almond,  wild 


8EMIPALATINSK.  209 


cherry,  hawthorn,  and  saxsaul,  while  among  the  her- 
baceous  vegetation    wormwood,    willow-herb,    feather- 
grass, and  reeds  are  conspicuous.     Agriculture  is  hope- 
lessly handicapped  by  the  climatic  conditions  :  want  of 
rain  and  irrigation,  the  high  temperature  which  is  usual 
by  the  end  of  May,  sand-storms  which  sweep  across  the 
plain   in  summer,  and  blizzards  which   devastate    the 
country  in  winter.     Industrial  development  in  so  thinly 
populated  a  country  is  naturally  insignificant,  and  the 
rearing  of  live-stock,  being  the  only  form  of  husbandry 
to  which  the  land  is  suited,  forms  the  chief  occupation 
of  its  people.     So  vast  is  the  country  and  so  scattered 
the  population  that  one  observes  no  great  quantity  of 
cattle  as  one  travels  through  it,  but,  according  to  sta- 
tistics compiled  a  few  years  ago,  there  were  upwards 
of  three  million  head  of  live-stock  in  the  Semipalatinsk 
district,  of  which  more  than  half  consisted  of  sheep,  the 
remainder  being  made  up  of  horses,  cattle,  camels,  and 
goats. 

At  last  a  thin  line  of  trees  becomes  visible,  marking 
the  course  of  the  Irtish  river,  and  the  roofs  and  spires 
of  Semipalatinsk  rise  on  the  horizon.  After  what  one 
has  become  accustomed  to  for  days,  the  town  seems 
almost  magnificent ;  but  its  magnificence  is  comparative. 
There  are  a  few  good  houses  of  brick,  and  the  churches 
and  cathedrals,  with  their  whitewashed  exteriors  and 
green  cupolas  and  gilded  spires,  produce  a  certain  efiect ; 
but  the  large  majority  of  the  houses  are  small  and  built 
of  wood,  and  the  whole  population  does  not  exceed 
30,000.  The  ground  all  round  is  flat  and  sandy,  and 
the  climate  liable  to  be  unpleasantly  hot  in  summer 
and  intensely  cold  in  winter. 

The  few^  shops  are  tolerably  well  supplied  with 
European  goods,  thanks  to  the  communication  with 
Omsk  on  the  Siberian  railway  afforded  by  the  Irtish 

0 


210  ACROSS  THE  STEPPES  OF  TURKESTAN. 

river,  down  which  steamers  ply  twice  a-week  during 
the  summer,  when  the  river  is  not  frozen.  In  the 
winter  communication  is  maintained  with  the  same 
place  by  a  post-road  479^  miles  in  length.  Alabaster 
is  found  near  the  town,  and  some  years  ago  very  rich 
beds  of  manganese  were  discovered  not  far  off  in  the 
Arkalik  Mountains,  though  this  is  but  a  small  item  of 
the  vast  mineral  wealth  that  abounds  in  these  remote 
dominions  of  the  Tsar. 

North  of  Semipalatinsk  I  found  the  country  much 
more  populous, — large  villages  of  log-built  houses  at  the 
end  of  every  stage  and  sometimes  in  between,  trees 
growing  in  many  places,  especially  along  the  river- 
banks,  and  the  country  altogether  presenting  a  more 
promising  appearance.  I  had  in  fact  reached  one  of  the 
most  fertile  tracts  of  Siberia,  whose  possibilities  are 
enormous ;  but  let  me  at  once  say  that  I  was  not  very 
greatly  impressed  with  the  settlers  there.  They  struck 
me  as  being  rude,  uneducated  peasants,  —  even  the 
master  of  the  post-horses  could  seldom  read  or  write, 
a  clerk  as  a  rule  being  attached  to  the  post-station  for 
this  purpose, — and  hardly  the  stamp  of  men  to  found  a 
colony.  They  may  be  a  degree  more  enlightened  than 
the  Cossacks,  who  were  the  first  settlers  in  these 
territories ;  but  that  is  not  saying  a  great  deal,  and  I 
do  not  think  that  there  is  much  chance  of  the  most 
being  made  of  this  country  of  magnificent  possibilities 
by  its  present  occupants. 

Three  hundred  and  eleven  miles  beyond  Semipalatinsk 
and  1542  beyond  Tashkent  stands  Barnaul,  the  capital 
of  one  of  the  districts  of  the  Tomsk  Government ;  but 
some  account  of  this  and  of  the  adjoining  districts  of 
Biisk  and  Zeminogorsk,  whose  development  is  so  in- 
timately connected  with  the  Siberian  railway,  will  be 
better  reserved  for  another  chapter. 


THE  SEEDS  OF  DISSENSION.  211 


CHAPTER    XIX. 

KULJA. 

Yakub  Khan — Internal  disorder  in  Kulja  in  the  'Sixties — Eussian  inter- 
ference— A  ghastly  holocaust — Eeport  of  a  Chinese  official — Russian 
assurances — Tso-Chungt-'ang,  a  Chinee  of  "  great  steadfastness  of  pur- 
pose " — The  reconquest  of  Turkestan  by  China — Difficulties  with  Russia 
— Gordon  summoned — The  treaty  of  St  Petersburg — What  Russia 
gained — The  position  of  Kulja  to-day  —  Suidon  —  Kulja — Mineral 
wealth  of  the  province — Tribes,  sedentary  and  nomadic — Kirgiz  and 
Kalmuk — The  Chinese  quarter — A  visit  to  the  Taotai — The  future  of 
Kulja — Russian  intrigue  with  Tibet. 

I  MUST  now  retrace  my  steps  for  a  moment  to  the 
Chinese  province  of  Kulja.  Like  most  parts  of  Central 
Asia,  Kulja  has  enjoyed  a  chequered  career,  and  has 
been  the  scene  in  modern  times  of  at  least  its  fair  share 
of  Eastern  disorder  and  intrigue.  While  Yakub  Khan, 
after  raising  his  master  to  the  throne  of  Khokand  and 
then  deposing  him  in  his  own  favour,  was  parading 
himself  before  the  Central  Asian  world  in  the  character 
of  the  "Athalik  Ghazi"  or  "Champion  Father,"  the 
seeds  of  dissension,  which  he  had  so  successfully  fos- 
tered, spread  north  of  the  Thian  Shan,  where,  thanks 
to  the  juxtaposition  of  rival  creeds  and  conflicting 
interests,  the  flame  of  rebellion  was  soon  fanned  into  a 
very  tolerable  conflagration. 

The  thread  which  runs  through  the  tale  of  massacre 
and  strife,  which  fills  up  the  page  of  history  devoted  to 


212  KULJA. 

Kulja  in  the  'Sixties,  is  to  be  traced  in  the  antagonism 
existing  between  the  Mohammedans  and  the  Chinese, 
thouo-h  often  obscured,  it  must  be  admitted,  beneath  a 
cloud  of  intrigue  and  civil  strife  among  the  parties 
themselves,  carrying  with  it  its  inevitable  concomitant 
of  bloodshed  and  atrocity.  For  a  time  the  Russians 
preserved  the  attitude  of  interested  spectators  along 
the  border-line  of  their  recently  acquired  territories ; 
but  the  time  at  length  came  when  it  appeared  to  them 
that  their  turn  for  creating  a  diversion  had  arrived. 
Marauders  were  plying  their  trade  along  the  borders 
with  unabashed  audacity,  while  the  stormy  petrel, 
Yakub  Khan,  was  engaged  in  a  promising  war  against 
the  Dungans — the  descendants  of  a  race  settled  in  very 
early  times  in  the  provinces  of  Han-su  and  Shen-si, 
Chinese  in  all  save  religion — of  Urumtsi  and  Turfan, 
which  would  in  all  probability  result  in  his  eventual 
occupation  of  Kulja.  So  wrote  the  Russian  oiEcials, 
determined  on  acquisition,  in  a  specious  despatch  to 
St  Petersburg. 

An  affray  between  a  Russian  outpost  and  a  body  of 
Tarantchis — Mohammedan  natives  of  Kulja — presented 
an  opportune  excuse  for  an  immediate  advance,  and  in 
the  course  of  eleven  days  an  army  of  4000  Tarantchis 
had  been  defeated,  two  cities  occupied,  the  submission 
of  the  Tarantchi  sultan  accepted,  and  the  capital  en- 
tered by  General  Kolpakofsky. 

But  the  Tarantchis  were  determined  upon  one  final 
holocaust,  and,  despite  the  proximity  of  the  Russians, 
succeeded  in  drenching  the  grave  of  their  supremacy  in 
a  veritable  sea  of  blood.  Enrag'ed  at  the  surrender  of 
their  chief,  they  fell  upon  the  wretched  Dungans  and 
Chinese  in  the  city  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  massacred 
upwards  of  2000  of  them  in  the  course  of  a  single  night, 
no  less  than  500  corpses  being  found  next  morning  in  a 


KULJA    OCCUPIED  BY  RUSSIA.  213 

canal  in  the  precincts  of  the  city.  The  Chinese  official 
Lu-tsu-han,  in  a  report  written  for  his  Government, 
which  fell,  however,  into  the  hands  of  the  Russians, 
says  :  "  There  were  many  instances  that  in  lonely  places 
they  actually  caught  Mantchus  and  Chinese  and  killed 
them.  Happily  Heaven  did  not  permit  the  human  race 
to  end.  Now  the  leader  of  the  great  Russian  empire, 
the  Dzian-Dziun  of  Semiretch,  with  his  army  inspired 
with  humanity  and  truth,  has  quieted  every  one.  This 
petty  foreign  Power  (Russia !)  saved  the  nation  from 
fire  and  water,  it  subdued  the  whole  four  countries 
without  the  least  harm,  so  that  children  are  not  fright- 
ened, and  the  people  submitted  not  without  delight  and 
ecstasy ! " ^ 

How  vastly  more  entertaining  would  our  own  consular 
reports  be,  were  they  permeated  by  a  similar  sense  of 
humour ! 

The  Russian  expedition  was  an  undoubted  success, 
and  had,  therefore,  to  be  approved  by  the  statesmen 
on  the  Neva,  who  were  in  reality  far  from  pleased  at 
these  further  acquisitions  and  consequent  responsibili- 
ties. The  Government  at  Peking  were  informed  of  the 
occupation,  and  assured  of  the  readiness  of  the  Russian 
Government  to  restore  the  province  to  its  rightful 
owners,  as  soon  as  a  Chinese  force  of  sufficient  strength 
to  occupy  and  preserve  order  in  the  district  should 
arrive. 

For  once  China  showed  herself  capable  of  a  deter- 
mined and  wholly  unexpected  fixity  of  purpose.  Tso- 
Chungt-'ang,  the  general  to  whom  the  task  of  reconquer- 
ing Turkestan  was  delegated,  was  a  man,  as  Professor 
Douglas  remarks,  "  of  proved  ability  and  of  great  stead- 
fastness of  purpose."  Before  him  stretched  a  dreary 
waste,  dotted  at  distant  and  lonely  intervals  by  small 

1  Schuyler's  Turkestan,  vol.  ii.  p.  188. 


214  KULJA. 

oases ;  beyond  again  lay  Turkestan.  With  a  contempt 
for  time,  which  was  as  delightful  as  it  was  character- 
istic, but  with  an  altogether  unlooked-for  tenacity,  the 
general  embarked  upon  his  task.  His  soldiers  became 
husbandmen,  the  land  was  ploughed,  seed  was  sown, 
and  in  due  season  crops  were  reaped,  and  the  danger  of 
famine  thus  averted — hey,  presto  !  the  Celestial  farmers 
became  the  soldiers  of  the  green  banner  once  more,  and 
the  expedition  resumed  its  way. 

The  result  was  a  complete  success.  Urumtsi  and 
Manas  soon  fell — not  without  hideous  slaughter  in  the 
case  of  the  latter  :  the  notorious  Yakub  was  compelled 
to  fly  :  Aksu,  Yarkand,  Kashgar,  and  Khoten  capitu- 
lated, and  by  the  year  1878  the  task  of  conquest  had 
been  completed. 

Seven  years,  however,  had  elapsed  since  the  occupa- 
tion of  Kulja  by  Russia,  who  was  no  longer  in  a  mood 
to  restore  the  lost  property  without  ample  remunera- 
tion, and  a  leisurely  diplomatic  duel  ensued.  A  treaty 
concluded  at  Livadia  by  the  Chinese  official  Chunghou 
— the  same  that  had  been  sent  to  France  in  1871  to 
apologise  for  the  massacre  of  sixteen  French  sisters  of 
charity  at  Tientsin — so  incensed  the  Court  at  Peking 
that  it  was  immediately  repudiated,  and  its  unfortunate 
author  handed  over  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  Board 
of  Punishments,  while  Gordon  of  imperishable  fame  was 
called  in  to  lend  the  lustre  of  his  reputation  as  stiffen- 
ing for  a  Chinese  army  to  be  hurled  against  the  might 
of  Russia.  His  mission  was  rendered  abortive  by  his 
repeated  declaration  on  his  way  to  the  capital  of  his 
intention  to  induce  China  to  make  peace — the  very  last 
thing  for  which  he  had  been  summoned ;  and  eventually 
the  question,  after  dragging  its  tedious  length  along 
the  obscure  channels  of  oriental  diplomacy  and  intrigue, 
found  a  solution  in  the  treaty  of  St  Petersburg,  con- 


THE   TREATY  OF  ST  PETERSBURG.  215 

eluded  in  February  of  the  year  1881,  with  the  assist- 
ance and  advice  of  the  British  Government,  by  the 
Marquis  Tseng. 

With  regard  to  the  treaty,  it  must  be  observed  that, 
however  much  the  authorities  at  St  Petersburg  may 
have  declared  themselves  opposed  to  the  action  of  their 
subordinates  on  the  spot  in  1871,  and  however  loud 
their  protestations  of  their  readiness  to  restore  the 
province  to  its  rightful  owners,  they  did  not  hesitate 
to  make  the  most  of  the  advantageous  position  in 
which  they  found  themselves  in  1881.  The  western 
half  of  the  country  remains  Russian  to  this  day.  Nine 
million  metallic  roubles  were  paid  by  China  for  the 
restoration  of  the  eastern  half.  The  towns  in  which 
Kussia  had  the  right  of  appointing  consuls  were  added 
to,  and  the  exclusive  rights  of  navigating  the  rivers  of 
Manchuria,  accorded  to  the  subjects  of  Russia  and 
China  by  the  treaty  of  Aigun  (1858),  were  confirmed. 

The  position  of  Kulja  to-day — Chinese  in  name, 
Russian  the  moment  it  pleases  her  that  it  should  be  so  in 
fact — is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  proceedings  already 
recorded,  which  culminated  in  the  above  treaty.  After 
crossing  the  frontier  you  very  soon  receive  intimation 
of  your  having  entered  the  dominions  of  the  "  Son  of 
Heaven,"  for  the  road  leads  through  a  walled  enclosure 
— the  Chinese  custom-house,  where  you  dismount  while 
a  Chinese  scribe  traces  incomprehensible  hieroglyphics 
on  your  passport.  Forty  versts  farther  on  you  come 
to  Suidon,  once  an  important  place  as  the  seat  where 
that  high  official  the  governor  -  general  of  Chinese 
Turkestan  held  court,  and  kept  his  soldiers  and  his 
guns  and  all  his  munitions  of  war.  When  the  Russian 
came,  however,  and  built  his  post-road  and  his  Cossack 
post,  Chinese  exclusiveness  rebelled ;  but,  being  unable 
to  oust  the  "  foreign  devil,"  retired  a  few  miles  into  the 


216  KULJA. 

wilderness  and  built  a  new  Suidon,  where  he  now 
reigns  sheltered  from  foreign  curiosity. 

The  town  of  Kulja  itself  affords  an  unmistakable 
illustration  of  the  status  of  the  province.  Russian 
reality  is  there  in  the  shape  of  a  Russian  consul  and  a 
Cossack  escort,  a  Russian  post  and  telegraph  office,  and 
the  insurmountable  fact  that  half  the  inhabitants  of 
the  town  are  Russian  subjects,  while  the  dignity  and 
prestige  of  the  Son  of  Heaven  are  ostentatiously  dis- 
played in  the  person  of  a  Taotai  or  provincial  governor, 
and  the  whole  gamut  of  minor  officials  and  hangers-on. 

I  spent  some  days  in  the  town  of  Kulja  itself,  and 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  something  of  the  sur- 
rounding country.  The  town  is  situated  on  the  Hi 
river,  which  here  flows  through  a  broad  and  fertile  val- 
ley enclosed  by  parallel  ranges  of  handsome  mountains. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  these  mountains  are  possessed 
of  considerable  mineral  wealth.  Coal  is  found  not  very 
far  off",  and  is  worked,  as  far  as  I  could  gather,  in  a 
desultory  way  by  any  one  who  feels  inclined  to  go  so  far 
to  gather  his  supply  of  fuel.  I  was  also  told  by  some 
of  the  nomad  tribes  that  they  found  gold  ;  but  this  fact 
they  kept  sedulously  hidden  from  the  authorities  at 
Kulja,  for  they  said,  "  if  the  Chinese  knew  that  there 
was  gold  in  the  mountains,  they  would  make  us  work  it 
for  them,  and  we  should  never  receive  any  of  the  profits 
for  ourselves."  As  it  is,  when  these  nomads  are  in 
want  of  a  little  money,  they  send  one  of  their  number 
down  to  Kulja  to  dispose  of  a  nugget  of  gold  in  the 
bazaar.  If  any  questions  are  asked,  the  individual 
replies  that  his  father  has  died  and  left  him  a  family 
ornament  (the  gold)  which  has  been  in  his  family  for 
generations,  but  which  he  is  obliged  to  dispose  of  for 
want  of  funds. 

The  population  in  the  vicinity  of  Kulja  itself  consists 


KIRGIZ  AND  KALMUK.  217 


chiefly  of  Tarantchis  living  in  villages  of  mud  houses, 
and   resembling   the    Turkish    races    of  Central   Asia 
rather   than   the    Chinese.      In   other   parts  —  in   the 
Tekkes  valley,  for  instance,  higher  up  the  river — the 
population  is  composed  exclusively  of  nomads,   Kirgiz 
and  Kalmuks,  living  in  villages  of  felt  tents.     Both 
peoples  are  of  Mongol  origin  and  both  lead  the  life  of 
nomads,  herding  and  pasturing  their  flocks ;  but  while 
the  Kalmuks  have  retained  their  connection  with  their 
ancestors  both  in  appearance  and  religion,  the  Kirgiz 
have  drifted  apart,  disdaining  to  wear  a  pig-tail,  and 
practising,  in  name  at  least,  the  precepts  of  the  Koran. 
I  had  occasion  more  than  once  to  spend  the  night  in 
a  Kirgiz  or  Kalmuk  yurt,  and  found  them  exceedingly 
comfortable.    I  remember  one  in  particular,  the  property 
of  the  headman  of  a  Kirgiz  village,  which  was  an  ex- 
cellent abode.     Thick  felts  were  spread  on  the  ground, 
and  warm  carpets  over  these.     On  one  side  were  couches 
of  rugs  and  cushions,  boxes  containing  the  family  pos- 
sessions, and  the  simple  household  utensils  in  daily  use. 
In  the  centre,  on  the  ground,  blazed  a  cheerful  fire; 
and  opposite  us,  on  the  far  side,  huge  hunks  of  horse- 
flesh were  hanging  from  the  roof.     My  host  possessed 
large  herds  of  horses,   amounting  to  4000,   while  his 
father,  who  had  died  two  years  before,  had  at  one  time 
been  the  owner  of  as  many  as  10,000.     I  doubt  if  the 
remarks  made  by  Stumm  in  description  of  the  Kirgiz 
whom  he  met  farther  west,  that  "  meat  is  only  eaten  on 
holidays  and  at  banquets  in  the  very  severe  cold  of 
winter,  or  on  an  extraordinary  occasion,  when  perhaps 
some  old  or  maybe  sick  camel  or  horse  is  found  in  the 
camp  which  is  of  no  further  service  for  transport  pur- 
poses," ^  would  be  applicable  to  the  Kirgiz  of  Hi.     One 
of  the  favourite  drinks  of  these  nomads,  not  only  here 

*  Russia  in  Central  Asia.     Herr  Stumm. 


218  KULJA. 

but  in  parts  of  Siberia  as  well,  is  kumiss  or  mare's  milk, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  extremely  nourishing  and  in- 
vigorating, and  is  considered  very  good,  though  I  am 
bound  to  say  that,  speaking  from  personal  experience,  I 
should  think  that  the  taste,  as  far  as  Europeans  are 
concerned,  must  be  an  acquired  one.  Another  beverage 
is  made  by  distilling  milk,  the  result  being  a  colourless 
liquid  of  no  very  pronounced  or  inviting  flavour. 

The  Kirgiz  women  were  bright  and  hospitable,  and, 
though  Mohammedans,  did  not  cover  the  face  in  the 
presence  of  a  stranger,  but,  on  the  contrary,  welcomed 
me  and  entertained  me  hospitably.  Primogeniture 
appears  to  be  unknown,  but  a  system  of  tenure,  some- 
what similar  to  that  known  as  borough- English,  is  in 
vogue,  the  youngest  son  remaining  at  home,  and  at  his 
father's  death  inheriting  his  fortune. 

To  return  to  the  town  of  Kulja  itself.  The  race 
variety  here  is  considerable.  You  may  in  the  course  of 
a  single  morning  see  Kalmuks  and  Kirgiz  come  in  to 
make  purchases  in  the  bazaar ;  Russians  on  official 
duty,  Sarts  and  Tartar  merchants  in  pursuit  of  trade, 
Chinese  Mohammedans,  and,  lastly,  the  true  Chinese, 
living  together  in  one  quarter  of  the  town.  Here  you 
may  stroll  through  the  Chinese  bazaar  and  see  the 
Chinaman  as  he  is.  Little  groups  of  pig-tailed  in- 
dividuals are  loitering  about,  eating  odd  messes  at  the 
cooking  shops  with  still  odder-looking  chop-sticks,  and 
drinking  everlasting  cups  of  tea.  Huge  streamers 
covered  with  strange  hieroglyphics  hanging  in  front  of 
the  shops  tell  of  the  goods  to  be  obtained  within — 
birds'  nests  and  jelly-fish,  and  a  hundred  other  delicacies 
dear  to  the  Celestial  soul ;  trinkets  and  furs,  and  the 
huge  spectacles  of  dark -coloured  crystal  affected  by  the 
Chinaman,  together  with  a  heterogeneous  collection  of 
Chinese  manufactured  goods. 


A    VISIT  TO   THE   TAOTAI.  219 

Of  course  I  called  on  the  Taotai,  or  Chinese  pro- 
vincial governor.  Passing  through  gateways  and  court- 
yards emblazoned  with  representations  of  fearful  demons, 
dragons,  and  antediluvian  monsters  of  the  most  ap- 
proved type,  I  reached  the  hall  of  audience.  I  found 
the  Taotai  a  delightful,  fat,  good-natured  Chinaman, 
whose  large  round  face  was  suffused  with  a  perennial 
smile.  Delicacies  of  all  sorts  were  placed  before  us, 
which  he  of  course  ate  with  chop-sticks,  though  he  was 
thoughtful  enough  to  provide  his  barbarian  guest  with 
a  two-pronged  fork.  Whenever  any  morsel,  in  any  of 
the  many  dishes,  struck  him  as  being  of  specially  en- 
ticing appearance,  he  seized  it  with  his  fingers  and 
placed  it  on  my  plate — the  high-water  mark  of  Chinese 
politeness. 

Later  in  the  day  he  returned  my  call.  The  procession 
was  delightful.  First  walked  a  Chinaman  in  scarlet, 
holding  up  an  enormous  scarlet  umbrella,  the  emblem 
of  officialdom.  Then  came  various  retainers  on  foot 
and  on  horseback,  clothed  in  scarlet  and  purple,  with 
enormous  soup  plates  embroidered  on  their  backs ; 
and  last  came  the  Taotai  himself,  in  the  most  extra- 
ordinary little  Chinese  cart,  drawn,  as  is  customary, 
by  a  mule. 

As  to  the  future,  Kulja  has  every  prospect  of  remain- 
ing in  statu  quo  for  many  years  to  come.  E-ussia  has 
nothing  to  gain  by  an  immediate  advance  in  this 
direction,  and,  moreover,  she  was  careful  to  see  that 
the  province  was  at  her  mercy  before  she  withdrew 
under  the  treaty  of  1881.  The  mineral  wealth  is  there 
in  the  earth,  and  is  likely  to  remain  there,  for  China 
will  most  assuredly  not  develop  it  herself,  and  Russia 
has  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  undeveloped 
mineral  wealth  in  Siberia  and  elsewhere  to  keep  her 
occupied  for  many  a  year  to  come.     There  are,  besides. 


220  KULJA. 

other  gateways  into  the  land  of  old  Cathay,  which 
hold  out  greater  attractions  than  does  the  road 
through  Kulja.  Mongolia  is,  no  doubt,  for  the  most 
part,  a  land  of  singular  unattractiveness ;  but  the 
shortest  and  most  direct  and  most  practicable  route 
from  Russia  to  Peking  lies  across  the  level  stretches 
of  the  Gobi  Desert.  Urga,  the  most  important  town 
in  all  Mongolia,  is  dominated  by  and  permeated  by  the 
leavening  Russian  yeast,  and  plans  and  surveys  have 
been  made  for  a  line  from  the  Siberian  railway  to 
Peking  via  Kiachta,  Urga,  and  Kalgan.^  To  the 
south,  again,  the  mystery  -  enshrouded  highlands  of 
Tibet  hold  out  irresistible  inducements  to  international 
flirtation  and  intrigue,  and  evidence  has  been  suffici- 
ently apparent  of  late  that  the  Russian  bear  is  by  no 
means  insensible  to  the  charms  of  coquetting  with  the 
hierarch  of  the  Mecca  of  Central  Asian  Buddhism. 
The  mission  from  Tibet  under  the  able  guidance  of  the 
Siberian  Buriat  Dorjieff,  which  arrived  at  Odessa  in 
October  1900,  and  was  received  by  the  Tsar  himself  at 
Livadia  a  short  time  after,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a 
mere  pleasure-trip,  undertaken  at  the  fancy  of  pleasure- 
seeking  officials  ;  nor  are  the  subsequent  Tibetan  mission 
to  St  Petersburg,  bearing  an  autograph  letter  from  the 
supreme  pontiff  of  Lhassa  to  the  Tsar  of  Russia,  or 
the  expedition  of  the  Russianised  Buriat,  Professor 
Tsybikoff,  to  the  Tibetan  capital,  or  the  fact  that  rifles 
bearing  the  stamp  of  the  Russian  Government  factory 
of  Tula  were  found  on  the  bodies  of  the  Tibetans  who 
fell  in  the  recent  onslaught  against  the  Indian  political 

^  I  was  informed  by  a  Russian  oflScial  that  the  construction  of  this  line  had 
been  decided  on,  the  850  miles  through  Mongolia  from  Kiachta  to  Kalgan 
to  be  built  by  Russia,  and  the  remaining  section  from  Kalgan  to  Peking 
by  China. 


RUSSIAN  INTRIGUE    WITH  TIBET.  221 

mission   in    the    Ohumbi   valley,   devoid    of  a  distinct 
significance.^ 

The  southern  regions  of  Chinese  Turkestan,  while 
as  much  probably  at  the  mercy  of  Russia  as  the  less 
important  province  of  Kulja,  have  the  supreme  attrac- 
tion, not  possessed  by  the  latter,  of  lying  in  contact 
with  the  semi-independent  States  which  border  upon 
the  Indian  Empire ;  and  the  possibility  of  controlling 
what  Mr  Chirol  describes  as  "  a  great  politico-religious 
orsfanisation,  whose  influence  can  and  does  make  itself 
appreciably  felt  all  along  the  north-eastern  borderland 
of  India,"  is  far  more  likely  to  appeal  to  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  chauvinist  statesmen  of  Russia  than  an 
advance  into  a  part  of  the  Chinese  Empire  which  could 
scarcely  be  deemed  either  necessary  or  advantageous, 
as  likely  to  lead,  for  the  present  at  any  rate,  to  any 
further  advancement  in  a  policy  of  territorial  aggran- 
disement and  acquisition. 

1  The  following  passage  from  Prince  Ukhtomski's  account  of  the  travels 
of  the  Tsesarievitch  in  the  East,  is  of  considerable  interest  in  this  con- 
nection. Speaking  of  the  Buddhists  in  Eussia  he  says  :  "  Every  year 
thousands  of  them  go  on  pilgrimage  to  Mongolia  and  to  the  centres  of 
Tibetan  learning.  Pioneers  of  Russian  trade  and  Eussian  good  fame, 
representatives  of  the  Eussian  name  in  the  depths  of  the  yellow  East, 
are  these  simple  little  men  in  their  worn  garments,  with  their  shaggy  little 
horses  and  their  camels.  These  nameless  natives  march  on  to  .  .  .  the 
mysterious  Tashe-Llunpo  and  the  highlands  adjoining  India,  with  as  much 
ease  and  briskness  as  we  do  in  our  suburban  excursions.  Everywhere 
this  intelligent  element  .  .  .  quietly  bears  into  this  Asiatic  wilderness 
ideas  of  the  White  Tsar  and  the  Muscovite  people.  .  .  .  These  sturdy 
travellers  bear  also  the  idea,  vague  as  yet,  that  the  Christian  West  is 
called  on  to  regenerate  through  us  the  effete  civilisation  of  the  East. 
Scarce  any  one  in  Eussia  guesses  as  yet  what  a  valuable  work  is  being 
carried  on  by  the  modest  Eussian  Lamaites,  at  a  distance  of  hundreds 
.of  miles  from  the  Russian  frontier." 


SPOET 


A   DIGRESSION 


"The  days  spent  in  the  chase  are  not  counted  in  the  length  of  hfe." — 
A  rah  proverb. 

"They  are  the  most  voracious  people  of  prey  that  ever  existed.  The 
more  vigorous  run  out  of  the  island  to  Europe,  to  America,  to  Asia, 
to  Africa  and  Australia,  to  hunt  with  fury  by  gun,  by  trap,  by  harpoon, 
by  lasso,  with  dog,  with  horse,  with  elephant  or  with  dromedary,  all  the 
game  that  is  in  nature." — Emerson,  English  Traits. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

AMONG   THE   IBEX   OF   TURKESTAN. 

A  sportsman's  paradise — The  way  there — A  lengthy  bargain — To  the 
Oriyaas  valley — Magnificent  scenery — A  Kalmuk  Nimrod — A  48-inch 
ibex  shot — Stormy  weather — An  evil  beast — Vengeance — A  successful 
right-and-left — Marmots — The  disappearance  of  an  ibex — Its  head 
secured — Extremes  of  temperature — The  luck  of  ibex-shooting — A 
51|-inch  trophy — Kalmuk  characteristics — Another  50-inch  head — 
Flooded  rivers — Back  to  Kulja — Horn  measurements. 

Far  away  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  where  remote  Cathay- 
holds  shadowy  dominion  over  nomad  Kirgiz  and 
Kalmuk,  the  waters  of  a  great  river  roll  placidly 
through  a  broad  grassy  plain.  On  either  side  fine 
ranges  of  mountains  rise,  and  at  their  foot  and  along 
the  river-banks  small  collections  of  yurts  are  to  be 
found,  the  homes  of  Kirgiz  and  Kalmuk,  who  find 
ample  pasturage  in  every  direction  for  their  flocks 
of  sheep  and  vast  herds  of  horses.  They  call  both 
the  river  and  the  district  Tekkes,  though  the  former 
has  a  wider  reputation  under  the  name  of  Hi,  which 
it  assumes  after  taking  a  sudden  turn  in  a  direction 
from  north  -  east  to  north  -  west,  before  it  flows  past 
Kulja,  and  on  till  it  empties  itself  into  Lake  Balkash. 
But  it  is  with  one  of  its  tributaries  which  race 
down  from  the  mountains  on  the  south-east  that  I 
am  concerned  in  the  present  chapter.  Of  these  there 
are  several,  each  one  of  which  flows  through  a  land 
infested    with    game,    the    Geok    Su    or    Blue    river, 

P 


226  AMONG  THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

the  Kara  Su  or  Black  river,  the  Ak  Su  or  White 
river,  and  the  Oriyaas,  up  which  I  journeyed  rifle 
in  hand  during  the  first  half  of  June  1903.  I 
believe  there  is  no  spot  known  to  the  European 
sportsman  which  can  lay  juster  claim  to  the  title 
of  "  sportsman's  paradise "  for  the  particular  game 
it  produces  —  the  ibex,  Asiatic  wapiti,  and  Asiatic 
roe-deer — than  the  wooded  slopes  and  grassy  corries, 
the  steep  ravines  and  rocky  precipices,  which  here 
abound  in  what  may  be  described  as  the  mountain 
pendants  of  the  great  central  system  of  the  Thian 
Shan.  In  the  days  of  long  ago,  when  Kashmir  was 
first  exploited  by  the  sportsman,  the  sport  obtained 
may  have  come  up  to  that  now  obtainable  in  the 
Thian  Shan,  but  I  doubt  if  the  barasingh  ever  car- 
ried so  massive  and  heavy  a  horn  as  the  Asian 
wapiti,  or  if  there  was  ever  the  same  number  of 
ibex  with  heads  equal  to  those  which  range  the 
mountains   in    the    vicinity   of  Tekkes. 

This  land,  like  most  lands  of  plenty,  is  a  distant 
one,  and  cannot  be  reached  without  a  considerable 
expenditure  of  time  and  forethought.  Mr  Church 
has  given  an  admirable  description  of  the  long  days 
of  weary  marching,  even  after  the  stupendous  Him- 
alayan and  Karakoram  ranges  are  crossed,  which 
await  the  traveller  journeying  hither  from  India. ■'■ 
From  the  west,  however,  far  less  difficulty  is  en- 
countered. Permission  once  obtained  from  the 
authorities  at  St  Petersburg  to  carry  rifles,  the 
Transcaspian  railway  lands  one  at  Tashkent  in 
Turkestan,  whence  a  post-road  is  available  to  Kulja. 
Allowing  a  month  for  the  journey  to  Kulja,  a  delay 
there,  varying  according  to  circumstances,  while  ob- 
taining   transport    for  the  remainder  of  the  journey, 

^  Chinese  Turkestan. 


A   LENGTHY  BARGAIN.  227 


and  from  eight  to  ten  days'  caravanning  to  the 
upper  reaches  of  the  Oriyaas  stream,  and  in  from 
six  weeks  to  two  months  after  leaving  London  the 
sportsman  will  find  himself  camped  in  the  cream 
of  his    shooting. 

The    prospect    of    securing    transport    speedily    at 
Kulja    is    dependent    on    the    demand    and    supply  of 
horses.       There    is    a    caravan    route    from    Kashgar 
which  passes  by  the  town  of  Aksu  over  the  Muzart 
Pass,    and    through    Tekkes    to    Kulja,    and    it    was 
from   a   caravan  -  hashi   who    had    travelled   up   along 
this    route    that    I    obtained    my    ponies.       I    offered 
him    twenty   roubles    a -month    per    pony  —  excellent 
pay,    since    after    reaching    the    Oriyaas    river    they 
would    have    little   to   do   except   rest   and   grow   fat 
on  the  rich  pasturage  on  the  river-banks.     The  man, 
however,    was    a    true    Oriental,    and    having    ascer- 
tained    that     there     were    very    few    ponies    in    the 
town,  promptly   demanded   thirty,   finally,  with  great 
magnanimity,  saying  that  as  I  was  no  doubt  anxious 
to  proceed  without  undue  loss  of  time,  he  would  clinch 
a  bargain,  and  supply  me  with  ponies  at  twenty-five 
roubles    a-head  per  month.      I    metaphorically   kicked 
him  out   of  the   house,   and  told  him   that   he  might 
come    back    when    he    came    to    his    senses,    when    I 
might    possibly    still    be   willing  to  offer   him  twenty 
roubles.     He   smiled  and  went,  and   the  days  passed, 
and  any  morning  I  might  see  him  idling  contentedly 
in    the    bazaar,   but    he    made    no    attempt   to    renew 
negotiations.     I  think  I  knew  all  along  in  my  heart 
of  hearts    the    fatuity    of   any    European    attempting 
to   compete   with    an  Asiatic   in  a  game   of  waiting ! 
The    keep    of  his    horses    cost    him    nothing, — indeed 
they    lived  sumptuously  on  the  luxuriant   vegetation 
of  the  Hi  valley, — his  last  journey  had  brought  him 


228  AMONG   THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

sufficient  means  for  subsistence  for  many  days  to 
come,  and  rather  than  climb  down  from  the  position 
he  had  taken  up  he  would,  I  am  convinced,  have 
waited  with  absolute  complacency  until  either  des- 
titution or  the  crack  of  doom  constrained  him  to 
move.  I,  unfortunately,  had  not  the  unlimited  time 
at  my  disposal  which  he  appeared  to  have,  and  at 
the  end  of  a  week  I  bowed  to  the  inevitable,  gave 
him  his  twenty-five  roubles,  and  proceeded  on  my 
way. 

There  is,  of  course,  no  bridge  over  the  Hi  river — 
Why  should  there  be  ?  the  Chinaman  would  probably 
ask — and  the  same  inconvenient  ferry-boat  which  has 
somewhere  been  aptly  described  as  a  "  muddy  box," 
and  which  has  been  handed  on  from  prehistoric  times 
of  the  past,  to  continue  in  all  probability  to  a  cor- 
responding period  in  the  future,  is  the  only  means  of 
getting  across.  From  here,  striking  south-east,  we 
crossed  the  spur  of  mountains  rising  between  Kulja  and 
Tekkes,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  fifth  day  reached  the 
Hi  once  more  and  halted  for  the  night  in  a  yurt  put  at 
our  disposal  by  the  headman  of  a  Kalmuk  aoul  (village 
of  yurts).  Here  a  day's  halt  was  necessary  while  en- 
gaging Kalmuks  as  guides  and  hunters,  and  buying  a 
small  flock  of  sheep  to  drive  along  with  us  for  our  food- 
supply,  for  the  Oriyaas  valley  is  uninhabited ;  but  on 
the  last  day  of  May  I  reached  the  gorge  where  the 
river  escapes  from  the  mountains,  and,  crossing  a  low 
ridge,  found  myself  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  valley. 

I  wish  I  could  give  a  description  even  approaching 
the  reality  of  the  extraordinary  beauty  of  the  scenery 
through  which  the  Oriyaas  flows.  Photographs  may 
give  the  outline,  but  they  cannot  reproduce  the  wonder- 
ful colouring,  to  which  is  perhaps  to  be  chiefly  attributed 
the  extraordinary  charm  of  the  view.    The  river's  source 


M^ 


MAGNIFICENT  SCENERY.  229 

must  be  looked  for  among  the  primeval  ice  and  snows 
of  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  Celestial  Mountains, 
but  after  leaving  the  frozen  world  of  its  birth  it  flows 
through  a  perfect  garden  of  delight,  the  grassy  lawns, 
planted  here  and  there  with  picturesque  clumps  of  fir- 
trees,  which  line  its  banks  resembling  rather  the  neat 
slopes  of  artistic  and  well-kept  pleasure-grounds  than 
the  untrimmed  reaches  of  a  natural  wild.  From  the 
green  levels  of  the  river-banks  steep  mountains  rise  on 
either  side,  carpeted  with  grass  and  flowers,  and  in  many- 
parts  well  wooded  with  many  kinds  of  bush  and  hand- 
some fir,  while  above  the  line  of  trees  weird  crags  and 
pinnacles  of  rock  protrude,  throwing  a  sharp  serrated 
outline  against  the  sky,  and  above  all  glistens  a  pure 
white  roof  of  eternal  snow.  As  one  turns  each  fresh 
corner  in  one's  onward  march  a  new  vista  of  beauty 
opens  out,  combining  in  a  single  picture  the  wild 
beauty  familiar  to  those  who  have  roamed  among  the 
mountains  on  the  west  coast  of  Scotland,  the  wooded 
magnificence  of  Kashmir,  and  the  jagged  outlines  which 
are  so  conspicuous  a  feature  of  the  rugged  Taurus 
Mountains.  I  have  seen  many  scenes  which  have  im- 
pressed me  more  with  a  sense  of  forbidding  grandeur, — 
the  stupendous  cone  of  Persian  Demavend,  the  colossal 
mountain  masses  on  India's  north-west  frontier,  the 
extraordinary  mountain  labyrinths  of  Baltistan,  and 
above  all,  perhaps,  the  unequalled  spectacle  which 
meets  the  eye  as  one  gazes  up  at  the  gigantic  peaks 
reared  aloft  in  every  direction  round  the  Bunji  plain, — 
but  I  can  call  to  mind  no  prospect  which  has  satisfied 
the  eye  with  quite  the  same  sense  of  content  as  the 
varied  loveliness  of  the  Oriyaas  valley. 

The  hunters  of  the  country  are  the  Kalmuks,  like  the 
Kirgiz  a  race  of  Mongolian  origin,  but  one  which  has 
better  preserved  its  type.     Like  the  Kirgiz,  too,  they 


230  AMONG   THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

live  in  villages  of  grey  felt  tents,  but,  unlike  the  former, 
who  are  Mohammedans,  are  Buddhists  by  religion,  their 
priests    or   lamas    easily  recognisable  by  their   scarlet 
and  yellow  robes.     Their  features  are  of  the  true  Mon- 
golian type,  with  little  hair  upon  the  face,  while  they 
wear  the  orthodox  Chinese  pig-tail  hanging  far  down 
their  backs.     Among  the  Kalmuks  of  Tekkes  was  one 
who,  like  Nimrod  of  old,  was  "  a  mighty  hunter,"  and 
so  great  was  his  reputation  in  this  respect  that,  though 
usage  among  the  Kalmuks  demands  that  the  younger 
shall  serve  the  older,  men  of  greater  age  than  he  would 
unhesitatingly  obey  him  in  the  chase.     I  was  not  sur- 
prised, therefore,  to  hear  that  he  was  away  hunting  in 
the  mountains ;  but  luck  was  with  me,  for  he  too  had 
selected  the  Oriyaas  valley  as  his  hunting-ground,  and 
on  June  3  I  ran  him  to  ground,  and  secured  his  services 
during  the  time  that  I  was  shooting.     My  quarry  was 
of  course  the  ibex,  since  the  horns  of  the  wapiti,  like 
those  of  the  red-deer,  do  not  reach  a  state  of  perfection 
until  August  or  September.    Not  so  with  the  Kalmuks. 
Their  hunting  is  for  existence,  not  for  sport,  and  by  an 
unlucky  chance  for  the  persecuted  stag,  the  medicinal 
property  of  the  unformed  horn  commands  a  high  price 
throughout  China, — as  much  as  ten  roubles  (over  21s.) 
a  pound, — so  that  during  the  months  of  June  and  July 
he  is  hunted  and  pursued  with  relentless  perseverance. 
A  fixed  salary,  however,  and  the  promise  of  a  present 
for  every  big  head  that  fell  to  my  rifle,  was  sufficient 
temptation  to  induce  Nurah — the  Kalmuk  Nimrod — to 
leave  for  a  time  the  less  certain  occupation  of  hunting 
wapiti ;  and  having  engaged  two  other  Kalmuks,  Hoh- 
Hah  and  Jergol,   to  make  themselves   useful    on  the 
hillside  and  in  camp,  I  lost  no  time  in  trying  my  luck 
after  ibex. 

As  already  stated,  the  sport  obtainable  is  of  the  best, 


>V.  2 


KALMUK  HUNTERS.  231 


and  in  thirteen  days'  actual  shooting  I  accounted  for 
fifteen  ibex,  among  which  were  some  magnificent  heads. 
Let  me  take  a  day  or  two's  sport  at  random  from  the 
pages  of  my  diary. 

June  4. — Leaving  camp  early  in  the  morning  we 
rode  up  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  spying  the  steep 
mountain-sides  above  us  as  we  went.  Before  long  we 
came  to  a  turbulent  mountain  torrent  which  hurled 
itself  down  a  bed  of  rock,  and,  like  the  waters  at 
Lodore,  came  "  dashing  and  flashing  and  splashing  and 
clashing"  till  it  tumbled  headlong  into  the  channel  of 
the  main  stream.  High  up  on  a  steep  mountain-face 
overhanging  this  turbulent  torrent,  sparsely  covered 
with  low  bushes,  but  plentifully  with  long  slippery 
grass,  we  saw  a  herd  of  ibex,  and  among  them  more 
than  one  carrying  horns,  which  appeared  through  the 
glass  to  be  of  enormous  size.  Tying  up  the  ponies,  we 
proceeded  to  climb  up  the  rocky  banks  of  the  stream, 
crouching  along  under  cover  of  the  low  bushes  with 
which  it  was  fringed.  While  thus  engaged  I  made 
more  than  one  discovery  :  first,  that  the  Kalmuk  hunter, 
unlike  the  stalker  on  a  Scotch  deer-forest  or  the  shikari 
of  India  or  Kashmir,  has  no  sort  of  idea  of  burdening 
himself  with  your  rifle ;  and,  second — a  far  more  dis- 
agreeable surprise— that  nothing  will  induce  him  to  go 
hunting  without  his  own  rifle  on  his  back,  a  fearful 
weapon,  with  long  forked  attachment  as  rest,  which, 
as  he  crouched  along  in  front  of  me,  was  continually 
threatening  to  disgorge  one  of  my  eyes  ! 

At  length,  after  much  patient  crawling  over  rock  and 
boulder,  we  succeeded  in  putting  a  ridge  between  our- 
selves and  the  herd,  and  were  able  to  assume  an  up- 
right position  once  more,  and  to  take  a  breath  before 
starting  on  the  steep  ascent  in  front  of  us.  Half  an 
hour's  struggle  up  a  steep  mountain-side  covered  with 


AMONG  THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 


long  slippery  grass,  which  made  climbing  very  arduous, 
brought  us  level  with  the  ibex,  and  worming  our  way  to 
the  top  of  a  ridge,  we  found  ourselves  in  an  excellent 
position  a  bare  hundred  yards  from  the  nearest  beasts. 
I  selected  my  animal  while  Nurah  crawled  up  close 
behind  me,  and  as  soon  as  he  turned  broadside,  fired. 
Immediately  there  was  a  loud  report  in  my  ear,  and  I 
turned  round  to  see  the  Kalmuk's  rifle  smoking  within 
a  foot  of  my  head  !  Two  ibex  lay  dead  on  the  ground, 
and  when  I  came  to  measure  them  I  found  mine  had 
a  splendid  head  of  just  over  48  inches,  while  Nurah's 
carried  a  horn  of  42  inches.  I  found  it  was  quite 
impossible  to  prevent  Nurah  shooting  when  in  sight 
of  game,  so  came  to  an  arrangement  with  him  by  which 
he  agreed  not  to  shoot  until  I  had  had  my  shot,  and 
then  not  to  fire  at  the  big  ones.  This  he  was  quite 
willing  to  do,  since  the  horns  were  of  no  value  to  him, 
and  he  only  cared  about  the  body  and  the  skin,  the 
former  of  which  he  ate,  and  with  the  latter  of  which  he 
clothed  himself. 

I  was  agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  there  was  no 
necessity  for  very  early  starts  in  the  mornings.  I  have 
vivid  recollections  when  shooting  in  the  Himalayas  of 
being  dragged  reluctantly  out  of  bed  in  the  grey  light 
of  dawn,  when  dawn  broke  at  4  a.m.,  and  sometimes 
before,  to  begin  clambering  up  the  mountains  by  the 
dim  light  of  the  paling  stars.  But  here  I  seldom  left 
camp  before  7  a.m.,  and  never  before  5  a.m.,  since 
the  amount  of  snow  lying  on  the  mountains  deterred 
the  ibex  from  seeking  the  seclusion  of  the  distant  and 
often  inaccessible  rocks  which  rose  above  the  woods  and 
grassy  corries  of  the  lower  slopes.  Indeed,  though  it 
was  June,  the  weather  was  a  strange  mixture  of  summer 
and  winter.  There  vvas  nearly  always  a  sharp  frost  at 
night,  and  heavy  storms  of  rain,  turning  to  snow,  at 


AN  ERRATIC  CLIMATE.  233 

sundown  were  common.  On  the  night  of  May  26  the 
thermometer  registered  13°  of  frost,  and  from  6°  to  8° 
was  the  usual  amount  during  the  first  half  of  June. 
From  the  4th  to  the  11th  we  experienced  frightful 
storms,  which  came  on  every  afternoon  with  clockwork 
regularity,  lasting  well  on  into  the  night,  and  leaving  a 
covering  of  snow  even  down  in  the  valley  bottom  where 
we  were  camped.  The  variations  in  the  temperature 
were  violent  in  consequence.  From  early  morning  to 
noon,  when  the  snow-clouds  began  to  gather,  the  ther- 
mometer would  rise  steadily.  Then,  as  soon  as  the  sun 
was  obscured,  and  snow  and  rain  came  driving  down 
the  mountain-sides,  down  would  come  the  mercury  with 
a  jump,  falling  70°  or  80°  in  half  as  many  minutes,  and 
readings  such  as  I  find  I  have  recorded  on  June  14, 
when  the  thermometer  stood  at  26°  Fahr.  early  in  the 
morning,  and  a  few  hours  later  in  the  sun  at  112°,  were 
common.  The  winter,  no  doubt,  had  been  an  unusually 
late  one  here,  as  it  appears  to  have  been  throughout 
Asia,  and  when  I  left  the  upper  reaches  of  the  Oriyaas, 
early  in  the  third  week  of  June,  bushes  and  shrubs  were 
only  just  breaking  into  bud. 

On  June  5  I  explored  the  ground  up  a  tributary 
stream  to  the  south,  and  saw  ibex  on  the  hills  on 
either  side.  Much  of  the  ground  is  excellent  stalking- 
ground,  which  is  as  well  perhaps  for  the  sportsman, 
for  the  ibex  is  no  fool,  and  takes  excellent  precau- 
tions against  surprise,  a  fact  of  which  I  was  afforded 
evidence  on  this  occasion.  I  was  climbing  up  one 
side  of  a  steep  ravine,  well  out  of  sight  of  the  herd 
I  was  after,  when  suddenly  on  the  sky-line  opposite 
us  appeared  a  pair  of  horns.  We — Nurah,  Hoh-Hah, 
and  myself — dropped  to  earth  where  we  were,  and 
watched  anxiously  while  the  animal  came  slowly  into 
full  view,   while  it  stood  like  a  statue  gazing  down 


234  AMONG   THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

towards  the  valley  below.  We  were  constrained  to 
remain  motionless  too,  in  a  most  irksome  position, 
and  when,  after  standing  like  stone  for  a  quarter  of 
an  hour,  the  evil  beast  lay  down  where  he  was,  the 
situation  became  acute.  A  fragment  of  rock  was 
grinding  into  my  back,  a  stone  was  gradually  be- 
coming loosened  under  pressure  of  my  foot,  and,  be- 
fore long,  precisely  what  I  was  expecting  came  about 
— the  stone  gave  way,  and  went  rumbling  down  the 
hill  with  those  aggravating  resounding  bumps  which 
rolling  stones  delight  in  when  one  is  particularly 
anxious  to  avoid  attracting  attention.  I  grabbed  at 
the  nearest  rock  to  prevent  myself  following  in  its 
track,  and  the  author  of  this  unfortunate  situation 
sprang  to  his  feet  and  came  racing  like  a  beast  pos- 
sessed down  towards  the  valley  bottom. 

That  was  where  he  made  a  grave  mistake,  because  it 
brought  him  within  easy  range  of  three  exasperated 
men,  two  of  whom  happened  to  be  carrying  loaded 
rifles.  I  fired,  and  Nurah  fired,  six  cartridges  I  think 
we  expended  between  us  while  you  could  have  counted 
ten,  and  a  whoop  of  savage  triumph  rent  the  air  as  he 
tottered  and  then  fell  headlong,  the  mangled  remains 
of  what  a  moment  before  had  been  a  joyous  living  ibex. 
Does  it  sound  ugly  now  this  tale  of  wilful  wicked  tak- 
ing of  life  ?  I  admit  it,  it  was  a  desire  for  vengeance, 
cruel,  vindictive  vengeance,  that  actuated  me,  for,  truth 
to  tell,  I  knew  full  well  his  horns  were  not  worth  the 
powder  expended  on  them.  Perhaps  it  was  Nurah 
who  fired  the  fatal  shot,  and  maybe  he  is  happier 
where  he  is,  roaming  the  ghostly  mountains  of  some 
wild  Valhalla,  where  ibex  ghosts  delight  to  be. 

Later  in  the  day  fortune  favoured  us,  for  we  came 
across  a  herd  towards  evening  grazing  in  a  grassy 
hollow  quite  unsuspicious  of  danger  lurking  near.     The 


AN  EXCITING  STALK.  235 


stalk  was  not  a  long  one,  for  we  were  above  them  when 
we  saw  them,  and  within  an  hour  of  the  time  when  I 
started  after  them  I  had  secured  a  right-and-left — two 
fine  heads  of  46  and  49  inches  respectively. 

A  day  or  two  later  I  moved  farther  up  the  Oriyaas 
stream.  All  along  the  river-banks  that  curious  little 
rodent  the  marmot  swarmed,  sitting  bolt  upright  over 
his  hole,  uttering  his  weird,  shrill  little  note,  and  dis- 
appearing like  a  jack-in-the-box  whenever  we  approached 
too  close.  Once  Nurah  made  out  the  tracks  of  a  big 
wapiti,  and  went  nearly  mad  with  excitement  until  I 
told  him  he  could  go  and  try  his  luck  after  it.  He 
went  off  towards  dusk  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  night 
in  the  gloomy  depths  of  the  forest,  but  no  success 
rewarded  his  efforts. 

A  day  or  two  after  this  I  had  a  most  exciting  stalk 
in  wild  rocky  ground,  where,  in  a  long  past  geologic 
era,  some  convulsive  spasm  of  nature  had  torn  great 
rents  and  thrown  up  odd  excrescences.  Grass  grew 
here  where  it  could,  and  trees  and  bushes  seemed  to 
find  foothold  in  the  rock  itself,  and  ibex  revelled  to  the 
utmost  in  projecting  crags  and  sheltered  hollows.  They 
were  there  on  this  occasion,  a  dozen  beauties,  and  off 
we  went  to  circumvent  them.  The  climb  was  steep,  as 
is  generally  the  case  when  a  big  ibex  is  at  the  other 
end  of  it,  and  an  hour  had  passed  before  we  found  our- 
selves in  a  position  to  crawl  up  for  a  shot ;  but  so  far 
all  was  well,  for  they  had  not  moved  from  the  spot 
where  we  had  first  caught  sight  of  them. 

I  crawled  flat  to  the  top  of  a  little  ridge,  and  straight 
below  me,  at  a  distance  which  I  judged  to  be  200  yards, 
stood  a  fine  beast,  while  others  were  lying  down  or 
cropping  grass  close  by.  I  held  my  breath,  pressed  the 
butt  hard  against  my  shoulder,  and  then  fired.  The 
usual  confusion  which   follows  a   shot  ensued.      Ibex 


236  AMONG  THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

were  springing  up  in  all  directions,  disappearing  and 
reappearing  among  the  crags  and  boulders  through 
which  they  picked  their  way.  The  beast  I  fired  at 
sprang  high  in  the  air  and  then  vanished,  as  though 
the  earth  had  opened  and  swallowed  him  up.  A  hoarse 
"  Shot ! "  from  Nurah  (this  was  his  one  word  of  Eng- 
lish) set  me  wondering  whether  he  wished  to  convey 
the  idea  that  I  had  shot  the  beast  or  that  I  should 
shoot  again.  Taking  it  for  the  latter,  to  be  on  the 
safe  side,  I  drew  a  bead  on  another  beast,  which  ap- 
peared bewildered  and  undecided  which  way  to  go,  and 
pressed  the  trigger.  "  Shot ! "  again  came  from  close 
behind  me,  and  this  time  there  was  no  doubt  what  was 
intended,  for  I  saw  the  beast  fall  dead  myself. 

Certainly  one  head,  perhaps  two, — not  so  bad  for  one 
morning,  I  thought.  But  things  were  not  quite  so 
bright  as  they  had  seemed,  for  when  we  reached  the 
fallen  beast  which  I  had  brought  down  with  my  second 
shot,  we  found  that  he  had  a  horn  of  little  more  than 
40  inches,  and  number  one  was  nowhere  to  be  found. 
I  went  up  to  the  spot  where  he  had  been  standing,  and 
found  myself  on  the  very  brink  of  a  yawning  chasm, 
which  gave  seemingly  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth, 
whence  there  issued  a  rumbling  of  subterranean  waters. 
Climbing  a  short  way  down  the  side,  I  peered  into  the 
abyss  below,  and  after  becoming  accustomed  to  the 
darkness,  made  out  with  the  aid  of  my  glasses  a  pair  oi 
horns,  wedged  evidently  between  two  rocks  in  the  very 
middle  of  an  angry  torrent,  whose  waters  roared  and 
hissed,  and  threw  up  great  jets  of  foam  as  they  raced 
through  a  tunnel  to  the  open  mountain-side  beyond. 

The  horns  had  all  the  appearance  of  being  very  large 
ones  ;  but  their  size  remained  a  matter  of  conjecture — 
for  the  time  being  —  for  not  even  a  Kalmuk  would 
trust  himself  unaided  into  the   swirling  cauldron  far 


AN  IBEX  RETRIEVED.  237 


below.  Nothing,  therefore,  remained  but  to  return  to 
camp,  and  to  devise  some  means  for  securing  the  dead 
beast  on  the  morrow.  This  was  soon  decided  on,  and 
early  the  following  morning  we  returned  to  the  scene 
of  our  stalk,  provided  with  ropes.  The  ibex  was  still 
visible,  wedged  between  the  same  two  rocks,  and 
making  the  rope  secure  round  the  Kalmuk  Jergol,  we 
let  him  down  hand  over  hand  into  the  gulf  below. 
Once  safely  down  he  found  foothold  among  the  rocks, 
and  having  succeeded  in  cutting  off  the  head,  signalled 
to  us  to  hand  it  up.  This  we  did,  and  immediately 
afterwards  pulled  up  Jergol,  landing  him  safely  on 
terra  Jirma  once  more. 

There  was  much  excitement  when  I  drew  out  the 
tape  to  measure  the  horn,  one  and  all  who  had  gazed 
at  it  while  it  remained  safely  out  of  reach  declaring 
that  it  must  be  well  over  50  inches.  I  laid  the  tape, 
carefully  counting  the  inches  as  it  reached  towards 
the  tip,  forty-four,  forty-five,  forty-six  —  and  a  half! 
Exclamations  of  incredulity  burst  forth  all  round,  but 
the  tape  could  not  lie,  and  46J-  inches  was  the  utmost 
that  it  would  concede.  So  the  great  head,  which  I  had 
dreamed  about  all  night,  and  which  had  been  rescued 
at  the  expense  of  so  much  difficulty  and  trouble,  turned 
out  after  all  to  be  not  so  very  great,  and  to  fall  short 
by  3|-  inches  of  the  limit  which  constitutes  a  really 
good  head  for  the  Thian  Shan. 

The  middle  of  June  was  now  fast  approaching,  much 
ground  still  remained  to  be  covered  before  my  pro- 
gramme of  Asiatic  travel  was  completed,  and  though 
I  should  be  sadly  disappointed  at  having  to  leave 
without  carrying  a  50-inch  trophy  away  with  me,  I 
decided  that  two  more  days  were  the  most  that  I  could 
afford  to  give  up  to  the  attempt  to  secure  one.  As 
Joseph  lucidly  remarked,  "  If  git,  git ;  if  not  git,  not 


238  AMONG   THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 


git,  can't  help,"  which  being  interpreted  meant,  if  we 
got  one,  well  and  good ;  if  we  did  not,  we  had  at  any 
rate  done  our  best,  and  there  was  no  help  for  it.^ 

I  started  early  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  while  the 
thermometer  still  stood  6°  below  freezing-point;  but 
the  cold  soon  changed  to  heat,  for  the  sun  shone 
fiercely  from  a  cloudless  sky,  and  the  mercury  had 
mounted  to  112°  (Fahr.)  before  I  returned  to  camp. 
We  rode  along  as  usual,  Nurah  in  front,  myself  and 
another  Kalmuk  behind, — all  clinging  to  our  stout 
little  ponies  as  they  struggled  up  the  steep  mountain- 
sides, or  scrambled  down  to  the  depths  of  some  inter- 
venino-  ravine,  our  attention  constantly  occupied  in 
preventing  our  saddles  from  slipping  oif  over  our 
ponies'  tails,  or  precipitating  us  unawares  over  their 
heads. 

Suddenly  Nurah  slid  off  his  pony  as  if  he  had  been 
shot,  and  I  pulled  mine  on  to  his  haunches  in  an 
endeavour  to  do  likewise.  The  ponies  were  dragged 
down  into  a  hollow,  and  Nurah  pointed  excitedly 
down  into  a  corrie  in  front  of  us,  whispering  "  Tekke  " 
(ibex).  Sure  enough  we  had  stumbled  almost  on  top 
of  a  small  herd  of  males,  lying  quietly  on  a  steep 
sloping  hillside  before  us.  It  was  all  very  sudden  and 
unexpected,  but  there  we  were,  actually  within  shot 
of  them  ;  and  a  few  seconds  later  an  ibex  was  lying 
dead  to  the  first  shot,  and  another  was  moving  slowly 
ofP,  evidently  damaged  somewhere  by  the  second.  I 
ran  to   intercept   him   farther  up  the  ravine,  and  ten 

1  For  the  benefit  of  the  uninitiated  I  must  point  out  that  whereas  there 
would  in  reality  appear  to  be  very  little  material  difference  between  a  horn 
which  measured  49^  inches  and  one  which  measured  50  inches,  the  paltry 
half-inch  does,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  eyes  of  any  one  who  has  gone  in 
for  collecting  trophies,  constitute  a  vast  and  insufferable  gap  !  To  have 
shot  a  50- inch  ibex  is  to  have  achieved  a  success  with  which  the  slaying  of 
a  49^-inch  beast  could  never  compare  1 


A   50-INGE  HEAD  SECURED.  239 

minutes  later  was  fortunate  enough  to  bring  to  bag  the 
much-coveted  50-inch  head. 

It  was  a  fair  illustration  of  the  luck  connected  with 
ibex  -  shooting.  To  begin  with,  we  had  dropped  on 
them  quite  accidentally,  and  then  the  beast  carefully 
selected  as  the  largest,  which  fell  to  the  first  shot, 
proved  to  have  a  horn  of  only  43|-  inches,  while  the 
second,  picked  out  hurriedly  as  the  herd  moved  off, 
turned  out  to  be  a  far  finer  beast,  carrying  a  horn  of 
5  If.  The  first  bullet,  which  seemed  to  daze  him,  I 
found  imbedded  in  the  horn. 

Nurah  and  the  other  Kalmuk  were  gleefully  happy, 
and  laughed  and  shouted  with  delight  as  they  cut  up 
and  skinned  the  two  beasts,  and  then  they  loaded 
them  upon  the  ponies  and  carried  them  down  to  a 
sheltered  hollow,  and  were  soon  giving  material  proof 
of  their  satisfaction.  A  fire  was  lighted,  a  cooking- 
pot  and  a  large  chunk  of  green  brick  tea  produced — 
most  things  necessary  for  Kalmuk  life  were  generally 
to  be  found  strapped  somewhere  on  one  of  the  ponies — 
and  the  marrow-bones  thrown  on  to  the  embers  to 
roast.  This  savoury  repast  finished,  they  betook  them- 
selves to  the  joy  of  chewing  nahs,  a  compound  of 
powdered  tobacco  and  ashes,  expectorating  thoughtfully 
on  the  ground  at  brief  intervals  in  emphasis  of  their 
appreciation.  Chewing  nahs  is  a  habit  which  appears 
to  be  pretty  general  among  the  tribes  of  Turkestan, 
and  frequent  expectoration  a  necessary  part  of  the 
practice.  A  Kalmuk  expectorates  at  all  times  and 
under  all  circumstances  indiscriminately,  whether  he 
be  in  his  yurt  or  in  the  open ;  wherefore,  when  I  called 
my  hunters  to  my  tent  for  consultation,  they  had  to  be 
content  with  sitting  outside. 

It  was  quite  early,  but  we  had  done  well  enough 
for  one  day,  and  after  the  marrow-bones  had  all  been 


240  AMONG  THE  IBEX  OF  TURKESTAN. 

picked  clean,  and  the  horns  and  skins  had  been  tied  on 
to  the  ponies,  we  made  our  way  back  to  camp. 

Fortune  is  proverbially  a  fickle  goddess,  but  she 
smiled  on  me  during  these  last  two  days  of  my  sporting 
expedition,  for  having  vouchsafed  to  me  a  5  If -inch 
ibex  as  narrated  above,  she  was  further  pleased  to 
bestow  upon  me  another  50-inch  head  on  my  last  day's 
shooting.  Two  50-inch  heads  in  the  last  two  days,  after 
having  spent  the  previous  eleven  in  fruitless  endeavour  ! 
It  was  all  very  satisfactory,  and  every  one  was  pleased, 
more  especially  when  I  doled  out  bricks  of  tea  and  bags 
of  nahs,  of  which  I  had  laid  in  a  stock  at  Kulja,  to 
celebrate  the  successful  termination  of  the  trip. 

On  June  16  we  struck  camp  and  started  on  our 
return  march  down  the  Oriyaas  valley.  The  melting 
snows  had  converted  all  the  streams  into  foaming 
torrents,  which  raced  angrily  over  uneven  rocky  beds, 
making  it  difficult  and  sometimes  even  dangerous  for 
the  baggage  -  ponies  to  cross.  By  marching  at  very 
early  hours,  however,  while  frost  still  held  their  source 
in  check,  we  reached  the  Tekkes  plain  without  mishap, 
though  even  here,  despite  its  comparatively  sluggish 
flow,  the  river  was  a  power  not  to  be  despised.  We 
crossed  successfully  in  the  ferry,  our  ponies,  freed  from 
their  pack-saddles,  swimming  across  after  us ;  but  a 
body  of  Kalmuks  who  happened  to  be  crossing  at  the 
same  time  were  not  so  fortunate — one  of  their  ponies 
being  drowned  while  struggling  against  the  current. 
The  mishap,  however,  appeared  to  please  them  rather 
than  otherwise,  for  the  body  was  fished  out  of  the 
stream  lower  down,  and  the  last  I  saw  of  them  they 
were  making  a  hearty  meal  ofl^  the  sodden  carcass ! 

On  June  23,  exactly  one  month  after  leaving,  I 
marched  back  into  Kulja.  A  more  enjoyable  sporting 
trip  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine,  and  the  time  will 


HORN  MEASUREMENTS.  241 


be  far  distant  when  memory  fails  to  recall  the  pleasant 
camps,  the  magnificent  scenery,  and  the  grand  sport 
which  I  enjoyed  among  the  rock-crowned  peaks  and 
the  smiling  valleys  of  the  Thian  Shan. 

The  measurements  of  my  seven  best  heads  were  as 
follows:  51|,  50,  49^  48^,  47^,  461  and  46  inches; 
the  length  of  the  six  record  heads,  either  picked  up  or 
shot,  recorded  up  to  the  present  time  in  Mr  Rowland 
Ward's  standard  work  on  horn  measurements  being 
56f  (picked  up),  56  (picked  up),  54f,  54f  (picked  up), 
.and  two  of  54  inches  each. 


242       AFTER   WILD  SHEEP  IN  TEE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI. 


CHAPTEH    XXL 

AFTER   WILD    SHEEP    IN    THE    SIBERIAN    ALTAI. 

The  Altai  —  Mr  Ney  Elias  observes  numbers  of  large  horns  —  Major 
Cumberland's  expedition— The  way  to  the  Altai— Time  occupied  by 
the  journey— Expense — Kosh-Agach — Nature  of  the  country  —  My 
Kalrauk  hunter— The  "Happy  Valley"— A  depressing  day— Rams 
sighted — A  wounded  ram — My  first  head— A  move  into  Mongolia 
— A  big  ram  in  view — Officious  females — Nature's  spell — A  desperate 
race — A  terrible  disappointment. 

My  earliest  recollections  of  the  Altai  are  associated 
with  a  small  book  called,  I  think,  '  Geography  without 
Tears,'  or  some  equally  deceptive  title,  wherein  it  was 
laid  down  that  the  chief  mountain-ranges  of  Asia  were 
the  Himalayas,  the  Hindu  Kush,  and  the  Altai.  There 
may  have  been  others  included  in  the  list,  but  these 
are  the  three  that  impressed  themselves  on  my 
memory.  Subsequent  reading  confirmed  the  accuracy 
of  this  information,  for  I  learned  that  the  Altai  high- 
lands embrace  a  superficial  area  of  something  approach- 
ing 144,140  square  miles,  or,  to  give  a  better  idea 
perhaps,  "  the  Altai,"  as  we  call  it,  is  a  vast  highland 
plateau,  intersected  by  numerous  mountain-ridges,  into 
which  you  would  have  no  difiiculty  in  getting  nine  or 
ten  Switzerlands.  When,  therefore,  I  am  asked  if  I 
have  seen  the  Altai,  I  reply  with  some  diffidence  that  I 
have  seen  some  small  portion  of  that  country.     I  have 


MAJOR   CUMBERLAND'S  EXPEDITION.  243 

other  rather  vague  memories  concerning  the  Altai : 
that  there  is  a  theory  that  here  was  the  cradle  of  the 
human  race ;  that  here,  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains, 
old  Tubal  Cain  forged  his  swords  and  his  ploughshares  ; 
and  that,  at  any  rate,  whatever  grounds  there  may  be 
for  such  surmises  concerning  prehistoric  times,  there  is 
no  doubt  whatever  that  here,  buried  in  the  bosom  of 
the  earth,  almost  fabulous  mineral  wealth  awaits  the 
pick  and  spade  of  the  prospector. 

It  was  not,  however,  with  pick  and  shovel  that  I 
travelled  to  the  confines  of  Mongolia.  Thirty  years 
ago  an  intrepid  traveller,  whose  name  is  a  widely 
known  and  honoured  one  in  political  circles  in  Asia, 
Mr  Ney  Elias,  travelled  through  China  and  Siberia,  and 
observed,  among  other  things,  the  number  of  large 
horns  of  the  great  wild  sheep  of  Mongolia  which  lay 
rotting  along  the  banks  of  the  streams  in  the  valley 
bottoms  and  on  the  steep  shaley  hillsides  which  it 
frequents.  Little  came  of  it  at  the  time ;  but  twenty 
years  later  a  well-known  sportsman.  Major  Cumberland, 
came  across  Mr  Ney  Elias,  and  hearing  from  him  of 
the  possibilities  of  the  Altai  from  a  sporting  point  of 
view,  immediately  made  arrangements  for  an  expedi- 
tion there,  and  in  1895  an  English  sportsman  found 
himself,  for  the  first  time,  rifle  in  hand,  in  search  of 
wild  sheep  on  the  bare  highlands  of  the  Altai,  From 
various  causes  few  trophies  rewarded  his  first  efforts ; 
but  a  second  expedition  the  following  year  was  crowned 
with  success,  and  resulted  in  the  arrival  in  London  of 
the  horns  of  wild  rams  which  were  described  by  Mr 
Rowland  Ward  as  the  finest  he  had  ever  seen.  Such,  in 
brief,  is  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  the  Altai  as  a 
sporting  country,  and  it  is  needless  to  say,  perhaps, 
that  other  sportsmen  were  not  slow  to  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  the  pioneer.     Prince  Demidoff  has  devoted 


244       AFTER    WILD  SHEEP  IN   THE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI. 

a  whole  volume  to  an  account  of  an  expedition  under- 
taken in  company  with  Mr  Littledale,  and  I  could  name 
a  dozen  other  sportsmen  who  have  shot  there  on  vari- 
ous occasions  since  1895.  This,  however,  is  not  far  off 
the  sum-total,  and  the  head  of  a  first-class  Ovis  Ammon 
is  in  all  probability  at  the  present  day  one  of  the  rarest 
trophies  to  be  found  among  the  museums  and  private 
collections  of  horns  in  Great  Britain.^ 

And  now,  how  to  get  there  will  probably  be  the  first 
query  of  the  curious  sportsman.  Those  who  have 
serious  thoughts  of  undertaking  an  expedition  will 
probably  invest  in  a  copy  of  Prince  Demidoff's  '  After 
Wild  Sheep  in  Mongolia  and  the  Altai,'  ^  or  of  a  more 
recent  work  by  Major  H.  G.  C.  Swayne,  entitled 
'  Through  the  Highlands  of  Siberia,'  published  since  my 
return,  which  will  supply  him  with  all  the  information 
he  will  require,  and  I  need  do  no  more  than  briefly 
indicate  here  the  means  at  present  available  for  the 
use  of  travellers.  A  choice  of  routes,  then,  is  open  as 
far  as  Moscow,  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  start- 
ing-point of  the  expedition,  since  here  is  the  terminus 
of  the  great  Trans-Siberian  railway,  along  which  it  is 
necessary  to  travel  for  the  next  3391  versts  to  Ob,  on 
the  river  of  that  name.  No  difficulty  need  be  appre- 
hended thus  far,  and,  indeed,  travelling  on  the  Siberian 
railway  may  be  described  as  journeying  with  a  maxi- 
mum of  comfort  at  a  minimum  of  expense.  From  Ob 
steamers  ply  frequently  to  Barnaul,  capital  of  one  of 

^  I  distinguish  between  the  wild  sheep  of  Mongolia,  which  I  believe  to 
be  the  true  Ovis  Ammon,  and  the  wild  sheep  of  Tibet  (0.  Hodsoni\  usually 
miscalled  the  Ammon. 

2  Published  by  Rowland  Ward.  The  reduction  of  versts  to  miles  is  some- 
what inaccurate.  For  instance,  I  find  on  page  36,  "  150  versts,  or  about 
120  miles."  Now,  since  a  verst  is  '66  of  a  mile,  it  is  obvious  that  150  versts 
cannot  possibly  be  more  than  100  miles.  This  is  an  error,  however,  which 
the  sportsman  will  easily  correct  for  himself. 


THE   WAY  TO   THE  ALTAI.  245 

the   seven   divisions   of  the    Tomsk   government,    and 
thence  on  to  Biisk,  the  chief  town  of  another  district, 
where   the    river   must   be   left    and  recourse   had   to 
wheeled  conveyance.     There  are  good  shops  at  both  of 
these   places,    where    ordinary   stores  —  such    as    jam, 
biscuits,  and  a  certain  assortment  of  tinned  goods — are 
obtainable,  though,  for  my  own  part,  I  prefer  always 
bringing  such  goods  with  me  from  London.     From  Biisk 
there  has  been  a  post-road  for  many  years  as  far  as  the 
village  of  Onguidai,  a  distance  of  about  250  versts,  and 
for  the  last  two  years  the  Bussian  authorities  have  been 
engaged  in  constructing  a  road  for  small  light  carriages 
from  Onguidai  to  the  frontier  at  Kosh-Agach,  a  dis- 
tance of  another   250   versts,  which  was  almost  com- 
pleted when  I  left  the  country  at  the  end  of  August 
1903.     I  must  warn  the  traveller,  however,  that  the 
Biisk -Kosh-Agach   post -road  differs  from  other  post- 
roads  in  Asiatic  Bussia  in  that  there  is  no  fixed  tariff 
for  the  hire  of  horses, — government  horses  not  being 
obtainable  by  the  ordinary  traveller, — and  he  will  find 
himself  in  the  unenviable  position   of  having   to  pay 
whatever  is  demanded  by  the  peasants  owning  horses 
at  the  various  villages  on  the  way.     Between  Onguidai 
and    Kosh-Agach    the   country   is    inhabited    only    by 
Kalmuks,   living  scattered  widely  in  yurts,  and  it   is 
advisable  to  hire  horses  at  Onguidai  for  the  whole  of 
the  remainder  of  the  journey.     Once  at  Kosh-Agach 
there  only  remains  to  engage  pack-ponies  and  Kalmuk 
guides  or  hunters,  and  to  make  a  day's  journey  into 
the  mountains  to  the  south,  to  find  oneself  on  one's 
shooting-ground. 

Time  occupied  by  the  journey?  Well,  three  days 
from  London  to  Moscow,  a  day  or  two  there  according 
to  fancy,  and  five  days  on  to  Ob — say  from  ten  days  to  a 
fortnight  to  the  end  of  the  railway.     Three  or  four  days 


246       AFTER    WILD  SHEEP  IN  THE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI 

by  steamer  to  Biisk,  and  a  day  or  two  there  to  make 
arrangements  for  the  road,  brings  the  total  up  to  from 
sixteen  to  twenty  days ;  and  if  you  do  not  waste  too 
much  time  bargaining  for  horses  on  the  road,  another 
four  days  will  take  you  easily  to  Onguidai.  A  day  or 
more  may  possibly  have  to  be  spent  here  while  securing 
horses  to  Kosh-Agach,  which  can  be  reached  in  from 
five  to  eight  days,  according  to  the  state  of  the  road 
and  whether  you  decide  to  drive  or  take  pack-ponies. 
If  you  have  not  a  great  deal  of  baggage,  I  would  re- 
commend wheels  as  the  quickest.  This  brings  the 
total  time  from  London  to  Kosh-Agach  up  to,  roughly 
speaking,  a  month. 

Expense?  That  is  a  question  which  I  would  not 
venture  to  advise  upon.  You  might  be  back  in  London 
in  three  months  from  the  time  you  started,  having 
accomplished  your  trip  for  £250  ;  but  you  might,  on  the 
other  hand,  have  spent  £500, — expenditure  is  so  largely 
dependent  on  personal  idiosyncrasy,  as  well  as  on  a 
whole  host  of  minor  circumstances.  ^  This,  then,  must 
suffice  for  my  duties  as  a  guide. 

I  have  said  that  the  horns  of  the  Ovis  Ammon  make 
one  of  the  rarest  trophies  obtainable  at  the  present 
day ;  I  might  also  add  that  the  beast  that  carries  them 
is  about  the  most  difficult  animal  to  stalk  successfully 
that  I  have  ever  come  across.  This  shall  be  my  excuse 
for  describing  a  few  days'  sport  of  my  own ;  and  lest  I 
render  these  pages  tedious  with  an  unduly  lengthy 
description  of  the  country,  I  will  omit  all  account  of  my 
journey  there,  and  begin  at  once  at  Kosh-Agach,  close 
to  the  scene  of  action.  For  a  week  I  had  been  marching 
through    magnificent   mountain   scenery,   where    dense 

1  Major  Swayne  gives  much  useful  information  concerning  outfit,  expense, 
&c.,  in  an  appendix  to  his  book.  He  there  works  out  the  expenditure  on  a 
three  months'  trip  in  detail,  arriving  at  a  total  of  £256. 


THE  KOSH-AGACH  PLATEAU.  247 

forests  of  fir  and  cedar  clothed  the  hillsides,  and  grass 
and  wild-flowers  grew  in  riotous  profusion  ;  and  when 
one  morning  I  emerged  from  a  wooded  valley  along 
which  the  river  Chuya  worms  its  way,  and  was  con- 
fronted by  the  Kosh-Agach  plateau,  the  change  of 
scenery  came  as  a  shock.  Tree-life  ceased  abruptly,  as 
though  a  line  had  been  drawn  beyond  which  Nature 
dared  such  things  to  pass  ;  a  bleak  uninviting  expanse 
stretched  away  to  the  east,  and  all  round  bare  brown 
hills  filled  in  the  view,  recalling  the  triumphant  sterility 
of  Tibet.  This  first  impression  was  a  little  misleading 
it  is  true,  for  a  closer  acquaintance  revealed  the  fact 
that  the  lower  slopes  of  these  hills  are  covered  with 
grass  and  a  mass  of  gorgeous  wild-flowers ;  but  above 
the  zone  of  grass  and  flowers  rise  cones  of  black  and 
brick-red  shale,  which  at  a  little  distance  fill  the  eye 
and  stamp  the  impress  of  their  horrid  nakedness  upon 
the  whole  surrounding. 

The  settlement  of  Kosh-Agach,  consisting  of  a  few 
wooden  houses  built  by  merchants  trading  with  Mon- 
golia, a  wooden  church  and  a  custom-house,  has  no 
attraction  of  itself;  and  as  soon  as  pack -ponies  and 
Kalmuk  hunters  were  engaged,  I  hastened  into  the 
mountains  to  the  south,  pitching  my  tents  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  second  day  at  the  foot  of  an  odd  detached  ofi"- 
shoot  of  the  main  range  called  "Tuzzi"  or  "the  chest/' 
close  to  the  junction  of  the  streams  which  flow  down 
valleys  called  Chagan  Burgaza  and  Bain  Chagan. 

Every  sportsman  knows  that  feeling  of  keen  anti- 
cipation which  assails  him  when,  after  many  days  of 
monotonous  journeying  thither,  he  at  last  finds  himself 
in  the  land  of  his  desire.  Excitement  at  the  pos- 
sibilities of  the  morrow,  fear  lest  after  all  the  quarry 
may  not  be  there,  a  still  more  disagreeable  reflection 
that  if  it  is  he  may  get  a  shot  and  miss !  combine  to 


248       AFTER   WILD  SHEEP  IN  TEE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI 


produce  a  sensation  which  is  almost  too  keen  to  be 
pleasant.  At  4  a.m.  the  following  morning  I  was  up 
and  dressed,  and  before  5,  when  the  sun  was  just 
casting  his  first  rays  over  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
above  my  camp,  I  started,  followed  by  two  Kalmuks 
— one,  reputed  a  cunning  hunter,  to  accompany  me 
when  game  was  found,  the  other  to  hold  the  ponies, 
— for  we  always  started  on  horseback.  A  Kalmuk 
would  never  dream  of  going  anywhere  on  his  own  legs 
when  he  could  make  his  pony  do  their  work  for  them, — 
that,  he  says,  would  obviously  be  foolish,  wherein  he 
undoubtedly  shows  a  certain  practical  common-sense. 
It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  here  his  common- 
sense  stops  short :  in  general  a  block  of  wood  would 
be  a  mass  of  intelligence  in  comparison,  and  there- 
fore, lest  by  any  possibility  I  do  him  any  injury  in 
railing  at  his  obtuseness,  my  hunter  shall  rejoice  in 
a  fictitious  name,  and  Pombo  he  shall  be  to  the  end 
of  the  chapter. 

This,  my  first  day  after  the  great  wild  sheep,  was 
not  encouraging :  it  was  worse,  it  was  gloomily  de- 
pressing. I  started  up  the  Bain  Chagan,  Demidoff's 
"  Happy  Valley,"  and  searched  it  from  top  to  bottom, 
and  when  I  reached  the  watershed  went  on  over  the 
shaley  slopes  which  overlook  Mongolia  ;  but  there  was 
nothing  in  the  least  degree  felicitous  about  it  on  this 
occasion,  for  not  a  sign  of  a  beast  did  I  see,  and  passing 
on  along  the  summit  of  the  ridge  I  returned  by  the 
Chagan  Burgaza,  reaching  camp  once  more,  tired  and 
dispirited,  at  7  p.m.,  after  a  futile  fourteen  hours  in  the 
saddle. 

Pombo  looked  wise  when  I  consulted  him  as  to  what 
was  to  be  done  on  the  morrow,  said  we  would  start  up 
the  Bain  Chagan  again  and  take  a  turn  over  the  hills 
to  the  east  instead  of  the  west  as  we  had  done  to-day. 


RAMS  SIGHTED.  24^ 


What  did  he  think  of  our  chances  of  finding  game 
there?  Well,  he  thought  we  might  see  something, 
though,  of  course,  on  the  other  hand,  we  might  not. 
Of  course  I  could  have  told  him  that  much  myself,  and 
I  did  tell  him  he  was  an  ass— I  was  not  in  a  very  good 
temper — which  he  of  course  did  not  understand,  so  he 
smiled  idiotically,  and  then  betook  himself  to  his  tea 
and  his  slumbers. 

The  next  day  was  a  great  day,  because  on  it  I  secured 
my  first  ram.  It  was  not  a  big  one,  quite  a  moderate 
head  in  fact,  measuring  only  42  inches  ;  but  I  was  wildly 
delighted  when  I  secured  it,  all  the  more  from  havings 
to  put  up  with  much  anxiety,  which  at  one  time  turned 
to  despair,  before  becoming  finally  possessed  of  it. 

We  had  seen  four  small  rams  moving  slowly  across 
the  heights  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  valley,  and  I  had 
been  examining  them  curiously  through  the  glass,  for  they 
were  the  first  I  had  seen,  but  I  soon  realised  that  they 
were  very  small, — far  too  small  to  be  worth  shooting, — 
and  was  beginning  to  wonder  if  to-day  was  going  to  be  as 
yesterday,  when  Pombo  suddenly  exclaimed  Koshkhor! 
— the  native  name  of  the  ram.  I  jumped  up  and  hur- 
riedly scanned  the  hillside,  and  sure  enough  there,  far 
away  close  to  the  horizon,  was  a  herd  of  rams.  I  could 
not  make  out  if  there  were  big  ones  or  not,  they  were 
too  far  ofi",  but  Pombo  said  there  were,  so  off  we  went. 
We  were  successful  in  getting  above  them  ;  but  for 
some  reason,  just  when  we  were  starting  to  crawl  into 
sight  for  a  shot  the  whole  herd  bolted,  and  I  had  to 
take  a  snap-shot  at  the  nearest  flying  beast.  I  heard 
the  welcome  thud  which  tells  of  a  bullet  gone  home, 
and  ran  on  to  the  spot  where  the  beasts  went  out  of 
sight ;  but  when  I  got  there,  search  as  I  would,  no 
dead  sheep  was  to  be  found.  Presently  a  dark  red 
stain  caught   my  eye,  and  then  ensued  one  of  those 


250       AFTER   WILD  SHEEP  IN  THE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI 

stern-chases  which  so  often  end  in  failure.  Over  end- 
less piles  of  shale  we  tracked  the  wounded  beast,  until 
at  last  the  sun  sank  behind  the  hills  in  the  west,  and 
the  chill  shadow  which  enveloped  the  land  sank  deep 
into  our  own  souls  as  we  made  up  our  minds  that 
we  must  return  home  without  him. 

One  of  the  Kalmuks  led  the  ponies  slowly  down 
the  hill,  while  I  and  Pombo  walked  on,  intending  to 
join  them  lower  down  the  valley.  Suddenly,  half  an 
hour  later,  just  as  we  were  scrambling  down  to  the 
valley  bottom,,  Pombo  quite  unexpectedly  stumbled  on 
the  tracks  of  the  wounded  beast  again,  and  at  the 
same  moment  I  heard  a  rattling  of  stones,  and  looking 
up  saw  the  wounded  ram  just  on  the  other  side  of  a 
narrow  valley  in  front  of  us.  I  threw  up  the  rifle, 
pushed  up  the  200  yards'  sight,  fired,  and  brought  him 
down,  all  before  Pombo  had  time  to  realise  what  I 
was  doing !  And  that  was  how  I  secured  my  first 
pair  of  horns.  It  was  a  fortunate  shot  in  more  ways 
than  one,  for  when  I  got  back  to  camp  I  found  that 
the  man  whom  I  had  sent  off  the  day  before  to  buy 
sheep  had  not  returned,  and  we  had  literally  exhausted 
our  supply  of  meat,  the  last  bone  having  just  been 
boiled  down  to  make  soup  for  dinner. 

Another  futile  day  on  the  Siberian  side  of  the  frontier 
decided  me  to  change  my  quarters  and  make  a  move 
into  Mongolia.  Accordingly,  having  issued  instructions 
for  camp  to  be  moved  across  the  watershed  and  pitched 
on  the  banks  of  a  stream  at  a  spot  known  to  the 
Kalmuks,  I  started  off  across  the  mountains  to  the 
south.  It  is  fortunate  that  a  benigfn  Providence  has 
decreed  that  man  remain  in  ignorance  of  what  awaits 
him.  Had  I  foreseen  the  disappointment  and  exaspera- 
tion which  was  awaiting  me  I  should  probably  never 
have  started  on  that  particular  day's  sport,  but  have 


FOUR  LARGE  RAMS  SEEN.  251 


rested  content  with  plodding  along  in  the  wake  of  my 
pack-ponies.  Certainly  I  should  not  have  been  in  the 
high  spirits  that  I  was.  To  enjoy  hunting  wild  sheep 
to  the  full  you  must  be  possessed  of  a  whole  host  of 
virtues — endurance,  good  temper,  an  inexhaustible  stock 
of  patience,  perseverance,  and  an  unlimited  capacity 
for  putting  up  with  disappointment.  I  do  not  say 
that  I  possess  these  qualities,  I  merely  remark  that 
this  is  the  equipment  which  the  hunter  ought  to  have. 
But  to  return  to  the  story. 

We  had  toiled  all  the  morning  and  seen  nothing,  and 
I  was  looking  disconsolately  round  through  my  field- 
glasses  when  my  attention  was  arrested  by  something 
moving  on  a  distant  sky-line.  I  was  not  given  long  to 
examine  it,  for  it  disappeared  almost  immediately  ;  but 
the  sight  of  a  beast  at  all  was  enough  to  encourage  us, 
and  off  we  went  up  the  steep  shaley  hills  in  front  of  us, 
clinging  in  various  attitudes  to  our  stout  little  ponies, 
till  we  reached  a  small  hollow  near  the  summit,  where 
we  left  them  and  proceeded  on  foot  to  examine  the 
ground  that  lay  before  us.  Nor  did  we  have  to  go 
very  far,  for  after  creeping  across  the  bare  hill,  and 
crawling  a  little  way  down  the  far  side,  I  became 
aware  of  the  presence  of  a  beast  lying  down  straight 
below  me.  As  I  put  my  glass  on  to  him,  I  felt 
my  heart  begin  to  thump  against  my  ribs  with  sup- 
pressed excitement.  I  was  gazing  at  a  magnificent 
ram  not  more  than  a  few  hundred  yards  away  from  me. 
It  was  the  first  really  big  ram  I  had  seen,  and  through 
my  powerful  Zeiss  glasses  he  appeared  to  be  almost  at 
my  feet.  However,  the  immediate  question  of  the 
moment  was  how  to  get  within  shot.  A  careful  survey 
revealed  the  presence  of  three  more  rams,  all  lying 
down,  and  we  were  worming  our  way  with  infinite 
caution  and  patience  down  towards  them,  when   sud- 


252       AFTER   WILD  SHEEP  IN   THE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI. 

denly  four  officious  females  stalked  slowly  into  sight, 
and  stood  complacently  surveying  the  scene,  two 
hundred  paces  beyond  the  rams.  Here  was  a  horrible 
dilemma.  The  rams  were  beneath  us,  just  visible  when 
we  craned  our  necks  upwards  to  their  utmost  extent, 
but  the  females  were  in  full  view,  and  commanded  the 
situation,  for  to  move  either  backwards  or  forwards  now 
would  be  to  court  instant  detection. 

It  would  be  useless  to  try  to  give  any  real  idea  of 
the  next  two  hours,  for  it  is  only  the  hunter  who  has 
tasted  the  joys  and  the  bitter  disappointments  which 
assail  him  as  he  pursues  his  occupation  amid  the  soli- 
tudes of  a  great  lone  land  who  can  know  the  depths  to 
which  his  feeling  can  be  stirred,  and  no  description 
is  required  to  add  to  the  picture  which  he  himself  will 
conjure  up.  As  the  sun  slowly  approached  his  cradle  in 
the  mountains  of  the  west,  an  intense  silence  fell  upon 
the  earth,  and  the  spell  which  Nature  always  weaves  for 
the  mortal  who  is  fortunate  enough  to  find  himself  alone 
with  her  came  irresistibly  upon  me.  Even  the  restless 
females  at  length  gave  themselves  up  to  the  peace  of 
their  surroundings,  and  lay  down  where  they  were, 
while  observing  the  precaution  of  fixing  their  gaze  each 
in  a  different  direction.  For  an  hour  I  lay  in  one 
position,  scarcely  daring  to  move  lest  I  should  disturb 
the  stillness  which  reigned,  and  then  a  small  bird  flew 
down  and  perched  on  a  stone  close  by.  He  looked  at 
us,  hopped  a  little  nearer,  and  looked  again.  Then  he 
tapped  on  a  stone  with  his  beak,  and  the  tap,  tap,  tap 
sounded  curiously  loud  to  my  strained  senses.  But  his 
curiosity  was  quickly  satisfied,  for  he  soon  flew  away 
again,  and  when  he  was  gone  an  unbroken  silence 
enveloped  us  once  more.  Once  or  twice  one  of  the 
sheep  got  slowly  up,  stretched  himself,  nibbled  lazily  at 
some  infinitesimal  blade  of  grass,  and  perhaps  moved  a 


EXASPERA  TION !  253 


few  paces  before  scratching  at  the  earth  preparatory  to 
lying  down  again. 

In  the  meantime  the  sun  had  sunk  far  down  behind  the 
mountains,  casting  long  shadows  towards  the  darkening 
east,  and  at  length  the  patience  of  Pombo  had  reached 
its  limit.  He  pointed  to  the  west  and  shook  his  head, 
and  then  he  dragged  his  hand  along  the  ground,  and 
nodded  towards  a  slight  depression  twenty  yards  away. 
I  nodded  acquiescence,  and  we  started,  worming  our 
way  painfully  after  the  manner  of  the  serpent,  and 
removing  every  stone  that  might  become  displaced.  At 
last  we  reached  our  goal,  took  one  last  look  at  the 
recumbent  sheep,  and  then  crawled  laboriously  back  up 
the  shallow  depression  till  we  regained  the  hill-top, 
whence  we  had  started  two  hours  before.  Then  I  ran, 
with  the  blood  thumping  through  my  veins,  and  my 
breath  coming  in  short  sharp  gasps,  for  I  was  racing 
against  time,  and  our  chance  lay  in  reaching  the  cover 
of  a  ridge  which  ran  down  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
hill  to  that  by  which  we  had  tried  to  make  our  first 
approach. 

We  reached  the  friendly  cover,  and  Pombo  raised  his 
head,  slowly  at  first,  and  then  less  cautiously.  I  re- 
leased the  safety-bolt  of  the  rifle,  and  raised  myself 
slowly  too.  Pombo  stood  upright,  gazed  right  and  left, 
and  then  looked  back  at  me.  I  saw  disgust,  hopeless 
and  unutterable,  written  on  every  feature.  "  What  is 
it  ?  "  I  said.  He  picked  up  a  handful  of  dust,  tossed  it 
in  the  air,  and  watched  it  float  slowly  away  in  front  of 
us.  "  The  wind,"  I  said.  Pombo  disdained  an  answer, 
turned,  and  walked  slowly  back  towards  the  ponies, 
and  began  leading  them  dolefully  down  the  hill.  I 
sat  down  and  groaned.  For  two  mortal  hours  had  I 
crouched  within  300  yards  of  four  magnificent  rams, 
unable  even  to  cover  them  with  my  rifle.     And  then, 


254       AFTER    WILD  SHEEP  IN  THE  SIBERIAN  ALTAI. 

having  with  much  labour  crawled  out  of  sight  once 
more,  I  had  made  one  wild  desperate  rush  to  get  round 
them,  reached  my  goal,  and  looked  from  behind  my 
cover,  to  see — nothing.  For  not  a  sign  of  a  living 
creature  was  to  be  seen  ;  rams  and  ewes  alike  had 
vanished  as  completely  as  if  the  earth  had  opened  and 
swallowed  them  up,  and  the  day  which  had  begun  so 
brightly  ended  in  a  dreary  dismal  ride  in  the  dark  over 
the  miles  of  execrable  ground  that  lay  between  us  and 
camp. 


MOVE  INTO  MONGOLIA.  255- 


CHAPTEH    XXII. 

SPORT     IN     MONGOLIA. 

A  gazelle  shot — Pombo's  obtuseness — A  long  stalk — A  flat  crawl — An 
anxious  wait — A  big  ram  wounded— Pombo's  jubilation — A  57-inch 
horn  secured — A  long  ride  in  the  dark — Amnion  plentiful — A  pack 
of  wolves — Cold — A  55-inch  ram  shot — A  right-and-left — Chase  after 
a  wounded  ram — Stupidity  of  Kalmuks — The  wounded  ram  brought 
to  bag — Preparations  for  leaving  the  country — Horn  measurements 
— Smuggling — Reach  the  Siberian  railway. 

With  my  move  into  Mongolia  my  bad  luck  soon  came 
to  an  end.  I  sent  a  man  off  with  my  Chinese  passport, 
a  gorgeous  foot  or  more  of  decorated  parchment,  to  the 
nearest  frontier  guard,  a  movable  institution  that  lived 
in  a  yurt,  and  having  obtained  permission  to  wander 
where  I  would,  and  the  services  of  a  Mongol  fighting 
man  as  a  witness  of  my  being  under  official  protection, 
marched  along  the  foothills  on  the  Mongolian  side  of 
the  range,  halting  for  two  or  three  days  at  distances  of 
ten  or  twelve  miles,  and  shooting  over  the  mountains  in 
the  vicinity  of  my  camp. 

Here  and  there  on  the  lower  ground  I  came  across 
large  herds  of  gazelle,  and  shot  a  fine  buck  one  day, 
while  on  another  occasion  I  had  a  desperate  hunt  after 
a  huge  wolf,  without,  however,  succeeding  in  bringing 
him  to  bag.  Still,  big  rams  seemed  difficult  to  find, 
and  when  found,  still  more  difficult  to  approach,  and  I 


256  SPORT  IN  MONGOLIA. 


began  to  wonder  if  the  fears  which  so  often  assailed  me 
were  destined  to  come  true.  But  a  great  day  was 
coming,  one  of  those  red-letter  days  which  stand 
out  so  clearly  in  the  life  of  a  sportsman. 

It  was  the  13th  of  August,  and  the  sun  was  just 
rising  in  a  cloudless  sky  as  we  left  our  quarters  on  the 
banks  of  a  tiny  stream.  But  there  was  that  hard  cold 
look  in  the  heavens  which  tells  that  you  need  expect 
no  warmth  from  the  dazzling  sun,  shine  he  never  so 
brightly,  and  ere  long  a  wind  swept  over  the  bare 
bleak  hillsides,  which  made  progress  against  it  a  severe 
■effort,  and  chilled  the  blood  in  our  veins,  till  feet  and 
hands  became  numb,  and  the  teeth  chattered  with  the 
cold.  We  toiled  long  and  hard  and  saw  nothing,  and 
at  length  at  one  o'clock,  as  I  sat  shivering  under  the 
lee  of  a  rock,  making  the  most  of  the  slices  of  cold 
gazelle  which  made  my  lunch,  Pombo  crept  up  to  me, 
and  after  shaking  his  head  pointed  repeatedly  in  the 
direction  of  camp.  The  temptation  was  great,  to  hurry 
back  to  the  shelter  of  our  tents  ;  but  I  had  been  look- 
ing round,  and  through  my  glasses  had  just  caught 
sight  of  a  herd  of  rams. 

I  pointed  in  their  direction.  Pombo  gazed  blankly, 
^nd  then,  "Stones,"  he  said.  "Koshkhor"  (rams),  I 
answered.  Pombo  shook  his  head,  took  my  glasses,  and 
stared  into  vacancy.  "  Koshkhor,"  I  said  again.  He 
looked  at  me,  wavered,  and  then,  "  Malinka"  (small). 
Our  means  of  carrying  on  a  conversation  intelligible  to 
both  parties  were  limited — a  few  words  of  Russian, 
English,  and  Kalmuk,  and  a  large  assortment  of  gesticu- 
lations. "Bolshoi"  (big),  I  maintained.  Pombo  re- 
fused to  give  way,  so  I  took  matters  into  my  own 
,hands,  tethered  the  ponies  in  a  hollow, — the  other 
Kalmuk  was  not  with  us, — and  signed  to  Pombo  to 
follow  me. 


A   DESPERATE  STALK.  257 

It  was  a  long  weary  way  before  the  rams  could  be 
approached,  for  the  wind  drove  me  to  the  top  of  a  range 
of  shaley  hills,  along  the  summit  for  about  a  mile,  and 
then  down  again,  above  the  spot  where  I  had  last  seen 
them  lying.  To  make  a  long  story  short,  I  found  my- 
self, at  the  end  of  about  two  hours,  in  a  fairly  favourable 
position  ;  and,  after  taking  a  thorough  survey  through 
the  glasses,  began  crawling  carefully  on  with  a  view  to 
the  final  approach.  But  the  end  of  my  stalk  was  by 
no  means  at  hand,  for  five  minutes  later  what  should 
happen  but  that  the  sheep  should  get  suddenly  up, 
stretch  themselves  after  their  siesta,  and  then  rush 
helter-skelter  down  the  mountain-side  across  the  valley 
bottom  to  some  low  foothills  on  the  far  side,  where  they 
proceeded  to  graze  on  such  scanty  herbage  as  succeeded 
in  maintaining  a  precarious  existence  among  the  stones. 

I  heard  a  hoarse  demoniacal  chuckle  behind  me, 
and  turned  round  to  see  the  Kalmuk's  ugly  saturnine 
countenance  at  full  e^rin.  That  decided  me.  I  be- 
came  desperate,  and  determined  at  all  costs  to  be 
even  with  him.  Putting  a  ridge  between  myself  and 
the  rams  on  the  far  side  of  the  valley,  I  ran  down 
to  the  bottom,  where  I  was  confronted  with  a  flat 
open  space,  half  a  mile  across.  The  case  certainly 
appeared  hopeless ;  but  a  little  lower  down  I  noticed 
a  shallow  gorge  in  the  valley  bottom,  where  a 
stream  flowed  down  the  mountain  -  side  into  the 
main  stream  in  the  middle.  That,  at  any  rate, 
would  take  me  half-way  across  if  it  afforded  suffi- 
cient shelter.  Shall  I  ever  forget  the  crawl  along 
that  stony  water-channel  ?  It  was  shallow,  so  shallow 
that  I  had  to  follow  the  tactics  of  the  serpent,  wrig- 
gling but  a  yard  or  so  at  a  time,  and  keeping  my 
glasses  fixed  on  five  busy  heads,  lying  like  a  log 
whenever  one  of  them   was  raised   suspiciously  from 

R 


258  SPORT  IN  MONGOLIA. 


the  ground.  It  passed  unnoticed  at  the  time,  but 
I  observed,  when  it  was  all  over,  a  dozen  bleed- 
ing cuts  on  hands  and  knees.  Somehow  I  reached 
the  main  stream,  where  a  fairly  high  bank  allowed 
a  few  minutes'  rest  in  an  upright  position,  and 
then  peering  anxiously  over  the  top  I  saw  the 
five  big  rams  still  grazing  quietly  about  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  from   me. 

But  more  satisfactory  still  was  the  fact  that  they 
were  grazing  slowly  away  from  me,  and  that  im- 
mediately in  front  of  them  rose  a  low  ridge,  so 
that,  provided  they  continued  in  their  present 
direction,  they  must  soon  pass  out  of  sight,  and 
so  give  me  a  chance  of  covering  the  few  hundreds 
of  yards  of  open  ground  which  still  lay  in  front 
of  me.  Pombo,  who  had  been  left  some  way  be- 
hind, now  came  up,  and  seeing  how  near  I  was  to 
getting  a  shot,  forgot  his  "  I-told-you-so "  attitude 
— he  got  a  bonus  on  every  big  head  which  I  secured 
— and  became  as  keenly  interested  in  the  proceed- 
ings as  I  was.  How  slowly  the  beasts  moved ! 
And  evening  was  fast  settling  down.  Sometimes  a 
blade  of  grass  would  catch  the  eye  of  one  of  them, 
and  he  would  turn  back  to  crop  it,  causing  a  delay 
of  several  precious  minutes.  At  last,  however,  the 
summit  of  the  ridge  was  reached,  and  they  began 
moving  out  of  sight  on  the  far  side.  For  some 
minutes  the  last  of  them  stood  gazing  round  on 
the  crest,  but  once  satisfied  he  too  went  on,  and 
the  way  was  clear.  Now  was  my  chance !  I  pulled 
myself  together,  climbed  out  of  the  river-bed,  and 
then  ran ;  ran  as  though  my  life  depended  on  it, 
across  those  few  hundred  yards  of  flat,  stony,  cover- 
less  ground,  till  I  was  on  the  very  ridge  which  the 
rams   had  just   crossed.      A    moment    to   get    breath, 


DEATH  OF  A   BIG  RAM.  269 

and  then — but  all  thought  of  the  next  step  was 
instantly  banished.  A  puff  of  wind  or  the  sound 
of  a  falling  stone  reached  the  still  invisible  rams, 
and  the  next  moment  they  were  streaming  back 
across   the   valley. 

The  first  shot  brought  one  down.  "  Malinka," 
hissed  Pombo,  and  I  aimed  again.  But  now  they 
were  travelling  fast,  and  try  as  I  would  I  could 
not  cover  one.  The  hoarse  bark  of  a  wolf  came 
from  behind  me.  The  rams  hesitated,  pulled  up 
for  a  second,  and  looked  round.  I  had  the  300 
yards'  sight  up,  and  fired  at  the  leader,  a  grey- 
haired  beast  with  a  massive  head.  He  went  on 
for  a  few  yards  and  then  sank  down,  while  the  rest 
disappeared  up  the  mountain-side.  Pombo  shrieked 
a  triumphant  war  -  whoop,  and  nearly  spoilt  every- 
thing by  dancing  a  wild  fandango  across  the  valley 
bottom  and  half-way  up  the  hillside  opposite,  for, 
as  I  soon  discovered,  the  beast  was  very  far  from 
being  dead ;  and  after  capturing  the  Kalmuk  and 
subduing  him  by  threats  of  summary  justice  with 
the  butt-end  of  my  rifle,  I  proceeded  to  make  a 
careful  stalk  after  the  wounded  beast,  and  was 
lucky  enough  to  get  up  unobserved  and  give  him 
a  death  -  shot  at  six   o'clock. 

He  was  a  magnificent  beast,  with  a  perfect  horn 
57  inches  along  the  curve,  and  20  inches  in  cir- 
cumference at  the  base.  But  there  was  no  time 
to  waste,  for  night  was  upon  us,  and  camp  was 
a  long  way  off.  I  sent  off  Pombo  to  fetch  the 
ponies  from  the  hollow  where  we  had  tethered 
them,  and  occupied  the  interim  in  skinning  and 
cutting  up  the  beasts.  By  the  time  we  had  loaded 
up  the  horns  and  turned  our  heads  towards  camp 
it    was    quite    dark,    and    for    the    next    two    hours 


SPORT  IN  MONGOLIA. 


we  picked  our  way  at  funereal  pace  over  ground 
which  it  was  often  as  much  as  I  cared  to  do  to 
ride  over  in  broad  daylight.  But  what  did  that 
matter  while  I  had  a  57-inch  ammon  head  tied  on 
at  the  back  of  my  saddle  !  What  did  it  matter  if 
I  did  not  reach  camp  until  ten  o'clock,  after  15^ 
hours  of  toil  over  mountains  of  shale !  The  joy 
which  it  is  given  to  the  hunter  to  know  is  deep, 
and  I  was  tasting  it  to  the  full.  I  even  abstained 
from  railing  at  Pombo  for  trying  to  persuade  me 
to  turn  back  early  in  the  day ! 

It  would  be  easy  to  dwell  at  length  upon  every 
stalk  which  I  enjoyed  during  my  sojourn  in  Mongolia, 
for  the  details  of  every  one  are  all  burned  deep  into 
my  memory ;  but  it  would  be  as  tedious  for  my  readers 
as  it  would  be  easy  for  me.  The  ammon  are  plentiful, 
and  big  heads  are  far  from  being  scarce,  though  owing 
to  the  bareness  of  the  ground  they  are  difficult  to  ap- 
proach. The  extraordinary  weight  of  the  horns  of  an 
old  ram  seems  to  be  a  handicap  in  the  race  for  life,  a 
fact  which  the  packs  of  wolves  which  frequent  the 
country  no  doubt  thoroughly  appreciate.  I  came  across 
a  regular  Golgotha  one  day,  many  of  the  horns  being  in 
excellent  preservation,  and  carried  off  a  horn  measuring 
58  inches  from  among  them.  Looking  round  through 
my  field-glasses  I  lit  upon  a  pack  of  wolves  on  a  hill- 
side not  far  off,  and  counted  no  less  than  eleven  in 
one  place.  No  doubt  it  is  largely  due  to  the  presence 
of  these  beasts  and  to  their  carnivorous  tendencies  that 
the  rams  are  always  so  much  on  the  alert  and  so  sensi- 
tive to  the  presence  of  danger. 

Camp-life  is  pleasant  enough,  if  you  are  not  averse 
to  a  little  cold,  for  except  for  occasional  snowstorms — 
which,  however,  are  indescribable  while  they  last ! — 
I  found  the  climate  fine  and  dry.      The  cold  in   the 


CHASE  AFTER  A    WOUNDED  RAM.  261 

winter  must  be  intense,  for  on  August  the  17th,  18th, 
19th,  and  20th  the  thermometer  registered  22°,  19°, 
7°,  and  15°  of  frost  respectively,  and  I  observed  on 
the  first  of  these  days  that  it  was  freezing  15°  while 
I  was  partaking  of  breakfast.  I  was  fortunate  enough 
to  secure  another  ram  on  that  day,  with  a  very  fine 
head  measuring  55  inches  and  20  inches  in  circum- 
ference, though  I  came  across  him  quite  by  accident 
when  starting  to  stalk  a  herd  which  I  had  spied  some 
distance  away. 

A  more  exciting  and  even  more  satisfactory  day  was 
the  20th,  on  which  I  was  lucky  enough  to  secure  a 
right-and-left,  both  rams  carrying  horns  over  50  inches 
in  length  !  Not,  however,  before  I  had  passed  through 
some  anxious  moments.  The  first  ram  fell  dead  to 
the  shot,  struck  at  the  base  of  the  neck,  but  the 
second  went  gaily  away  with  a  broken  hind-leg ;  and 
a  ram  with  a  broken  leg  is,  as  I  very  soon  found  out, 
by  no  means  an  easy  beast  to  get  on  terms  with, 
especially  when  you  have  the  inherent  stupidity  of 
two  Kalmuks  combined  to  reckon  with  as  well. 

Having  watched  him  till  he  lay  down,  I  pointed  him 
out  to  Pombo,  gave  him  the  glass,  and  impressed  upon 
him  by  signs  and  forcible  expressions  that  I  desired 
him  to  remain  where  he  was  to  keep  an  eye  on  the 
wounded  ram,  while  I  proceeded  to  stalk  him.  I  then 
started  off,  but  I  had  reckoned  without  Kalmuk  number 
2,  who  seized  the  opportunity  before  I  had  gone  very 
far  of  leading  a  white  pony  along  the  sky-line  behind 
us.  Of  course  the  ram  was  up  and  away  like  a  flash  ; 
but  he  soon  lay  down  again,  this  time  mercifully  out  of 
sight  of  both  Kalmuks,  who  evidently  imagined  that 
he  had  gone  off  for  good,  and  set  to  work  to  skin  and 
cut  up  the  dead  beast.  I  marked  down  the  spot  where 
he  was  lying,  and  then  went  off  as  hard  as  I  could  to 


262  SPORT  IN  MONGOLIA. 

get  round  him.  There  was  a  valley  to  be  crossed  and 
a  long  climb  up  a  steep  shaley  mountain-side  to  be 
effected,  and  it  was  not  till  an  hour  later  that  I  found 
myself  crawling  down  towards  the  spot  which  I  had 
so  carefully  marked.  To  my  satisfaction  I  was  soon 
able  to  make  out  a  horn  straight  down  below  me,  and 
I  knew  that  he  was  still  there.  A  few  more  yards 
and  I  should  be  in  a  position  to  shoot ;  but  the  next 
moment,  to  my  consternation,  I  saw  the  ram  spring 
up  and  bolt,  and  looking  for  some  cause  I  descried  the 
evil  features  of  Pombo  appearing  over  a  ridge  straight 
in  front  of  me !  He  was  evidently  blissfully  ignorant 
of  the  presence  either  of  myself  or  of  the  wounded  ram, 
but  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost,  and,  running  on  to 
a  slight  eminence,  I  apprised  him  of  the  position  by 
emptying  the  contents  of  the  magazine  after  the  flying 
beast.  By  a  stroke  of  good  luck  I  brought  him  down, 
and  the  next  minute  was  standing  exultant  beside 
him.  He  carried  a  fine  horn  of  51  inches,  and  as 
this  first  also  had  a  horn  of  just  over  50  inches,  I 
congratulated  myself  on  bringing  my  trip  after  wild 
sheep  to  a  highly  satisfactory  conclusion. 

The  following  day,  August  21,  I  stayed  in  camp 
packing  the  horns  and  head-skins,  and  making  various 
preparations  for  leaving  the  country  on  the  morrow.  I 
had  been  out  shooting  exactly  fourteen  days,  and  during 
that  time  had  shot  ten  rams  and  a  gazelle,  an  excellent 
bag,  considering  the  bare  nature  of  the  country  and 
the  wildness  of  the  game.  I  need  hardly  add,  perhaps, 
that  we  had  worked  hard  to  secure  this  result.  Per- 
sonally I  had  not  taken  a  rest  once  during  the  fortnight, 
and  the  day's  work  cannot  have  averaged  less  than 
fourteen  hours  during  the  whole  of  that  time,  my 
habit  being  to  leave  camp  at  5  or  6  a.m.  and  to  get 
back  again  by  dark  or  as  soon  after  as  possible. 


HORN  MEASUREMENTS.  263 

The  trophies  which  I  had  secured  were  all  fine  heads, 
with  the  exception  of  one  small  one  which  I  discarded, 
and  included  four  heads  of  over  50  inches,  as  follows  : 
50f,  51,  55,  and  57  inches;  the  measurements  of  the 
six  best  heads  given  in  the  latest  edition  of  Mr 
Rowland  Ward's  '  Horn  Measurements '  being  62,  60, 
59|-,  59,  56|-,  and  55  inches. 

On  the  22nd,  I  bade  farewell  to  my  Mongol  soldier, 
who,  by  the  way,  had  just  concluded  an  agreement 
with  my  Kalmuks  to  meet  them  at  a  spot  known  to 
them  in  the  mountains  on  the  frontier,  with  30  bricks 
of  tea,  for  which  he  was  to  be  paid  25  roubles.  By 
thus  evading  the  vigilance  of  the  Russian  Custom 
oflficials  at  Kosh-Agach  they  no  doubt  expected  to  do 
a  good  stroke  of  business,  the  price  of  this  particular 
brand  of  tea  in  Russia  amounting  to  1  rouble  40  kopecks 
per  brick. 

Two  days  later  I  reached  Kosh-Agach,  whence  a 
march  of  eight  days  brought  me  to  the  Russian 
village  of  Onguidai.  Here  I  was  able  to  get  post- 
horses  again,  and  reached  Biisk  on  wheels  in  five  days 
more,  taking  steamer  from  here  down  the  river  Ob  to 
the  Siberian  railway. 


SIBERIA  AND  ITS  RAILWAY 


'  Clime  of  the  East !  that  to  the  hunter's  bow 
And  roving  herds  of  savage  men  wert  sold— 
Their  cone-roofed  wigwams  pierced  the  wintry  snow, 
Their  tasselled  corn  crept  sparsely  through  the  mould, 
Their  bark  canoes  thy  glorious  waters  clave, 
The  chase  their  glory  and  the  wild  their  grave- 
Look  up  !  a  loftier  destiny  behold." 

— L.  H.  SiGOURNET. 


"Railroad  iron  is  a  magician's  rod,  in  its  power  to  evoke  the  sleeping 
energies  of  land  and  water."— R.  W.  Emerson. 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 


CENTRAL    SIBERIA. 


The  Government  of  Tomsk— The  Altai  mining  district— Nature  of  the 
country— An  agricultural  land- Three  years'  famine— The  fallow-land 
system— Absence  of  English-made  goods— The  reason— The  Siberian 
village— The  Siberian  peasant— The  vodka  curse— The  Government 
vodka  monopoly— Vodka  statistics— Barnaul— A  general  store— The 
Altai  highlands  — Kosh-Agach  —  Eusso- Mongol  trade  — The  city  of 
Tomsk— The  mystery  of  Tomsk— Feodor  Kuzmitch— The  mysterious 
death  of  Alexander  I.—" Alexander's  House"  at  Tomsk— The  uni- 
versity and  technological  institute— Population  and  position. 

Immediately  north  of  the  region  of  "  steppe  border- 
land,"  known   as    Semipalatinsk,   lies  that   portion   of 
Siberia    embraced    by    the    government    of    Tomsk. 
Bounded  on  the  west  and  north-west  by  the  Akmo- 
linsk  territory  and  the  Tobolsk  government,  and  on  the 
east  and  north-east  by  Mongolia    and   the  Yeniseisk 
government,  it  comprises  an  area  of  upwards  of  331,000 
square  miles,  or,  to  give  a  better  idea,  is  one  and  a  half 
times  as  large  as  France.     Through  the  centre  of  this 
province  runs  the  middle  link  of  the  great   Siberian 
railway,   and    south    of  the    line   are  situated  four  of 
the  seven  unequal   divisions  into  which,  for  purposes 
of    internal    administration,    it   is   divided,    known   as 
the  Barnaul,   Biisk,   Kuznetsk,   and  Zeminogorsk  dis- 
tricts, forming  the  property  of  his  Imperial  Majesty's 
Cabinet   under    the   name    of    the   Altai    mining    dis- 
trict.     This   property,  already   one  of  the  richest  in 


268  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


Siberia,  is  certain  to  advance  still  further  in  import- 
ance, especially  when  the  proposed  Tomsk-Tashkent 
railway  is  taken  in  hand,  and  merits  a  few  words  of 
description. 

The  surface  of  the  country  is  varied,  a  vast  level  plain 
constituting  the  western  and  northern  portions,  while 
on  the  east  and  south-east  rise  ranges  of  the  Altai 
Mountains.  Throughout  the  lowlands  rich  black  earth, 
which  has  proved  to  be  the  most  fertile  soil  of  Siberia, 
abounds,  and  hence  doubtless  the  attraction  which  has 
brought  settlers  to  these  parts  in  such  large  numbers 
during  recent  years.  For  long,  attempts  were  made  to 
protect  the  Altai  lands  from  the  intrusion  of  immi- 
grants ;  but  since  1865,  when  the  district  was  first 
opened  to  colonisation,  the  influx  of  settlers  has  steadily 
increased,  as  many  as  300,000  being  said  to  have  settled 
in  the  Cabinet  lands  of  his  Majesty  within  the  last  ten 
years  of  the  past  century.  Agriculture  is  consequently 
the  predominant  occupation  of  the  people,  and  though 
only  a  fraction  of  the  total  arable  land  is  sown,  a  large 
surplus  of  grain  is  available  in  normal  years  for  export 
to  Eastern  Siberia  and  other  parts  of  the  empire.  The 
recent  three  years'  famine  caused  by  drought  has  there- 
fore been  a  severe  blow  to  the  prosperity  of  the  country, 
and  though  the  harvest  of  1903  promised  to  be  a  fair 
one,  it  could  only  go  a  part  of  the  way  towards  recom- 
pensing the  settlers  for  the  heavy  loss  which  they  have 
recently  sustained.  But  later  events — the  war  in  the 
Far  East — are  likely  to  bring  about  a  still  greater 
measure  of  depression,  if,  as  is  probable,  troops  are  to 
be  levied  in  Siberia,  a  proceeding  which,  in  the  opinion 
of  well-qualified  judges,  would  mean  the  depopulation 
of  whole  villages. 

The  system  of  husbandry  adopted  is  characterised  by 
the  fallow-land  system,  and  to  the  eye  of  the  English- 


SIBERIAN  AGRICULTURE.  269 

man,  accustomed  to  the  neat  enclosures  of  an  agricul- 
tural district  in  his  own  country,  which  once  led  an 
American  critic  to  describe  it  as  having  the  appearance 
of  being  finished  with  a  pencil  rather  than  with  a 
plough,  the  land  has  a  ragged  and  untidy  appearance. 
Hedges  and  ditches  there  are  none,  but  patches  of  corn 
alternate  with  tracts  of  grass  or  waste  land,  with  no 
apparent  method  or  order.  Driving  from  the  foot  of 
the  Altai  Mountains  to  the  town  of  Biisk,  a  distance  of 
upwards  of  fifty  miles,  in  September,  I  received  the 
impression  of  passing  over  a  continuous  patch -work 
quilt,  masses  of  golden  corn  shining  in  a  setting  of 
grass  and  flowers,  alternating  with  patches  of  newly- 
stacked  hay. 

There  are  no  signs  of  manure  of  any  sort  being  in 
use,  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and  the  vast  amount  of 
virgin  land  merely  awaiting  the  plough,  being  con- 
ducive no  doubt  to  apathy  and  carelessness  on  the  part 
of  the  farmer  with  regard  to  the  future.  "  The  land," 
as  Mr  Simpson  remarks,  "  is  very  rich,  and  there  is  a 
royal  waste  of  everything — of  time,  of  space,  of  natural 
products."^  Your  Siberian  peasant  sows  |  his  seed  and 
then  sits  down  and  placidly  waits  for  it  to  grow  and 
ripen.  It  does  not  seem  to  occur  to  him,  as  it  does  to 
the  onlooker,  that  however  fertile  the  soil  the  phos- 
phates must  some  time  become  exhausted,  and  that 
however  plentiful  the  virgin  land,  a  day  will  come 
when  its  limit  will  have  been  reached.  When  these 
things  come  to  pass  he  will  doubtless  learn  wisdom  ;  in 
the  meantime  he  is  blissfully  content. 

This  is  not  all  that  strikes  the  Englishman,  however, 
if  he  happens  to  be  of  an  observant  turn  of  mind.  For 
to  any  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  note  it,  the  absence 
of  English-made  agricultural   implements  is    painfully 

^  Sidelights  on  Siberia.     J.  Y.  Simpson. 


270  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


obvious.  Ploughs  that  are  not  of  Russian  manufacture 
bear  the  names  of  American  and  German  firms,  while 
M'Cormick  reapers  and  Deering  mowers  bear  witness 
on  all  sides  to  the  success  which  has  attended  the 
energy  and  enterprise  of  our  cousins  across  the  Atlantic. 
Siberia  is  a  vast  agricultural  country,  which  must  offer 
a  steadily  increasing  market  for  agricultural  machinery 
— a  fact  which  does  not  seem  to  have  been  appreciated 
by  our  own  manufacturers.  So,  as  I  found  before  long, 
with  everything  else.  You  may  travel  far  in  Siberia 
with  the  fixed  intention  of  finding  something  of  Eng- 
lish make,  and  fail.  I  think  a  Merry  weather  fire-engine, 
the  chemical  balances  used  in  the  gold-smelting  labora- 
tory at  Irkutsk,  and  the  "  Morgan  "  crucibles  of  world 
renown  used  in  the  same  place,  about  exhaust  the  list 
of  English  articles  which  I  saw. 

And  when  you  begin  to  wonder  why,  and  to  search 
for  the  reason,  you  are  reluctantly  compelled  to  admit 
that  the  fault  lies  at  our  own  door.  No  trouble  is 
taken  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  people. 
Catalogues,  when  they  are  sent  at  all,  are  almost  in- 
variably sent  in  English — I  know  of  only  one  honour- 
able exception — and  might  just  as  well  be  written  in 
Sanskrit. -"^  Specimens  of  the  article  required  are  re- 
fused, a  ridiculous  economy,  since  nothing  will  induce 
the  Siberian  to  buy  what  he  is  unable  first  to  see 
working  for  himself;  and  further,  long  credits,  which 
are  invariable  in  the  country,  are  rigorously  tabooed. 
So  the  wily  German  and  the  astute  American  "  travel- 
ler "  steps  in,  and  before  we  realise  what  has  occurred 
the  market  is  gone. 

^  The  same  lament  comes  from  other  quarters.  Compare  the  report  of 
the  British  Vice-Consul  at  Resht  for  1902-3,  in  which  he  states  that  cata- 
logues sent  to  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  are  in  the  majority  of  cases 
useless,  owing  to  the  fact  that  Persians  cannot  read  them. 


SIBERIAN   VILLAGES.  271 

After  agriculture  the  rearing  of  live-stock  forms  an 
important  element  in  the  husbandry  of  the  country, 
horses,  cattle,  and  sheep  being  raised  in  large  numbers, 
especially  in  the  Barnaul  and  Biisk  districts.  Bee- 
keeping, too,  is  largely  practised,  enormous  quantities 
of  honey  and  wax  being  produced  in  the  Biisk  and 
Zeminogorsk  districts,  and  when  travelling  through  the 
country  I  often  obtained  excellent  honey  from  the 
villagers.  The  villages  are  invariably  composed  of 
wooden  houses  built  of  rough  unsquared  logs,  moss 
and  earth  being  forced  into  the  interstices  to  keep  out 
the  cold.  The  windows  are  double  for  the  same  reason 
— a  good  enough  reason,  too,  when  we  remember  that 
the  thermometer  drops  to  70°  below  zero  (Fahrenheit), 
without  causing  surprise  to  any  one.^  Originality 
plays  no  part  in  their  construction,  one  being  like 
unto  another ;  "  indeed,"  to  quote  Mr  Simpson  once 
more,  "  they  only  differ  in  one  respect — their  linear 
extent ;  otherwise  they  are  all  at  the  same  stage  of 
development."  I  saw  the  interiors  of  many  such  dwell- 
ings, often  spending  the  night  in  the  house  of  some 
villager  when  travelling,  and  was  struck  with  the 
uniformity  of  their  appearance.  The  rooms,  of  which 
there  were  generally  two  or  three,  were  always  fur- 
nished on  the  most  simple  plan  —  a  table  standing 
against  a  bare  wall,  a  few  chairs,  and  a  large  wooden 
bed  piled  up  with  cushions  and  blankets,  constituting 
the  bed-  and  sitting-room,  while  a  huge  whitewashed 
brick  stove  and  oven  combined  monopolised  the  greater 
part  of  the  other,  which  served  as  kitchen.  The  walls 
were  seldom  adorned  with  anything  beyond  an  ikon 
and  print  of  the  Tsar  and  Tsaritsa,  and  never  once  did  I 
see  a  sign  of  those  odds  and  ends,  such  as  ornaments, 

At  Novo  Nicholaewsk  on  the  Siberian  railway  the  greatest  amount  of 
cold  registered  is  usually  46°  Keamur  =  103°  of  frost  Fahrenheit. 


272  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


pictures,  photographs,  &c.,  which  make  the  lares  and 
penates  of  an  English  cottage. 

The  villager  himself  is  a  sad-looking  man,  which  is, 
perhaps,  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  he  only  reflects  the 
circumstances  of  his  existence.  The  excessive  length 
of  his  hair  and  the  fulness  of  his  bushy  beard  give 
him  a  somewhat  wild  and  uncouth  appearance,  and  his 
mirth  is  as  brief  as  the  short  summer  he  enjoys,  the 
usual  hard  expression  which  he  wears  being  but  a 
reflex  of  the  long  gloomy  winter  which  broods  over  his 
land.  He  wears  a  cotton  blouse,  generally  of  scarlet, 
or  one  of  the  many  shades  which  scarlet  assumes 
under  the  influence  of  sun  and  rain  on  its  road  to  an 
ultimate  neutral  tint,  thick  baggy  trousers,  whose 
shape  is  the  result  of  chance  rather  than  design,  and 
the  ends  of  which  are  tucked  into  big  top-boots  made 
for  comfort  rather  than  for  elegance.  In  addition  to 
a  trouser  end,  a  long-stemmed  pipe  is,  as  a  rule,  kept 
in  one,  and  a  wad  of  tobacco,  rolled  up  in  an  indescrib- 
able rag,  in  the  other,  besides  other  small  odds  and 
ends  which  might  be  found  in  an  ordinary  being's 
pockets.  He  gets  solemnly  drunk  on  vodka  when  he 
has  nothing  better  to  do,  which  is  mostly,  and  is  apt 
to  become  aggressive  under  its  influence. 

Vodka,  indeed,  is  likely  to  prove  the  curse  of  Siberia. 
I  have  related  in  a  previous  chapter  how  the  post- 
master one  Sunday  evening  told  me  he  would  bring 
the  blacksmith  to  repair  my  tarantass  if  he  was  not 
drunk,  and  on  another  occasion  I  found  the  postmaster 
himself  gloriously  intoxicated  at  nine  o'clock  in  the 
miorning.  Once  in  the  small  town  of  Zeminogorsk  I 
came  to  blows  with  an  inebriated  peasant,  and  narrowly 
escaped  being  locked  up  by  an  oflicious  police-ofiicer 
for  setting  upon  an  inoflensive(?)  subject  of  the  Tsar  ! 
To  prove  that  I  was  not  the  victim  of  chance,  it  is  only 


THE   GOVERNMENT  VODKA    MONOPOLY.  273 


necessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  writings  of  other 
travellers  in  Russia  and  Siberia.  Mr  Henry  Norman, 
for  instance,  writes  of  the  Russian  peasant  that  "  he 
gets  wildly  drunk  at  Easter  for  joy  to  think  that 
Christ  is  risen,  and  at  other  times  for  no  reason  at 
all " ;  1  while  Mr  Simpson,  in  his  '  Sidelights  on  Siberia,' 
records  that  "  Sunday  evening  is  usually  spent  in 
rioting  and  drunkenness.  .  .  .  From  Tomsk  onwards  it 
was  not  once  or  twice  merely  that  we  passed  men  lying 
in  the  centre  of  the  village  road  ;  and  often  late  in  the 
evening  small  groups  of  inebriates  stumbled  along  the 
uneven  track,  unduly  emphasising  with  each  loss  of 
balance  sundry  snatches  of  their  weird  minor  airs." 

It  has  been  suggested  by  some  that  the  Government 
vodka  monopoly,  which  is  gradually  being  introduced 
throughout  the  Russian  Empire,  will  tend  to  lessen 
drunkenness.  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  I  am  quite 
unable  to  agree  with  this  far  too  sanguine  expectation. 
To  begin  with,  where  the  monopoly  is  in  force,  vodka 
may  not  be  consumed  on  the  premises  where  it  is  sold. 
Result  :  the  peasant  cannot  buy  a  glass  of  vodka,  so 
he  buys  a  bottle,  walks  outside,  empties  the  bottle 
(down  his  throat!),  returns  to  the  shop,  and  receives 
back  value  in  money  for  the  empty  bottle.  At  the 
settlement  of  Novo  Nicholaewsk — of  which  more  anon 
— the  monopoly  came  into  force  in  November  1902. 
In  the  course  of  the  first  ten  months  the  takings 
amounted  to  Ij  million  roubles !  That  is  to  say, 
taking  fifty  kopecks  a  pint  as  the  average  price  paid 
for  vodka,  the  amount  consumed  in  ten  months  was 
375,000  gallons!  I  have  secured  the  figures  for  the 
province  of  Moscow,  with  a  population  of  just  under 
24  millions,  during  the  year  1902,  which  are  equally 
instructive.      Six    hundred    and    eleven    Government 

1  All  the  Eussias. 


274  CENTRAL   SIBERIA. 


shops  retailed  8,139,530  gallons  of  vodka,  having  a 
total  value  of  £3,242,341,  the  clear  profit  amounting 
to  £2,410,568.  This  shows  an  increase  of  profit  over 
the  previous  year  of  £1,252,528,  or  nearly  100  per 
cent !  Excellent  for  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
no  doubt,  though  hardly  an  inspiring  outlook  from  the 
temperance  point  of  view.  What  a  pity  the  anti- 
compensationists — et  hoc  genus  omne — don't  live  in 
Russia ! 

But  my  discussions  on  the  Russian  peasant  and  his 
faults  are  carrying  me  away  from  the  subject  in  hand, 
which  is  the  government  of  Tomsk.  If  the  villages 
are  severe  in  their  simplicity,  the  towns  show  signs  of 
a  higher  ambition.  Barnaul,  capital  of  the  district  of 
the  same  name,  comes  as  a  surprise.  Here  large  build- 
ings of  brick  and  stone  are  plentiful,  there  are  broad 
streets  and  commodious  shops,  a  substantial,  almost 
magnificent.  Government  House  rises  in  the  centre  of 
the  town,  and  the  churches,  of  course,  form  conspicuous 
objects.  Altogether,  the  town  wears  an  air  of  pros- 
perity and  progress.  Houses  of  wood  still  exist  in 
parts,  but  in  many  places  these  may  be  seen  in  process 
of  demolition,  while  superior  buildings  of  brick  are 
rising,  phoenix-like,  from  their  ashes.  I  went  into  one 
of  the  chief  shops,  which  displayed  an  assortment  of 
goods  from  bicycles  to  tooth-brushes.  A  map  was  my 
modest  requirement,  and  a  courteous  shop-walker  sent 
off  an  assistant  to  unearth  the  maps  from  the  stationery 
department.  In  the  meantime,  was  there  anything  else 
he  could  show  me  ?  He  had  several  excellent  gramo- 
phones, recently  imported — there  were  half  a  dozen  on 
the  counter,  one  of  which  was  braying  forth  what  I 
took  to  be  a  Russian  comic  song,  in  the  harsh  metallic 
cadence  common  to  gramophones.  No,  I  was  in  no 
need  of  a  gramophone  at  the  moment.     Well,  then,  a 


A   LAND   OF  WOODS  AND  MOUNTAINS.  275 

bicycle  or  revolver  ?  No,  I  did  not  require  the  former, 
and  was  already  provided  with  the  latter.  I  saw 
machinery,  tools,  glass-ware,  silver- ware,  jewellery, 
hats,  clothes,  boots,  toilet  accessories,  saddlery,  oilman's 
stores,  and  confectionery  looming  large  behind  gramo- 
phone, bicycle,  and  revolver  ;  but  fortunately  the  maps 
were  produced  at  this  moment,  and  I  was  spared 
further  inspection  of  goods  for  which  I  had  no  possible 
use. 

Beyond  Barnaul,  that  is  to  say  higher  up  the  river, 
is  Biisk,  which  is  Barnaul  on  a  smaller  scale,  with 
electric  light  and  a  bishop's  house  thrown  in,  and 
beyond  Biisk  rise  the  wooded  slopes  and  snow -clad 
peaks  of  the  Altai  highlands.  The  face  of  the  country 
here  assumes  a  complete  change.  You  pass  from  a 
level  almost  treeless  plain  into  a  land  of  woods  and 
mountains,  of  rushing  streams  and  frost-bound  heights, 
of  lovely  valleys,  where  grass  and  wild-flowers  grow  in 
riotous  profusion,  and  where  villages  nestle  snugly  in 
sheltered  hollows.  Agriculture  is  less  conspicuous  here  : 
herds  of  horses  and  flocks  of  sheep  form  the  wealth  of 
the  people,  and  trapping  and  hunting  are  among  their 
favourite  occupations.  The  last  Russian  village  of  any 
importance  is  Onguidai,  250  versts  from  Biisk,  beyond 
which  the  population  is  reduced  to  wandering  Kalmuks, 
who  live  scattered  widely  over  the  country  in  round  felt 
tents.  After  travelling  for  500  versts  from  Biisk,  yet 
another  change  comes  over  the  land,  tree -life  ceases 
abruptly,  agriculture  becomes  quite  impossible,  and  you 
debouch  on  to  a  bare  bleak  plateau  on  the  Mongolian 
frontier. 

Kosh-Agach — such  is  the  name  of  the  district  we 
have  reached — began  with  a  church,  erected  upwards  of 
thirty  years  ago  for  the  benefit  of  the  Kalmuk  converts 
to  orthodoxy.     Then  the  prospect  of  trade  with   the 


276  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


Monofols  attracted  the  merchant,  who  built  him  wooden 
houses  on  the  banks  of  the  Chuya  river.  Now  there 
are  ten  merchants,  forming  a  little  colony  on  the  edge 
of  the  bleak  plateau,  pushing  their  trade  into  Mongolia, 
and  buying  the  produce  of  that  country  in  return. 
Manufactured  and  millinery  goods,  iron  and  copper 
wares,  tanned  leather  and  maral  horns  pass  into  Mon- 
golia, and  in  return  furs,  wool,  skins,  brick  tea,  silk 
stuffs,  and  small  wares  of  Chinese  manufacture  are 
brought  into  Russia.  This  trade,  which  has  so  far 
attained  a  value  of  only  a  few  hundred  thousand 
roubles,  is  likely  to  show  an  increased  development 
before  long,  since  the  authorities  have  been  engaged 
during  the  past  two  years  in  constructing  a  road,  at  a 
cost  of  65,000  roubles  (roughly  £6500),  from  Onguidai, 
which  is  now  sufficiently  near  completion  to  admit  of 
the  passage  of  light  vehicles  for  the  whole  distance 
to  the  frontier,  whence  a  caravan  route  leads  to  Kobdo, 
Uliissatai,  and  Urga,  the  chief  centres  of  Mongolian 
trade.  ^  At  present  Mongolia  can  only  be  described  as 
a  poor  country ;  but  a  great  future  lies  before  it  when 

^  Since  writing  these  words,  I  learn  from  Siberia  that  the  road  has 
already  given  a  considerable  impetus  to  Eussian  trade  with  Mongolia, 
whence  increasing  quantities  of  sheep's  wool,  camel  hair,  prepared  felt, 
hides,  and  skins  are  being  obtained.  Trade  with  this  country  is  also  being 
stimulated  by  the  opening  up  of  a  water  route  via  the  lower  Irtish,  the 
Nor-Zaisan  Lake,  and  the  Black  Irtish  river,  up  which  steamers  and  barges 
have  now  been  run  for  three  years  in  succession  by  three  merchants  of 
Semipalatinsk,  who  have  established  a  station  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kaldjir 
river,  a  tributary  of  the  Black  Irtish.  In  the  course  of  last  season  8000 
tons  of  merchandise  were  thus  carried,  and  two  new  steamers  are  being 
built  with  a  Grovernment  subsidy,  to  be  launched  in  the  present  year.  The 
present  station  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kaldjir  river  is  45  miles  from  the 
Russian  town  of  Zaisansk,  150  miles  from  the  Mongolian  town  of  Tchu- 
gutchak  and  375  miles  from  Kobdo.  A  party  of  surveyors  and  scientists 
were  under  orders  to  proceed  on  an  expedition  of  exploration  with  a  view 
to  finding  the  best  I'oute  to  this  latter  town  ;  but  owing  to  the  outbreak  of 
war  and  the  consequent  withdrawal  of  all  extraordinary  expenditure  on  the 
part  of  the  Government  the  expedition  has  been  postponed. 


TOMSK  CAPITAL   OF  SIBERIA.  277 

the  untold  mineral  wealth  of  which  it  is  known  to  be 
possessed  comes  to  be  extracted  from  the  bosom  of  the 
earth,  and  it  requires  no  great  powers  of  perception  to 
perceive  to  whom  the  bulk  of  it  will  fall. 

Such  in  brief  is  the  Government  of  Tomsk,  a  vast 
territory  embracing  some  of  the  richest  and  most  pros- 
perous tracts  of  Siberia,  or  rather,  I  should  perhaps  say, 
those  parts  of  Tomsk  which  I  had  opportunities  of 
visiting.  I  have  given  some  description  of  the  country 
and  its  people  ;  it  remains  for  me  before  concluding  this 
chapter  to  say  a  few  words  about  its  capital. 

Tomsk — so  called  from  its  situation  on  the  river 
Tom  —  has  a  mystery  of  its  own,  but  it  is  in 
no  way  connected  with  the  railway.  The  so-called 
mystery  of  the  railway,  —  why  Tomsk,  the  univer- 
sity town,  the  most  populous  city  in  Siberia,  and 
prospective  capital  of  5,000,000  square  miles  of  terri- 
tory, was  severely  left  on  one  side  when  the  great  rail- 
way came  to  be  built, — is  in  reality  no  mystery  at  all, 
least  of  all  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  concerned. 
The  said  inhabitants  were  proud — their  position  they 
thought  was  unassailable — and  they  shouted  defiance  at 
the  engineers  when  they  demanded  their  price  for  in- 
cluding Tomsk  in  their  scheme  of  railway  construction. 
But  they  forgot  that  they  were  in  Russia  and  were 
dealing  with  Russian  engineers,  so  Tomsk  was  left  out 
in  the  cold,  and  is  to  this  day  left  at  the  terminus  of 
a  branch  59  miles  from  the  main  line.  Now  they  would 
willingly  give  twice  the  amount  originally  demanded, 
but  it  is  too  late.  The  whole  business  is  not  a  creditable 
one,  and  casts  a  serious  reflection  on  the  honour  of  the 
engineers  who  built  the  line,  and  perhaps  the  less  said 
about  it  the  better. 

The  real  mystery  of  Tomsk  centres  round  the  tomb  of 
a  pious  hermit,  one  Feodor  Kuzmitch,  who  died  in  1864, 


278  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


and  was  buried  by  the  monks  of  the  Alexis  monastery 
in  the  town,  leaving  behind  him  a  memory  which  at  the 
present  day  is  held  in  reverent  awe  by  the  people.  But 
there  was  something  more  than  the  extreme  piety  and 
asceticism  of  his  life  to  excite  the  worship  which  is  now 
accorded  him ;  and  herein  lies  the  mystery,  for  there  is 
no  doubt  whatsoever  that,  whoever  the  wanderer  who 
reached  Tomsk  in  1849  to  make  it  his  final  home  may 
in  reality  have  been,  the  vast  majority  of  its  inhabitants 
are  firmly  convinced  that  in  the  person  of  the  lonely 
monk  there  was  living  among  them  no  less  a  personage 
than  the  abdicated  monarch,  Alexander  I. 

The  story  is  one  of  absorbing  interest,  and  is  worthy 
of  a  foremost  place  among  those  strange  romances  with 
which  the  annals  of  Russian  history  are  fraught. 

As  far  as  recorded  history  goes,  we  are  led  to  believe 
that  Alexander  I.  died  in  November,  in  the  year  1825, 
at  the  town  of  Taganrog,  whither  he  had  repaired  for 
the  benefit  of  his  health.  But,  as  is  not  unusually  the 
case  in  the  history  of  Russia,  there  is  much  that  requires 
explanation  and  elucidation  in  connection  with  what  is 
described  by  the  historian  Bambaud  as  "  the  premature 
and  mysterious  death  of  Alexander."  The  circumstances 
attendant  on  his  departure  from  his  capital  are  suffi- 
ciently strange.  "  At  the  moment  of  his  departure 
he  appears  to  have  been  shaken  by  gloomy  presenti- 
ments, and  insisted  on  a  requiem  mass  being  said  at  the 
monastery  of  Saint  Alexander  Nevski.  In  broad  day- 
light, lighted  tapers  were  left  in  his  room.  ...  At 
Taganrog  Alexander  received  circumstantial  accounts 
as  to  the  conspiracy  of  the  Society  of  the  South  and  its 
schemes  of  regicide.  Cruel  recollections  of  1801  may 
have  mingled  with  his  melancholy.  He  thought  sadly 
of  the  terrible  embarrassments  which  he  would  bequeath 
to  his  successor  ;  of  his  lost  illusions ;    of  his  liberal 


AN   UNKNOWN  MONK.  279 

sympathies  of  former  days,  which  in  Poland,  as  in 
Russia,  had  ended  in  a  reaction ;  of  his  broken  pur- 
poses and  changed  life."  ^ 

His  body  was  of  course  carried  to  St  Petersburg  for 
burial,  but  the  people  of  Tomsk  will  tell  you  that 
spurious  corpses  are  easy  to  obtain  in  Kussia,  and  that 
whosoever  it  may  have  been,  it  was  not  the  body  of 
Alexander  over  which  was  read  the  royal  funeral  service 
of  1825.  An  old  Cossack  officer  told  Mr  Simpson  that 
he  was  a  boy  in  St  Petersburg  at  the  time  when  the 
remains  of  the  deceased  emperor  were  brought  up  from 
the  south  ;  and  that  he  remembered  distinctly  how  it 
was  quite  openly  remarked  that  the  body  was  not  that 
of  Alexander,  and  how  it  was  a  cause  of  comment  at 
the  time  that  people  were  not  allowed  to  pass  by  and 
look  on  the  face  of  their  late  emperor  as  he  lay  in  state, 
according  to  custom  ;  ^  and  I  was  told  stories  to  the 
same  effect  in  Tomsk.  So  much  for  the  accredited 
history  of  the  death  of  Alexander.  Now  for  the  version 
which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  chronicles  of  recognised 
historians. 

Not  very  long  after  the  supposed  death  of  that 
monarch,  a  vagrant,  having  in  his  possession  a  horse  of 
a  quality  which  did  not,  in  the  opinion  of  the  police, 
coincide  with  his  humble  status,  turned  up  on  the 
eastern  borders  of  Russia,  and,  as  he  refused  to  explain 
how  he  came  by  his  property,  was  beaten  and  despatched 
across  the  frontier  to  Siberia.  The  first  years  of  his  life 
in  that  country  were  spent  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Krasnoyarsk  ;  but  in  1832  he  moved  to  a  village  twenty 
miles  from  Tomsk,  where  he  lived  a  retired  and  ascetic 
life  for  seventeen  years.  In  1849  he  came  to  Tomsk 
itself,  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his  life  amid  the  humble 

^  History  of  Eussia.     Alfred  Eambaud. 
2  Sidelights  on  Siberia.     J.  Y.  Simpson. 


280  CENTRAL  SIBERIA. 


surroundings  of  a  small  wooden  house,  18  ft.  by  20  ft., 
which  is  known  to  this  day  as  "Alexander's  House." 
The  simple  furniture  he  used  is  still  preserved,  but  the 
simplicity  and  gloom  of  the  apartment  are  now  relieved 
by  many  gilded  ikons,  and  by  portraits  of  Alexander  I. 
and  Feodor  Kuzmitch,  placed  side  by  side  to  accentuate 
their  strong  resemblance.  The  place  is  looked  upon  as 
holy  ground,  a  shed  has  been  raised  over  the  whole 
building  to  protect  it,  and  services  are  held  there  every 
Sunday. 

Papers  proving  his  identity  are  said  to  have  been 
taken  to  St  Petersburg  after  his  death  at  his  own 
request  by  his  landlord,  Khromov  ;  and  I  was  told  of  a 
curious  incident  which  is  likewise  held  to  be  proof  of 
his  being  no  other  than  the  abdicated  monarch. 

While  heir  to  the  throne,  it  is  asserted  that  Alex- 
ander II.,  during  his  tour  in  Siberia,  visited  the  lonely 
monk  near  Krasnoyarsk.  For  long  he  was  closeted 
with  him,  until  at  length  the  curiosity  of  the  village 
priest,  in  whose  house  the  interview  took  place,  could 
no  longer  be  restrained,  and  gazing  through  the  key- 
hole he  saw  to  his  astonishment  the  heir  to  the  throne 
of  all  the  Russias  humbly  kneeling  before  the  myste- 
rious monk ! 

Be  the  story  right  or  wrong,  no  amount  of  argument, 
however  forcible,  will  persuade  Siberia  that  she  was  not 
the  unwitting  host  of  a  royal  guest ;  and  almost  the 
last  thing  I  saw  in  Tomsk  was  a  humble  citizen  bowing 
and  praying  before  the  small  chapel  which  is  now  being 
erected  above  the  grave  of  the  deceased  ascetic. 

But  even  without  a  mystery  Tomsk  would  be  a 
notable  town.  It  has  a  university — the  only  one  at 
present  in  Siberia  —  with  faculties  for  medicine  and 
jurisprudence,  and  the  prospect  of  others  to  come,  at- 
tended at  the  time  of  my  visit  by  600  students.     It  has 


THE   TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE.  281 

botanical  and  zoological  museums.  It  boasts  of  its 
electric  light  and  telephones,  and  it  parades  before  you 
rows  of  massive  buildings,  which  are  in  reality  composed 
of  brick  and  stucco,  but  which  look  like  stone.  It 
provides  fine  shops  for  you,  and  is  building  arcades ;  it 
has  theatres  and  hotels,  and,  last  but  not  least,  it  is 
possessed  of  a  technological  institute  of  which  any  city 
in  the  world  might  be  proud.  This  latter  building  is 
magnificent.  It  is  four  storeys  high,  and  covers  a  large 
area  of  ground  on  both  sides  of  a  wide  street.  Drawing 
and  elementary  instruction  had  been  started  for  three 
years  ;  chemistry  was  being  begun  when  I  was  there, 
and  physical  science  and  mineralogy  were  shortly  to  be 
embarked  upon.  Buildings  for  engineering  were  being 
added,  and  altogether  it  was  expected  that  additions 
would  be  made  during  the  next  five  years.  The  whole 
institute  is  lighted  with  electric  light  and  artificially 
heated,  and  the  laboratories  are  fitted  with  all  the 
latest  appliances  from  German  manufactories. 

I  have  said  much  that  is  good  about  Tomsk  :  there 
are  some  things  that  are  bad  also.  The  shops  are  in- 
ordinately expensive,  and  the  streets  and  roads  recall 
the  horrors  of  Constantinople.  But  on  the  whole  Tomsk 
has  every  right  to  be  proud.  Its  50,000  inhabitants 
place  it  alongside  of  Irkutsk,  as  the  two  most  popular 
cities  in  Siberia,  and  its  university  will  ensure  its  re- 
maining one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  country,  even 
should  its  present  unfortunate  position  involve  its 
decline  in  commercial  activity  before  others  more  for- 
tunately placed. 


282  THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 


CHAPTER   XXIV. 

THE    GREAT    SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 

The  spirit  of  discovery  of  the  sixteenth  century— Yermak— The  conquest  of 
Siberia— The  treaty  of  Nertchinsk— Count  Muravieflf— Need  of  com- 
munications in  Siberia — Early  railway  schemes- The  Perm-Tiumen 
line  built— The  imperial  rescript  of  March  1891— The  cost  of  the 
Siberian  railway  — The  price  of  a  ticket  —  Western  Siberia  — The 
settlement  of  Novo  Nicholaewsk— Dairy-farming— The  junction  for 
Tomsk  —  Deficiencies  of  the  railway  track  — The  monotony  of  the 
journey  —  Irkutsk  —  Its  origin  —  Its  present  position  —  Its  chief 
buildings — The  gold-smelting  laboratory. 

The  sixteenth  century  is  one  which  has  left  an  indelible 
mark  in  the  annals  of  Western  nations.  The  spirit  of 
unrest  which  had  long  lain  dormant  in  the  peoples  of 
Europe  burst  forth  simultaneously  in  half-a-dozen 
countries,  impelling  men  irresistibly  to  leave  their 
homes  and  penetrate  to  the  uttermost  ends  of  the 
earth.  A  veritable  lust  for  discovery  set  in,  fostering 
in  the  hearts  of  the  intrepid  adventurers  of  the  day 
seed  which  was  destined  to  give  birth  in  due  course 
to  the  empires  of  the  world.  So  it  happened  that 
while  the  world  was  still  marvelling  at  the  discoveries 
of  John  Cabot  and  Christopher  Columbus  beyond  the 
Western  seas,  and  speculating  on  the  possibilities 
opened  up  by  the  successful  outcome  of  the  daring 
voyage  of  Vasco  da  Gama  in  the  East,  there  arose,  in 
a  wild  and  lawless  district  bordering  the  banks  of  the 
Volga  and  the  Don,   a  man  who  was  destined  to  set 


THE   CONQUEST  OF  SIBERIA.  283 


going  on  its  long  career  the  natural  tendency  of  the 
Slav  race  towards  the  East,  and  by  force  of  char- 
acter and  his  own  extraordinary  personality  to  start 
the  rapidly  awakening  power  of  Russia  ^  on  the  thorny 
road  to  empire. 

Vassil,  the  son  of  Timothy  Povolski,  known  to  the 
world  by  his  curious  nickname,  Yermak  (millstone), 
given  him  by  his  fellow -boatmen,  pervaded  by  the 
same  spirit  of  unrest  which  was  stirring  the  pulses  of 
"Western  Europe,  early  developed  from  boatman  into 
Cossack  chief,  a  synonym  in  those  days  for  pirate 
king.  A  career  of  successful  piracy  on  the  Volga  was 
brought  to  an  abrupt  termination  when  news  of  the 
doings  of  the  chief  and  his  desperadoes  was  brought 
to  the  ears  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  who,  incensed  at  such 
flagrant  defiance  of  law  and  order,  despatched  an  army 
to  put  an  end  to  the  freebooters.  Thus  does  the  fate 
of  men  and  nations  hang  ever  on  the  trend  of  small 
events.  Driven  from  his  former  haunts,  compelled  to 
seek  safety  on  the  confines  of  the  country,  the  pirate 
chief  came  under  the  eye  of  the  merchants  Stroganoff, 
already  grown  rich  and  powerful  on  possessions  on  the 
Kama  :  and  entering-  their  service,  volunteered  to  lead 

'CD  ' 

an  expedition  for  them  across  the  Urals  in  quest  of  the 
rich  furs  of  the  coveted  land  of  Yugra.  On  New 
Year's  Day  1581  (then  September  1st),  he  started  at 
the  head  of  800  men  for  the  unknown  land  beyond 
the  mountains :  in  less  than  two  years  he  had  won  an 
empire  for  his  sovereign  and  a  pardon  for  himself. 
Such  was  the  beginning  of  the  movement  which  has 
given  five  million  square  miles  to  a  Russian  Tsar,  and 
won  for  a  nation  still  young — fit  compensation  for  the 
stormy  days  of  childhood  passed  under  the  galling  yoke 

1  The  first  man  to  assume  the  title  of  autocrat  of  all  Russia  was  Ivan  III., 
son  of  Vassil  II.,  Grand  Duke  of  Vladimir,  a  century  before  (1462). 


284  THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 

of  the  Golden  Horde — the  proud  heritage  of  one  of  the 
greatest  empires  of  the  world  ! 

The  story  of  the  exploits  of  Yermak  up  to  the  day 
of  his  violent  death  in  the  frenzied  waters  of  the 
Irtish,  while  trying  to  swim  to  safety  from  a  disas- 
trous night -attack  at  the  hands  of  his  old  enemy,  the 
Tartar  chief  Kutchum,  and  of  the  daring  feats  and 
heroic  endurance  of  the  Cossack  bands  who  took  up 
the  task  thus  started,  as  they  pressed  steadfastly  on 
towards  the  East,  harassed  by  the  savage  tribes  they 
encountered,  cut  off  by  vast  stretches  of  inhospitable 
country  from  their  base,  and  exposed  to  the  rigour  of 
the  terrible  Siberian  winter,  is  one  of  surpassing  in- 
terest, but  one  which  it  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of 
the  present  chapter  to  portray.  Suffice  it  to  say  that 
little  less  than  half  a  century  after  Yermak  had  led 
his  band  across  the  Urals,  thanks  to  the  dauntless 
courage  and  perseverance  of  these  pioneers,  the  limit 
of  the  continent  was  reached  on  the  Sea  of  Okhotsk ; 
while,  in  strong  contrast  to  this  activity  and  progress 
in  the  north,  stands  the  indifference  of  the  Government 
at  Moscow  and  the  incompetence  of  their  envoy  in  the 
Amur  region  on  the  south,  who,  baffled  by  the  ability 
of  a  Jesuit  priest,-^  signed  away  the  ground  won  under 
exceptional  difficulties  by  a  succession  of  heroes,  and 
put  a  check  upon  Russian  expansion  in  the  direction 
of  the  Pacific,  which  was  only  removed  a  century  and 
a  half  later  by  the  genius  of  a  man  who  did  for  E-ussia 
in  the  Far  East  all  and  more  than  Yermak  had  done 
for  her  in  the  West. 

^  The  treaty  of  Nertchinsk,  the  first  ever  concluded  by  China  with  a 
foreign  power,  was  signed  in  1689  by  the  Russian  envoy  Golovin  and  the 
Jesuit  fathers,  Gerbillon  and  Pereira,  who  accompanied  the  Chinese  Pleni- 
potentiary. By  its  terms  Russia  gave  up  the  Amur  and  retired  behind 
the  river  Gorbitza,  the  line  of  mountains  bounding  on  the  north  the  basin 
of  the  Amur  and  the  river  Argun. 


COUNT  MURAVIEFF  IN  THE  EAST.  285 


Count  Muravieff,  appointed  Governor -General  of 
Eastern  Siberia  in  1847,  broke  the  long  spell  of  in- 
activity which  had  sterilised  Russian  enterprise  east 
of  the  Baikal  for  160  years,  and,  in  spite  of  violent 
opposition  from  headquarters,  and  innumerable  obstacles 
on  the  spot,  succeeded,  before  he  laid  down  his  staff 
of  office,  in  wiping  out  the  inglorious  treaty  of  Nert- 
chinsk,  in  bringing  the  whole  of  the  Amur  region 
under  the  yoke  of  Russia,  and  establishing  her  firmly 
on  the  Pacific  seaboard  as  far  south  as  the  borders  of 
Korea,  thus  putting  the  finishing  touches  to  the  great 
movement  begun  three  centuries  before,  which  has  had 
for  effect  the  inclusion  of  half  a  continent  in  the 
dominions  of  the  Tsar, 

I  have  given  this  short  sketch  of  the  Conquest  of 
Siberia  because  it  explains  the  circumstances  which 
have  led  up  to  the  subject  of  this  chapter,  the  con- 
struction of  the  greatest  railway  which  the  world 
has  seen.  Towns  and  villages  followed  in  the  wake 
of  Cossack  pioneers,  and  with  the  establishment  of  a 
sedentary  form  of  occupation,  the  necessity  of  improved 
communication,  without  which  the  administration  of  law 
and  order  in  such  wide  regions  was  impossible,  forced 
itself  upon  the  attention  of  the  central  Government  at 
St  Petersburg.  1  Post-roads,  such  as  still  afford  the 
only  means  of  communication  in  many  parts  of  Asiatic 
Russia,  were  inaugurated,  stretching  from  town  to 
town,  until  the  links  were  at  length  forged  into  a 
great  chain,  which  reached  across  Asia  from  the  Urals 
to  the  Pacific.  Later  on  a  further  advance  was  made 
by  the  introduction  of  steam  traffic  on   the  principal 

1  The  centre  of  administration  was  moved  from  Moscow  to  St  Petersburg 
in  the  days  of  Peter  the  Great,  who  assumed  the  reins  of  government  on 
September  12,  1689,  a  fortnight  after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  of  Nert- 
chinsk. 


286  THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 

waterways  of  Siberia,  and  when  at  last  a  man  arose 
to  put  fresh  life-blood  into  the  stagnant  veins  of  Russian 
activity  in  the  East,  it  was  in  great  measure  due  to  the 
defects  inevitably  attaching  to  the  navigation  of  rivers 
themselves  frozen  for  half  the  year,  flowing  into  a 
remote  and  almost  impracticable  sea,  that  the  project 
of  constructing  railways,  to  at  least  assist  existing 
communications,  took  definite  shape. 

The  earliest  definite  suggestion  seems  to  have  come 
from  an  English  engineer,  who  proposed  to  build  a 
gigantic  horse  tramway,  extending  from  Nijni-Novgorod 
to  the  Pacific  Ocean ;  but,  as  Mr  Henry  Norman  re- 
marks, "it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment passed  over  in  silence  so  fantastic  a  scheme, 
unsupported  by  any  estimates."  ^  Another  proposal 
made  in  the  same  year  was  that  of  Colonel  Romanoff, 
for  a  carriage-road,  to  be  transformed  later  into  a  rail- 
way, between  Sophiisk  on  the  Amur  and  De  Castries 
Bay.  The  idea  of  railway  communication  having  once 
taken  root,  a  whole  host  of  proposals  of  varying  merit 
immediately  sprang  up,  including  one  by  an  American, 
Collins,  to  unite  Irkutsk  and  Chita ;  a  gigantic  scheme 
for  traversing  the  whole  region  by  three  Englishmen, 
Morrison,  Horn,  and  Sleigh ;  and  the  equally  colossal 
project  of  Sophronoff,  to  build  a  line  from  Saratof 
across  the  Steppe  via  Semipalatinsk  to  the  Amur  and 
Peking. 

After  this  many  schemes  of  a  less  ambitious  nature 
were  propounded,  the  first  tangible  result  appearing 
in  the  shape  of  a  line  built  solely  to  satisfy  the  demands 
of  the    Ural   mining   industry,   a   special  commission, 

1  In  his  '  Peoples  and  Politics  of  the  Far  East.'  The  facts  concerning  the 
proposals  for  and  eventual  construction  of  the  trans-Siberian  railway  are 
taken  from  the  above  book,  Vladimix-'a  'Russia  on  the  Pacific,'  and  the 
ofl&cial  '  Guide  to  the  Great  Siberian  Railway.' 


THE  NOTE  OF  STATE  SECRETARY  VON  HUBBENET.     287 

organised  for  the  purpose  of  selecting  the  most  suitable 
route  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  mining  industry 
and  Siberian  transport,  having  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  two  interests  were  incompatible.  This  line, 
projected  by  Colonel  Bogdanovitch,  had  for  its  starting- 
point  Perm,  and  reaching  Ekaterinburg  in  1878  was 
completed  as  far  as  Tiumen  in  1884  ;  and  it  was  not 
until  1891  that  the  much-discussed  scheme  for  a  great 
trans-continental  railway  was  finally  decided  on.  By 
this  time  there  were  three  lines,  any  one  of  which  could 
be  extended  east  beyond  the  Urals,  and  the  choice 
eventually  adopted  was  made  in  accordance  with  a 
detailed  note  presented  by  the  then  Minister  of  Ways 
and  Communications,  State  Secretary  Von  Hubbenet, 
on  November  15,  1890. 

After  pointing  out  that  the  possible  points  of  de- 
parture of  a  trans-Siberian  line  to  Nizhneudinsk  were 
(1)  Tiumen  on  the  Ural  line,  (2)  Orenburg  on  the 
Orenburg  line,  and  (3)  Mias  on  the  Zlatoust-Mias  line, 
he  demonstrated  the  advantages  of  a  line  starting  from 
the  last-named  as  being  the  shortest  from  Moscow,  the 
cheapest  to  construct,  and  the  one  passing  through  the 
most  populous  localities  of  Western  Siberia ;  while  he 
objected  to  the  Orenburg  line  on  the  grounds  of  its 
great  length  and  cost  owing  to  technical  difficulties, 
and  to  the  Tiumen  line  as  necessitating  the  further 
construction  of  a  costly  line  of  1000  versts  from  Perm 
to  Nijni-Novgorod  to  preserve  its  commercial  import- 
ance. Urged  by  the  Ministers  of  War  and  Foreign 
Affairs,  he  also  attached  great  importance  to  the  con- 
struction of  the  Ussuri  line  for  connecting  Vladivostok 
with  the  Amur  Basin,  which,  at  the  instigation  of 
Count  Ignatieff  and  Baron  Korf,  had  already  been 
sanctioned  by  the  Emperor  in  1887. 

As  a  result  of  these  representations,  the  Committee 


288  THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN   RAILWAY. 

of  Ministers  issued  an  order,  sanctioned  by  the  Emperor, 
in  February  1891,  (l)  to  approve  the  direction  of  the 
Ussuri  hne  from  Vladivostok  to  Grafskaya  station, 
(2)  to  commence  the  construction  of  the  Mias-CheHa- 
binsk  line  in  1891,  and  (3)  to  conduct  surveys  in  the 
same  year  from  Cheliabinsk  to  Tomsk  or  some  other 
point  of  the  mid  -  Siberian  section,  and  from  the  ter- 
minus of  the  first  section  of  the  Ussuri  line  to  Khar- 
barovsk,  and  by  an  imperial  rescript  issued  in  March 
1891  the  question  of  the  construction  of  the  great 
Trans-Siberian  railway  was  definitely  settled. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  in  constructing  a  line  across 
Asia,  Russia  has  become  responsible  for  one  of  the 
achievements  of  the  world.  An  English  officer,  whose 
lot  has  been  cast  for  the  most  part  in  the  East,  once 
said  to  me  that  Russia  had  done  two  big  things — she 
had  carried  on  the  Russo-Turkish  war  and  she  had 
built  the  Siberian  railway,  and  there  can  be  few  who 
will  deny  that,  as  far  at  any  rate  as  the  latter  is  con- 
cerned, he  was  undoubtedly  correct.  In  little  more 
than  ten  years  6000  miles  of  railway  have  been  built, 
and  the  journey  from  London  to  Shanghai,  even  with 
the  present  imperfect  running,  has  been  reduced  from 
upwards  of  a  month  via  the  Suez  Canal  to  nineteen 
days.  The  cost  has,  of  course,  been  enormous — far 
greater  indeed  than  it  ought  to  have  been,  and  the 
estimate  rose  as  the  line  progressed.  At  one  time 
£40,000,000  was  suggested  as  the  probable  cost  of  the 
undertaking;  but  by  the  end  of  1899  £53,000,000  had 
already  been  spent,  and  the  total  official  estimate  rose 
to  £82,500,000.  By  the  end  of  last  year  (1903)  even 
this  stupendous  sum  had  been  exceeded,  and  an  official 
publication,  commemorating  the  tenth  anniversary  of 
the  Imperial  Committee  of  the  Siberian  Railway,  was 
issued,  which  placed  the  total  cost  of  the  line  through 


THE  PRICE   OF  A    TICKET.  289 

Siberia  and  Manchuria  to  Vladivostok  and  Port 
Arthur  at  940,000,000  odd  roubles,  or  £99,000,000, 
which  works  out  at  something  like  £16,600  per  mile. 
This  will  have  still  to  be  added  to  by  the  time  that 
the  difficult  circum-Baikal  branch  is  completed. 

Travelling   is   luxuriant    in    the    extreme,    the   car- 
riages— particularly  the  newest  ones,  which  have  been 
constructed  for  the  Trans-Baikal  and  Manchurian  sec- 
tions— being  very  high  and  roomy,  fitted  with  electric 
light,   a  movable   electric   reading-lamp,   and  electric 
bells,  and  being  connected  by  a  corridor  with  a  smoking 
saloon,  dining  saloon,  and  bathroom.     Small  plate-glass 
flanges  are  fitted  at  right  angles  to  the  windows,  which 
prevent  sparks,  &c.,  blowing  in  when  open,  and  electric 
fans  give  additional  ventilation  when  required  in  the 
smoking  and  dining  car.     With  all  these  comforts  you 
naturally  expect  to   have  to  pay  handsomely  for  the 
privilege  of  travelling  on  the  line,  and  it  comes  as  a 
surprise  to  you  when  you  learn  the  ridiculously  low 
price  of  a  ticket.     It  was  originally  ofiicially  predicted 
that  the  cost  of  a  first-class  ticket  by  fast  train,  in- 
clusive of  government  tax  and  sleeping  accommodation, 
from  Moscow  to  Port  Arthur,  a  distance  of  something 
like   5300   miles,  would  be   114  roubles,  or  a  fraction 
over  £12,  and,  though  this  estimate  has  in  point  of  fact 
been  largely  exceeded,  the  present  price  of  270  roubles 
78    kopecks,   or   £28,    16s.,   can   only   be  described   as 
exceedingly  moderate.     There  is,  however,  one  thing 
which  it  struck  me  might  be  altered  with  advantage, 
not  only  to  the  passengers  but  also  to  the  receipts  of 
the  railway,   and  that   is,   the   time  of  duration  of  a 
through  ticket.     When  it  is  remembered  that  forty-five 
days  are  allowed  for  the  journey  on  a  through  ticket 
from  London  to  St  Petersburg,  it  strikes  one  as  a  little 
absurd   that    twenty- four    days    should    be   the   limit 


290 


TEE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 


allowed  for  the  journey  from  Moscow  to  Port  Arthur, 
and  fifteen  and  eleven  from  the  two  chief  towns  in 
Siberia — namely,  Tomsk  and  Irkutsk.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  the  authorities  will  see  their  way  before 
long  to  remove  so  annoying  and  unnecessary  a  limit- 
ation. 

The  following  list  of  fares  may  be  of  Interest  to  the 
traveller  : — 


^  Calais 
London  to  J       „ 

Port  Arthur         via    j  Ostend 

C  Calais 
London  to  J       » 

Vladivostok  „     j  Ostend 

C  Calais 
London  to  ;       „ 

Peking     .  •    "    i  Ostend 


What  is  to  be  seen  in  the  course  of  a  journey  through 
this  far-oif  land,  from  which  tales  of  terror  used  to 
come  as  from  some  lonely  land  of  inexorable  exile, 
where  misery,  pain,  and  death  alone  awaited  its  un- 
happy visitors?  Thanks  to  the  Russian  railway  and 
the  accounts  of  many  modern  travellers,  such  fantastic 
pictures,  depicting  Siberia  as  the  country  of  despair,  no 
longer  obtain  credence  even  among  the  least  informed. 
Convicts  and  prisons,  with  an  undue  share  perhaps  of 
human  misery  and  suffering,  no  doubt  exist,  but  these 
are  far  away  in  the  inhospitable  regions  of  Yakutsk, 
and  form  but  a  small  part  of  the  Siberia  of  to-day  ;  nor 
do  the  horrors  of  the  Arctic  prison  come  under  the  pur- 
view of  the  traveller  on  the  railway.  The  prospect 
which  meets  the  traveller's  gaze  is  of  a  very  different 
kind. 


Class. 

Francs. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

1st 

1024-G5 

40 

12 

5 

2nd 

693-40 

27 

9 

9 

1st 

1013-70 

40 

3 

7 

2nd 

685-65 

27 

3 

7 

1st 

944-20 

37 

8 

7 

2nd 

642-60 

25 

9 

5 

1st 

933-25 

36 

19 

9 

2nd 

635-85 

25 

4 

0 

1st 

1037-95 

41 

2 

9 

2nd 

723-60 

28 

13 

7 

1st 

1027 

40 

14 

2 

2nd 

716-85 

28 

8 

2 

THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  NOVO  NIGHOLAEWSK.  291 

Of  Western  Siberia  I  cannot  speak  from  personal 
experience.  The  picture  which  hngers  in  my  mind 
from  the  accounts  of  other  travellers  is  a  simple  mono- 
chrome. Uninterrupted  plain  from  dawn  till  noon,  and 
from  noon  till  dusk,  and  from  dusk  till  dawn  again, 
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  miles  of  it.  In  September  a 
sea  of  waving  golden  corn  spread  out  all  round,  and 
tree-life  in  the  shape  of  alder,  birch,  and  willow.  My 
own  acquaintance  with  the  line  began  at  the  settlement 
of  Novo  Nicholaewsk  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ob  river, 
and  it  is  at  Novo  Nicholaewsk,  therefore,  that  I  must 
ask  the  reader  to  step  on  board  the  train  with  me. 

First,  however,  a  word  about  the  settlement  itself 
In  countries  like  Siberia  towns  spring  up  as  if  by 
magic ;  where  there  was  nothing  one  day  there  may 
be  as  likely  as  not  a  town  the  next,  and  Novo 
Nicholaewsk  is  an  apt  illustration  of  this  pheno- 
menon. Nine  years  ago  a  vast  virgin  forest  covered 
the  banks  of  the  great  Ob  river,  through  which  the 
railway  forced  its  way.  Now  a  settlement  of  30,000 
inhabitants,  which  is  awaiting  only  an  imperial  edict, 
constituting  it  a  town,  to  become  a  great  deal  larger, 
flourishes  on  the  site  of  fallen  pine  and  birch,  and 
bids  fair  ere  long  to  force  its  way  to  the  forefront  of 
Siberian  cities.  The  advantageous  position  which  it 
occupies  at  the  junction  of  the  railway  and  the  great 
Ob  waterway,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  situated  in  the 
heart  of  the  richest  of  the  Siberian  governments,  are 
sufficient  guarantees  of  the  future  which  lies  before  it. 
A  large  government  biscuit  factory  for  the  supply  of 
troops,  which  is  in  process  of  construction,  points  to 
the  probability  of  its  shortly  becoming  an  important 
military  depot  ;  and  the  fact  that  in  one  or  two 
instances  large  buildings  of  brick  are  at  this  moment 
being  raised  to  replace  existing  structures  of  wood,  is 


292  THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 

sufficient  evidence  of  the  belief  of  those  concerned  that 
a  release  from  the  ties  attaching  to  imperial  Cabinet 
property  is  at  hand,  and  that  it  is  on  the  verge  of 
becoming  a  town.  It  may  interest  the  British  con- 
sumer to  learn  that  at  the  present  time  this  little  set- 
tlement is  exporting  something  like  54,000,000  lb.  of 
butter  a  -  year,  part  of  which  finds  its  way  direct  to 
London,  while  a  considerable  portion  of  the  remainder 
passes  through  Denmark,  where  it  is  remade,  finally 
reachino:  the  London  market  as  "  best  Danish  butter."  ^ 

Between  this  point  and  Lake  Baikal,  a  distance 
of  1173|-  miles,  lies  the  middle  link  of  the  Siberian 
railway.  Seated  in  an  easy  -  chair  in  the  comfort- 
able saloon  of  the  "  International,"  which  runs  once 
a-week  from  Moscow  to  Irkutsk,  you  gaze  out  on 
an  almost  uninterrupted  expanse  of  pine,  fir,  and 
birch,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  occasional  small 
clearings  where  settlers  have  built  themselves  houses 
and  tilled  the  land  are  dwarfed  into  insignificance. 
The  vast  gloomy  depths  of  a  limitless  virgin  forest 
confront  you  on  every  side,  and  the  three  days' 
struggle  which  you  enter  upon  to  free  yourself 
from  the  monotony  of  unending  forest  is  a  futile 
one,  for  from  first  to  last  fir,  pine,  and  birch  are 
gloriously  triumphant,  forcing  upon  you  a  sense  of 
your  own  insignificance  and  of  their  unquestioned 
dominion. 

As  day  fades  into  night  after  leaving  the  Ob, 
the  '  gloomy  jungle  opens  for  a  space,  and  you 
glide  slowly  into  Taigar.  A  few  years  ago  Taigar 
was    what    its    name    still    suggests  —  virgin    forest. 

^  The  dairy -farming  industry,  with  special  reference  to  the  manufacture 
of  butter  for  export,  has  in  a  few  years  made  rapid  strides  in  Western 
Siberia,  which  now  exports  annually  to  Baltic  ports  for  shipment  abroad 
butter  to  the  value  of  over  £3,500,000. 


THE  JUNCTION  FOR  TOMSK.  293 

Now  it  is  the  junction  for  Tomsk,  which  lies  on 
a  branch  line  59  miles  to  the  north,  and  wears 
an  air  of  importance  in  consequence.  The  line 
expands  mysteriously  into  a  dozen  sidings,  red 
wooden  buildings  with  green  roofs  spring  up  all 
round,  numerous  engines  with  quaint  bulbous-shaped 
spark-arresters  surmounting  their  funnels — for  wood 
still  forms  the  greater  part  of  the  fuel  on  the 
Siberian  railway  —  puff  officiously  up  and  down, 
while  a  large  brick  engine  -  house  shelters  a  dozen 
more.  Long  rows  of  red  waggons  occupy  many  of 
the  sidings,  with  here  and  there  a  water  -  tank 
among  them.  And  thereby  hangs  a  tale,  for 
Taigar,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  was  inconsiderately 
chosen,  there  being  practically  no  water,  and  the 
supply  having  consequently  to  be  brought  by  rail. 
Indeed  the  whole  line  seems  to  have  been  built 
with  an  astonishing  lack  of  foresight.  The  water- 
supply  in  many  cases  appears  to  have  been  con- 
sidered only  after  the  rails  were  laid,  the  rails 
themselves  were  far  too  light  for  what  was  re- 
quired of  them,  and  were  speedily  replaced  by 
heavier  ones,  which  in  their  turn  are  proving  all 
too  light  for  the  amount  of  traffic  which  has 
rapidly  sprung  up.  No  provision  was  made  when 
the  embankments  were  thrown  up  for  the  future 
doubling  of  the  line ;  the  cuttings  are  so  narrow 
and  so  steep  that  you  expect  every  shower  to 
bring  a  ton  of  earth  rolling  down  on  to  the  line, 
and  all  the  bridges  have  been  built  to  admit  only 
of  a  single  rail.  No  doubt  the  traffic,  which  sprang 
up  as  if  by  magic,  far  exceeded  all  calculations, 
and  while  work  is  being  pushed  forward  to  enable 
the  existing  line  to  cope  with  the  demands  made 
upon    it,     such     as    the    replacing    of    the     wooden 


THE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 


bridges  across  small  streams  by  superior  erections 
of  stone  and  the  addition  of  sidings  at  all  the 
larger  stations,  the  necessity  of  doubling  the  line 
is  under  consideration.  In  this  connection  it  may 
be  mentioned  that,  in  view  of  the  difficulties  which 
stand  in  the  way  of  doubling  the  existing  line, 
serious  consideration  is  likely  to  be  given  to  a 
scheme  which  has  been  suggested,  for  building  an 
entirely  separate  line  at  a  considerable  distance  to 
the  north.  In  such  a  scheme  would  lie  the  sal- 
vation  of  Tomsk. 

Beyond  Taigar  the  line  passes  by  several  towns 
of  importance — Mariinsk,  Achinsk,  Krasnoyarsk,  and 
Kansk — while  gradually  passing  from  the  level  plains 
of  Western  Siberia  into  the  more  mountainous  lands 
of  the  districts  of  Yeniseisk  and  Irkutsk.  Here  the 
configuration  of  the  country  has  been  followed  with 
ridiculous  faithfulness,  the  result  being  a  succession 
of  curves,  over  which  our  pace,  attaining  at  the 
best  a  modest  average  of  twenty  miles  an  hour, 
becomes  a  crawl.  To  the  uninitiated,  indeed,  the 
serpentine  alignment  appears  wholly  unnecessary, 
recalling  vivid  impressions  of  the  twists  and  turns 
of  another  railway  nearer  home,  which  is  said  to 
have  lined  the  pockets  of  a  certain  baron  of  Hebraic 
descent,  while  at  the  same  time  rendering  him  an 
object  of  anathema  on  the  shores  of  the  Golden 
Horn. 

Long  before  Irkutsk  is  reached  the  monotony  of 
the  journey  is  brought  home  to  one,  for  there  is 
little  to  divert  one's  attention  on  the  way.  Once 
we  passed  another  "  International "  on  its  way  back 
from  Irkutsk,  and  greetings  were  exchanged  before 
we  moved  on,  and  sometimes  we  overtook  trains 
carrying  convicts,  easily  recognisable  by  their  closely 


REACH  IRKUTSK.  295 


barred  windows.  At  every  wayside  station  we  jumped 
out  in  company  with  our  fellow-passengers — Germans, 
Russians,  Frenchmen,  Swedes,  and  Danes — to  stretch 
our  legs  during  the  liberal  waits,  and  on  one  occa- 
sion two  of  our  companions  indulged  in  a  little  mild 
revolver  practice  in  the  forest  close  by,  by  way  of 
passing  the  time !  At  last,  however,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  fourth  day  after  leaving  Ob,  we  ran  into 
a  large  suburb  with  busy  station  harbouring  a  number 
of  trains,  crept  cautiously  across  the  Angara  by  a 
wooden  bridge  plastered  with  notices  forbidding  smok- 
ing, and  liberally  supplied  with  barrels  of  water,  to 
draw  up  finally  alongside  of  the  stone  buildings  of 
the  station  of  Irkutsk  beyond. 

The  train  goes  on  for  another  forty  odd  miles  to 
Baikal ;  but  Irkutsk  is  worthy  of  some  remark,  and 
before  continuing  my  journey  across  the  great  lake 
and  through  Manchuria,  I  must  conclude  this  chapter 
by  devoting  a  few  words  to  it. 

Irkutsk,  like  most  towns  in  a  new  country,  began 
life  in  a  humble  way.  One  Ivan  Pakhoboff  reached 
the  river  Irkut  in  1652  while  engaged  in  collecting 
tribute  from  the  Buriats  in  the  shape  of  furs,  and 
established  an  intrenched  post  on  its  banks,  where- 
fore it  is  called  Irkutsk  to  this  day.  It  was  not 
destined,  however,  to  remain  on  its  original  site,  for 
it  was  afterwards  transferred  to  the  banks  of  the 
Angara,  and  in  1686  became  a  town.  Now  it  is  the 
second  city  in  all  Siberia,  and  far  the  most  imposing  in 
appearance,  the  seat  of  a  governor-general  of  2,807,626 
square  miles  of  territory,  the  proud  possessor  of  up- 
wards of  sixty  houses  of  worship,  of  the  very  credit- 
able number  of  forty-five  educational  institutions,  of 
an  admirable  museum,  of  a  theatre  that  cost  close 
upon  £30,000,  and  of  a  gold-smelting  laboratory  which 


296  TEE   GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 

has  smelted  since  it  came  into  being  in  1870  the  very 
respectable  amount  of  64 3 1  tons  of  gold,  having  a 
probable  value  of  upwards  of  £80,000,000  sterling. 
And  now,  to  show  how  its  citizens  have  thriven,  it 
is  about  to  erect  a  statue  to  the  late  Emperor  at  a 
cost  of  300,000  roubles  or  £31,915. 

Many  of  the  buildings  are  fine  structures,  the  main 
streets  and  market-square  provide  splendid  shops,  and 
the  cathedral,  standing  somewhat  apart  in  an  open 
space,  is  magnificent,  and  it  is  only  when  you  reach 
the  slums  and  descend  abruptly  from  well-kept  streets 
and  stately  mansions  to  cesspools,  dust  -  heaps,  and 
squalid  shanties  that  you  remember  that  you  are  in 
an  Asian  town.  One  night  I  witnessed  a  performance 
at  the  theatre,  and  the  acting  struck  me  as  very 
good — and  indeed  I  should  be  a  good  judge,  for  I 
understood  no  word  of  what  was  said  !  The  museum 
of  the  East  Siberian  Branch  of  the  Russian  Geographical 
Society  is  a  fine  building,  and  contains  much  that  is 
worth  seeing.  I  saw  specimens  of  marble,  lapis-lazuli, 
coal,  graphite,  and  other  minerals  from  the  district ; 
mammoth  bones  and  tusks ;  the  skeleton  of  a  pre- 
historic man ;  shells,  insects,  snakes,  fish,  and,  what 
is  especially  striking,  the  very  fine  collection  of 
Buddhist  specialities.  The  library  is  well  stocked  with 
periodicals  from  English,  American,  German,  and  French 
societies,  and  contains  books  in  many  languages  besides 
Bussian. 

Perhaps  the  object  of  chief  interest  to  the  traveller 
is  the  gold-smelting  laboratory.  Originally  the  yearly 
average  weight  of  gold  which  passed  through  the 
laboratory  at  Irkutsk  amounted  to  54,000  lb.  In 
recent  years,  however,  laboratories  have  been  estab- 
lished at  Nicholaewsk  and  Blagovestchensk  of  blood- 
stained  fame,    and   yet   a    third   is    being   created  at 


THE   GOLD-SMELTING  LABORATORY.  297 

Bodaibo,  so  that  in  future  a  fifth  of  that  amount 
is  all  that  is  looked  forward  to.^  The  mines  from 
which  Irkutsk  at  present  draws  its  chief  supply  are 
those  of  the  Lena  Company,  with  an  average  annual 
output  of  9000  lb.,  and  of  the  Imperial  Cabinet  in 
Transbaikalia,  with  a  yield  of  5040  lb.  The  gold  law, 
until  quite  recently,  was  stringent,  all  gold-dust  having 
under  pain  of  penalty  to  be  sold  to  the  Government. 
Now,  however,  this  law  has  been  repealed,  and  the  free 
sale  of  gold  is  everywhere  legal. 

The  process  of  smelting  is  an  interesting  one.  I 
was  conducted  into  a  large  room  having  all  the 
appearance  of  a  chemical  laboratory.  Presently  a 
number  of  sealed  leather  bags  were  brought  in  con- 
taining the  raw  material,  and  after  these  had  been 
carefully  weighed  and  opened,  the  gold  was  mixed 
with  borax,  poured  into  graphite  crucibles,  and  placed 
in  the  furnace  for  half  an  hour.  The  molten  metal 
was  then  poured  into  moulds,  and  the  resultant  ingots 
stored  in  the  strong-room  prior  to  their  being  despatched 
to  St  Petersburg.  At  the  time  of  my  visit  I.  saw  in- 
gots with  a  total  weight  of  5400  lb.  thus  stored.  The 
gold  is  valued  at  from  18,000  to  21,000  roubles  a  pud^ 
or,  roughly,  at  from  £53  to  £62  a  pound,  and  after  it 
is  weighed  and  analysed  a  certificate  is  issued  to  the 
owners,  which  can  be  cashed  at  any  state  bank.  The 
gold  from  the  Amur  is  the  purest,  containing,  after 
smelting,  96  per  cent  of  pure  gold,  that  from  the  Lena 
mines  showing  from  91f  to  93|-  per  cent  of  pure  metal. 

It  would  be  easy  to  write  at  length  of  the  many 
buildings  and  objects  of  interest  of  Irkutsk ;  I  spent 
a  most  instructive  morning  at  the  fine  technical  school, 

^  For  the  output  of  Western  Siberia  there  have  long  been  laboratories  at 
Barnaul — the  oldest  in  Siberia — and  Tomsk,  and  recently  also  one  at  Kras- 
noyarsk. 


THE  GREAT  SIBERIAN  RAILWAY. 


and  an  interesting  afternoon  at  a  celebrated  monastery 
a  little  distance  from  the  town,  to  mention  but  two 
of  the  many  institutions  of  which  it  can  boast.  But 
were  I  to  do  so  this  volume,  already  sufficiently  swollen, 
would  become  expanded  to  an  altogether  unwarrantable 
size,  and  I  have  perhaps  said  enough  to  show  that 
the  large  cities  of  Siberia  have  been  built  and  fostered 
with  a  due  sense  of  the  responsible  position  which  it 
will  undoubtedly  be  their  lot  to  occupy  some  day. 


DIRECTION  OF  THE  LINE.  299 


CHAPTEH  XXV. 

THE    EAST    CHINESE    RAILWAY. 

Eussia's  coup  —  The  line  to  pass  through  Manchuria  —  Great  Britain's 
reply  —  The  Manchurian  railway  agreement  —  A  journey  over  the 
Manchurian  railway  in  the  autumn  of  1903 — Across  Lake  Baikal — 
The  frontier  of  Manchuria— Calibre  of  the  line — Kharbin — Military 
occupation — Article  II.  of  the  Manchurian  Convention  of  1902 — The 
ambitions  of  Kharbin — Magnificent  crops — Dalni — Port  Arthur — 
Eussia's  outlay  in  Manchuria  —  Niuchwang  —  The  Boxer  outbreak 
Eussia's  opportunity — The  situation  at  Niuchwang  at  the  outbreak  of 
hostilities — Mukden  and  Antung  opened  to  foreign  trade — Peking 
the  end  of  the  journey. 

Once  upon  a  time  it  was  supposed  that  the  Trans- 
Siberian  railway  was  to  be  built  entirely  through 
Russian  territory.  East  of  Lake  Baikal  it  was  to 
run  in  a  more  or  less  straight  line  to  Kharbarofsk, 
whence  a  line  has  been  built  to  Vladivostok ;  and 
in  the  meanwhile,  before  the  line  was  completed, 
the  waterway  of  the  Amur  was  to  be  used  as  the 
connecting-link  in  the  communications  between  Russia 
and  the  Pacific.  Russian  statesmen,  no  doubt,  knew 
better,  though  they  kept  their  knowledge  to  them- 
selves ;  and  even  people  who  were  not  Russian  states- 
men, but  who  had  made  themselves  acquainted  with 
Russian  aims  and  Russian  methods,  spoke  sceptically 
of  the  section  through  the  mountainous  regions  of  the 


300  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

Amur,^  and  of  the  ice-bound  terminus  of  Vladivostok, 
and  watched  events  in  interested  anticipation.  Nor 
were  they  disappointed  at  the  sequel.  For  before 
very  long  Kussia  sprung  upon  the  world  one  of  those 
masterpieces  of  diplomacy  which  she  alone  is  capable 
of  perpetrating.  The  line  did  not  pass  through  the 
Amur  region  at  all,  but  ran  along  through  a  much 
easier  country  belonging  to  Russia's  neighbour,  and 
in  addition  to  linking  up  Vladivostok  with  Moscow, 
forged  its  way  to  the  south  through  another  man's 
land  till  it  reached  Port  Arthur,  a  terminus  in  far 
warmer  water  than  Vladivostok,  and  possessing  a 
situation  conveniently  adjacent  to  the  capital  of  the 
Celestial  Empire  and  seat  of  political  activity  in  the 
Far  East. 

British  diplomacy,  it  is  true,  for  once  rose  to  the 
occasion,  and  secured  for  Great  Britain  the  lease  of 
Wei-hai-Wei,  a  harbour  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
completely  commands  Port  Arthur ;  but  the  advantage 
thus  obtained  was  hastily  and  gratuitously  thrown 
away  when  it  was  made  known  that  it  had  been 
decided  not  to  fortify  it,  and  the  sole  advantage  which 
we  now  reap  from  our  position  is  that  in  occupying  it 
ourselves  we  prevent  any  one  else  more  aggressively 

1  I  am  not  personally  acquainted  with  the  region  through  which  such  a 
line  would  have  had  to  pass,  but  it  is  admitted  on  all  sides  that  the  Amur 
section  could  of  itself  have  had  no  value,  and  would  consequently  be  looked 
upon  merely  as  a  necessity  for  completing  the  communication  between 
Stretensk  and  Khabarofsk.  The  position  is  put  plainly  by  Vladimir  in 
his  '  Russia  on  the  Pacific,'  when  he  says  :  "  Here  we  have  about  2000 
versts  to  be  constructed  through  dense  forests,  across  big  rivers,  often 
away  from  all  population,  under  rigorous  climatic  conditions,  with  a  frozen 
soil  requiring  to  be  laboriously  broken  up.  Moreover,  the  local  conditions 
do  not  warrant  the  heavy  expenses  necessary  for  the  work  ;  the  population 
of  the  Amur  province  amounts  only  to  115,000  inhabitants,  and  the  country 
is  mostly  uncultivated ;  many  years  must  pass  before  the  trade  of  the 
people,  all  living  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  already  provided  with 
regular  steamer  service,  will  require  a  railway." 


A   DIPLOMATIC  COUP.  301 

inclined  from  doing  so.  There  is  every  sign  that  the 
decision  was  come  to  in  haste  and  in  contradiction 
to  a  former  determination,  since  five  admirably  and 
scientifically  constructed  forts  were  built  on  the  island 
at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  at  a  cost  of  £25,000  ;  but 
the  rescission  of  the  order  to  fortify  the  place  having 
gone  forth  before  the  guns  which  had  already  been 
shipped  were  able  to  reach  their  destination,  they  stand 
to-day  —  powerless  either  for  offence  or  defence  —  as 
glaring  illustrations  of  official  fatuity  and  vacillation. 

The  main  incidents  of  the  diplomatic  coup  which  led 
up  to  the  construction  of  the  Manchurian  railway  are 
now  a  matter  of  history.  The  Liaotung  peninsula 
ceded  to  Japan,  "in  perpetuity  and  full  sovereignty, 
with  all  fortifications,  arsenals,  and  public  property 
thereon,"  by  a  vanquished  China ;  the  remonstrance 
of  an  indignant  Russia — indignant  that  the  peace  of 
the  Far  East  should  be  threatened  by  the  occupation 
of  Chinese  territory  by  an  alien  Power !  The  seizure 
by  the  expostulating  Power  two  years  later  of  the 
very  country  in  question,  and  the  prompt  production 
of  an  agreement,  signed  more  than  two  years  before, 
sanctioning  the  construction  by  her  of  railways  across 
Manchuria,  are  the  main  points  in  an  interesting  little 
story  which  throws  an  illuminating  light  upon  Mus- 
covite methods,  while  it  at  the  same  time  accords 
triumphant  testimony  to  the  success  of  Muscovite 
diplomacy. 

The  agreement  in  question,  drawn  up  between  the 
Eusso- Chinese  Bank  and  the  Chinese  Government, 
provides  for  the  forming  of  a  company  described  as 
the  "  East  Chinese  Railway  Company,"  to  construct  a 
line  across  Manchuria  from  west  to  east,  connected 
with  the  Trans -Baikal  line  on  the  one  hand  and 
the   South   Ussuri  line  on  the    other,   with    a  branch 


302  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

known  as  the  South  Manchurian  line  running  from 
Kharbin  on  the  main  line  to  Dalni  and  Port  Arthur. 
Shares  in  the  company  can  only  be  held  by  Russian 
and  Chinese  subjects,  a  rebate  of  ^  of  the  Chinese 
custom  duties  is  allowed  on  goods  imported  and  ex- 
ported across  the  northern  frontier  by  rail,  the  com- 
pany have  rights  ovei-  a  strip  of  territory  on  either 
side  of  the  line,  and  are  entitled  to  keep  as  many 
troops  along  it  as  are  considered  necessary  for  its 
protection.  The  resultant  railway  is  now  a  link  in 
the  great  overland  route  to  the  Far  East. 

With  this  very  brief  reminder  of  the  birth  and 
growth  of  the  Manchurian  railway,  and  without  for 
the  present  entering  upon  any  wider  discussion  of  the 
Manchurian  question,  let  me  give  a  description  of  a 
journey  over  it  in  the  autumn  of  1903. 

At  10  A.M.  on  September  24  we  steamed  out  of  Irkutsk, 
and  by  midday  had  covered  the  forty-two  miles  which 
lay  between  us  and  the  station  of  Baikal,  built  on  the 
shores  of  the  lake  of  the  same  name.  Here  we  had  to 
leave  our  carriage  and  embark  on  the  steamer  Angara, 
for  the  circum-Baikal  branch  was  only  in  process  of 
construction,  and  though  its  completion  was  ofl&cially 
predicted  for  January  1904,  the  officials  responsible  for 
the  prediction  were  the  only  people  who  believed  even 
ostensibly  in  its  possible  fulfilment.  The  large  ice- 
breaker Baikal,  which  accommodates  whole  trains  on 
board,  and  is  capable  of  cutting  its  way  through  2  feet 
of  solid  ice,  is  used  only  for  goods  trains,  passengers 
being-  taken  across  on  the  smaller  boat,  which  is  said  to 
be  capable  of  travelling  through  from  16  to  18  mches 
of  ice.  Both  vessels  were  constructed  at  the  Arm- 
strong works,  and  brought  out  in  pieces  and  fitted  up 
on  the  lake,  as  was  also  a  floating  dock,  which  has, 
however,  so  far  proved  a  failure.     The  smaller  boat  on 


THE  MANGHURIAN  FRONTIER.  303 

which  we  crossed  is  fitted  with  triple  -  expansion  en- 
gines of  176  effective  horse-power;  but  as  a  result  of 
the  feverish  haste  with  which  Russia  hurried  on  her 
arrangements  for  transporting  troops  to  Manchuria 
in  1900,  the  boilers  were  not  properly  lined,  and 
are  now  in  a  precarious  condition,  one  of  them  being 
actually  out  of  work.  The  speed  attained  averages 
about  10  knots,  and  at  7.45  p.m.,  four  hours  after 
starting,  we  reached  Missovaiya,  the  present  starting- 
point  of  the  Trans-Baikal  line. 

Here  we  found  a  train  awaiting  us,  and  for  the  next 
twenty -eight  hours  were  borne  through  the  wooded 
slopes  of  Trans-Baikalia  to  Chita.  Beyond  Chita  the 
line  continues  to  Stretensk  on  the  upper  reaches  of  the 
Amur ;  but  at  the  junction  of  Karimskaia  we  turned 
south  across  a  hungry-looking  steppe  beyond  the  forest 
zone  to  the  little  station  which  stands  on  the  frontier  of 
the  most  northern  dependency  of  China,  and  bears  the 
name  of  the  country  to  which  it  gives  access — Man- 
churia. It  was  dark  when  we  drew  up  alongside  of  the 
platform  of  the  frontier  station,  but  there  was  a  sug- 
gestive air  of  activity  about  our  surroundings.  A 
dozen  instruments  clicked  noisily  from  the  brightly  lit 
telegraph -office,  large  red  lights  moving  to  and  fro  in 
the  darkness  outside  suggested  the  active  movement  of 
rolling-stock,  while  the  sound  of  a  measured  tread  up 
and  down  where  trains  stood  in  the  sidings,  spoke  un- 
mistakably of  the  presence  of  troops.  Troops  there 
were,  trains  full  of  them,  forty  men  crowded  into  each 
of  the  big,  red,  covered-in  goods  waggons  of  which  they 
were  composed.  Eastward  bound  ?  No  doubt,  but  a 
zealous  sentry  peremptorily  ordered  off  a  too  inquisitive 
passenger,  and  their  destination  remained  a  mystery. 

When  daylight  broke  we  were  travelling  through  a 
mountainous  country,  and  later  on  climbed  to  the  summit 


304  TEE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

of  the  Khingan  range  and  descended  again  on  the  far 
side  by  a  laborious  zigzag,  taking  an  hour  and  fifty-five 
minutes  to  cover  a  distance  of  ten  miles.  No  one  but  a 
Russian  engineer  could  ever  have  evolved  so  cumbrous 
and  intricate  a  method  of  surmounting  a  mountain- 
range,  and  even  he  has  at  last  done  what  any  one  else 
would  have  done  at  the  outset — made  a  tunnel  through 
it.  Mountains  are  the  bugbear  of  the  Kussian.  He 
has  none  to  speak  of  in  his  own  country,  and  he  does 
not  understand  them  when  he  comes  across  them  else- 
where. It  is  perhaps  fortunate  for  him,  therefore,  that 
he  has  not  had  to  make  a  single  tunnel  between  Moscow 
and  Irkutsk. 

On  the  first  opportunity  I  alighted  to  inspect  the 
line  and  compare  it  with  the  Siberian  track.  The  rails 
were  certainly  heavier, — perhaps  27  lb.  to  the  foot,  as 
compared  with  18  on  the  Siberian  sections,  though  still 
merely  spiked  down  to  the.  sleepers,  and  a  powerful 
compound  engine  stood  at  the  end  of  the  five  business- 
like armoured  carriages — for  east  of  the  Baikal  the  cars 
are  protected  with  J-inch  steel  plate,  capable  of  turning 
a  bullet — in  place  of  the  light  freight-engines  used  on 
the  Siberian  sections. 

Night  found  us  still  speeding  through  a  mountainous 
country ;  but  when  I  awoke  in  the  morning  it  was  to 
gaze  upon  an  absolute  level,  which  gradually  resolved 
itself  from  a  grass-covered  steppe  into  a  sea  of  cultiva- 
tion. At  midday  on  the  28th  we  reached  Kharbin,  a 
rapidly  growing  town,  with  large  government-built — 
Hussian  Government  of  course — brick  buildings  spring- 
ing up  in  all  directions.  Military  occupation  stares  you 
in  the  face  here,  and  a  large  camp  stands  just  to  the 
south  of  the  town ;  but  this  is  an  exception.  For  the 
most  part  troops  are  not  paraded  along  the  line  for  the 
satisfaction  of  travellers,  and  one  might  travel  along 


RUSSIAN  TROOPS.  305 


it  without  suspecting  the  presence  of  any  excessive 
number.  Nevertheless  they  are  there.  There  are 
miHtary  posts  at  intervals  of  5  versts  the  length  of  the 
line,  barracks  and  stables  are  in  process  of  construction 
at  every  station  along  the  South  Manchurian  branch, 
and  long  lines  of  innocent-looking  goods  waggons  on 
the  sidings  prove  on  closer  inspection  to  be  the  tem- 
porary home  of  Russian  soldiers.  I  was  told  on  excel- 
lent authority  that  by  July — three  months,  that  is, 
before  the  promised  final  evacuation  of  the  country — 
there  were  200,000  Russian  troops  in  the  Far  East.^ 
In  August  an  additional  twenty-three  trains,  bearing 
troops  and  military  equipment,  passed  along  the  Siberian 
line  eastward  bound,  and  now  a  fortnight  prior  to  the 
date  fixed  for  the  completion  of  the  evacuation  of 
Manchuria  two  more  brigades  were  hurrying  south 
from  Chita,  and  an  order  had  gone  forth  to  replace  all 
Chinese  employees  on  the  line,  such  as  firemen,  points- 
men, &c.,  by  Russian  soldiers. 

Mobilisation  everywhere ;  the  air  was  full  of  it.  I 
read  through  Article  ii.  of  the  Manchurian  Convention 
of  April  1902:  "Russia  .  .  .  consents  on  its  part  .  .  . 
to  withdraw  gradually  all  Russian  troops  from  Man- 
churia, as  follows  :  (a)  Within  six  months  from  the 
signing  of  the  Convention,  from  the  south-western 
portion  of  Mukden  province  as  far  as  the  Liao  river,  at 
the  same  time  restoring  the  railway  to  China ;  (b) 
during  the  six  months  following — i.e.,  between  October 
8,  1902,  and  April  8,  1903 — from  the  remaining  portion 
of  Mukden  province  and  Kirin  province  ;  (c)  during  the 
six  months  following — i.e.,  between  April  8,  1903,  and 

1  This  estimate  has  since  been  confirmed  by  Mr  J.  W.  Davidson,  U.S. 
consul  at  Formosa,  who  said  in  December,  "  Every  place  of  importance  on 
and  off  the  railroad  is  held  by  troops,  whose  number,  inclusive  of  the  gar- 
rison of  Vladivostok,  is  not  less  than  200,000.  " 

U 


306  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 


October  8,  1903 — Russia  will  withdraw  her  troops  from 
the  remaining  province  of  Heh-lung-kiang."  And  then 
I  looked  at  the  military  activity  all  round  me,  at  the 
vast  military  encampment  which  stretched  away  to  the 
south,  at  those  rows  of  significant  red  waggons,  on  each 
of  which  was  written,  so  that  he  who  runs  might  read, 
the  fateful  words,  "  forty  men  or  eight  horses,"  and  at 
their  perspiring,  expectant,  tightly  packed  occupants. 
And  I  thought  of  the  hecatombs  of  Russian  assurances 
in  the  past,  and  wished  that  those  good  people  who  are 
so  anxious  to  invite  our  Indian  neighbours  to  occupy 
commanding  positions  on  our  flank  in  the  Persian  Gulf 
and  elsewhere  were  with  me  to  see  it  all  too.  Actual 
experience  is  so  much  more  realistic  than  paper  theories 
concocted  in  an  editor's  office.  Of  course,  there  have 
been  assurances  about  Manchuria — stacks  of  them.  The 
assurance  of  Count  Lamsdorff",  given  through  the  Russian 
Ambassador  on  August  12,  1903,  that  "the  evacuation 
of  Manchuria  was  to  take  place  at  an  early  date, 
although  that  date  could  not  exactly  be  tixed,"  was  a 
particularly  interesting  one  under  the  circumstances  ! 

The  town  of  Kharbin  is  naturally  destined  to  become 
an  important  centre,  if  only  from  its  situation  on  the 
Sungari  river,  as  the  junction  of  the  South  Manchurian 
line  with  the  main  trans-continental  railway  ;  but  there 
is  also  every  sign  of  administrative  zeal  to  push  the 
place  artificially  into  prominence.  The  administrative 
portion  of  the  town  is  being  rapidly  covered  with  well- 
paved  streets,  and  handsome  buildings,  including  a  fine 
railway-station  and  a  big  hotel, — which  will,  at  any  rate 
in  the  first  instance,  be  run  by  the  railway  company,  or 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Russo- Chinese  Bank, — are 
being  feverishly  carried  to  completion.  An  administra- 
tive building  costing  £110,000  and  engine-shops  costing 
£251,000  are  in  course  of  erection,  and  a  hospital    is 


THE   TOWN  OF  KHARBIN.  307 

being  built  at  an  outlay  of  £42,000.  No  one  but 
Russians  or  Chinese  are  permitted  to  own  land,  con- 
struct buildings,  or  engage  in  any  permanent  enter- 
prise, and  the  land  for  many  miles  round  has  been 
secured,  so  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  any  foreign 
influence  to  obtain  a  foothold  close  to  the  city.  The 
Kusso- Chinese  Bank  and  the  commercial  department  of 
the  Russo- Chinese  railway  are  the  commercial  powers 
in  Manchuria.  They  buy  and  sell  produce,  and  leave 
little  room  apparently  for  the  individual  or  private 
trader  to  compete  with  any  profit.  Amongst  the  in- 
dustries, Mr  Miller,  U.S.  consul  at  Niuchwang,  men- 
tions flour-mills,  brick  manufacturing,  breweries,  meat- 
packing establishments,  bean  -  oil,  confectionery,  and 
saw-mills.  At  the  time  of  my  visit  two  large  steam 
flour-mills  were  in  operation,  and  three  more  were  being 
laid  down.  It  is  possible  that  these  may  pay,  but  they 
were  all  built  or  building  on  credit,  and  on  conditions  of 
full  mortgage  to  the  firms  supplying  the  machinery ; 
and  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  millet  is  the  staple 
food  of  the  native  population,  and  they  do  not  want 
it  milled  for  them.^  The  commercial  and  residential 
quarters  are  meanwhile  left  to  individual  enterprise, 
and,  as  my  travelling  companion  remarked,  "  following 
usual  Russian  precedent,  no  doubt  a  very  long  time  will 
elapse  before  that  part  of  Kharbin  emerges  from  the 
chrysalis  state  of  wooden  or  sun-dried  brick  shanties, 
impassable  roads,  and  interior  and  exterior  filth."  On 
the  whole,  "artificial"  and  "subsidised"  are  the  words 
which  suggest  themselves  in  connection  with  Kharbin, 
and  when  Mr  Miller  wrote  that  "it  is  in  this  city  more 

1  Mr  Davidson,  however,  already  quoted,  says  :  "  The  production  of 
wheat  in  Manchuria  is  increasing  to  a  phenomenal  degree,  and  its  manu- 
facture into  flour  is  veiy  profitable.  The  city  of  Kharbin  alone  will  from 
the  beginning  of  1904  produce  800,000  lb.  of  flour  daily." 


308  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

than  in  all  the  others  combined  that  Russia  is  asserting 
her  intentions  of  becoming  an  active  industrial  force  in 
the  affairs  of  the  Orient,"  he  would  have  given  a  more 
strictly  accurate  idea  of  the  existing  conditions  if  he 
had  substituted  for  "Russia"  the  words  "Russian 
Government." 

South  of  Kharbin  spread  masses  and  masses  of  millet, 
extending  mile  after  mile  as  far  as  the  eye  can  see. 
Little  else,  in  fact,  is  visible, — occasional  clumps  of  trees 
looking  like  little  green  dots  in  a  bronze-brown  sea,  and 
the  villages  themselves  being  half-buried  in  the  sur- 
rounding crops.  For  two  days  and  nights  we  steam 
through  crops  such  as  are  in  all  probability  to  be 
seen  nowhere  else  in  the  world,  passing  Mukden,  the 
capital  of  the  country  ;  Ta-Shih-Chiao,  the  junction 
for  Niuchwang  and  Peking,  where  only  so  lately  as 
August  the  line  had  been  washed  away  by  floods,  and 
all  traffic  suspended  for  nine  days  in  consequence ;  to 
pull  up  at  length  on  the  shores  of  the  Pacific  at 
Dalni,  striving  so  desperately  to  become  a  thriving 
commercial  port,  or  at  the  great  military  and  naval 
base  of  Port  Arthur. 

Dalni,  as  the  Russians  have  christened  the  town 
which  they  have  built  on  the  bay  of  Taliewan,  has  all 
the  appearance  of  a  modern  town,  and  does  credit  to  its 
creators  and  owners,  the  Russian  Ministry  of  Finance. 
A  few  years  ago  there  was  nothing.  The  order  went 
forth  that  there  must  be  a  town,  and  a  town  accord- 
ingly was  put  in  hand.  Houses  were  built,  brick 
houses  such  as  you  would  expect  to  see  in  any 
modern  watering-place,  except  for  their  roofs,  which 
show  a  tendency  tow^ards  the  curves  which  distin- 
guish Chinese  architecture ;  streets  were  laid  out 
and  paved,  harbour  works  were  begun,  offices,  shops, 
and  a  magnificent  electric  station,  fitted  by  a  Buda- 


PORT  ARTHUR.  309 


Pesth  firm,  to  give  light  to  the  future  citizens  and 
drive  the  motors  at  the  dock  workshops,  were  erected, 
and,  lo  and  behold,  the  order  was  fulfilled !  It  next 
became  necessary  that  people  should  be  induced  to 
occupy  the  new  town,  and  Dalni  was  made  a  free  port. 
Port  charges  were  likewise  introduced  at  Port  Arthur 
on  all  trading  vessels  that  entered  that  harbour ;  but  in 
spite  of  everything  Dalni  has  up  to  the  present  failed 
to  vindicate  its  right  to  the  title  of  a  successful  com- 
mercial town.  The  greater  part  of  the  town  in  fact  is 
at  present  composed  of  the  administrative  quarter  built 
and  reserved  for  tenancy  by  the  government  and  muni- 
cipal officials  and  employees,  the  ground  marked  out 
for  residential  and  commercial  quarters  remaining  for 
the  most  part  unclaimed  and  unbuilt,  the  reason  being 
the  absence  of  any  real  development  of  commercial 
activity  with  the  interior,  such  trade  as  there  is  being 
bound  up  with  government  contracts  or  based  upon  the 
market  afforded  by  the  naval,  military,  or  railway 
elements. 

Port  Arthur  is,  of  course,  essentially  a  naval  base, 
and  on  my  arrival  I  found  everything  given  up  to 
naval  and  military  preparation.  Gangs  of  coolies  could 
be  seen  at  work  on  fortifications  on  the  hills  which 
surround  the  town,  and  all  building  and  commercial 
activity  had  been  turned  into  government  channels, 
the  building  and  fitting  of  government  stores  occupying 
the  attention  of  the  authorities.  The  harbour  is  not  a 
very  large  one,  and  is  in  places  extremely  shallow, 
though  this  defect  has  now  been  remedied  to  a  certain 
extent  by  extensive  dredging,  and  I  saw  one  large  dry 
dock  which  looked  capable  of  accommodating  large 
vessels.  In  another  direction  I  observed  the  work- 
sheds  which  had  been  built  for  piecing  together  de- 
stroyers ;  but  on  the  whole  the  traveller  will  not  dis- 


310  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

cover  a  great  deal  that  is  of  interest, — he,  of  course, 
cannot  visit  the  things  which  are  of  real  interest,  such 
as  fortifications,  &c., — and  finding  the  miserable  shanties 
which  served  for  hotels  a  trial  to  both  mind  and  body, 
I  soon  shook  the  dust  of  its  streets  from  my  feet,  and 
steamed  across  the  water  to  the  treaty  port  of  Chifu, 
on  the  opposite  shore  of  the  gulf 

There  is  one  thing,  I  think,  which  cannot  fail  to  strike 
the  traveller  in  Manchuria,  and  that  is  the  dispropor- 
tionately small  return  which  has  so  far  accrued  to  E-ussia 
for  her  vast  expenditure  in  that  country.  The  engineer 
in  charge  of  the  construction  of  Russian  railways  in 
Manchuria  informed  Mr  Miller,  the  United  States 
consul  at  Niuchwang,  that  £27,000,000  had  been  ex- 
pended in  railway  construction  alone  ;  and  when  we  add 
to  this  the  cost  of  fortifications  and  construction  in  Port 
Arthur,  Dalni,  Kharbin,  &c., — it  is  said  that  bribes  to 
the  extent  of  2,000,000  taels  (roughly,  £288,600)  were 
administered  in  obtaining  the  lease  of  Port  Arthur, — 
and  the  expenditure  involved  in  keeping  large  numbers 
of  troops  in  the  country,  the  disbursement  so  far  must 
have  amounted  to  anything  from  50  to  100  millions. 
And  what  has  she  received  in  return  ?  An  increased 
power  of  dictation  in  the  affairs  of  China  perhaps,  but 
in  addition  a  naval  base  which,  though  superior  in  some 
respects  to  a  more  northern  port,  is  admittedly  far  from 
ideal — a  commercial  port  which  has  been  aptly  described 
as  still-born ;  and,  to  crown  all,  a  war  which,  whatever 
be  its  final  issue,  can  never  surely  be  anything  but 
disastrous  to  a  country  in  the  present  stage  of  financial  • 
and  economic  development  of  Russia.  It  is,  in  fact,  the 
unexpectedly  resolute  action  of  Japan,  following  upon 
the  Anglo-Japanese  alliance,  which  has  seriously  upset 
the  calculations  of  Russian  statesmen,  and  which  must 
have  a  strong  modifying  efiect  upon  the  whole  trend  of 


RUSSIAN  EXPENDITURE  IN  MANCHURIA.  311 


events  in  the  Far  East.  It  is  as  yet  impossible  to  say 
what  may  take  place  at  the  termination  of  a  war  the 
result  of  which  no  one  can  foresee ;  but  it  is  well  to 
observe,  when  considering  the  present  lack  of  tangible 
return  for  expenditure  involved,  the  measures  which 
Eussia  had  taken  to  secure  her  position  in  the  future 
— a  position  which,  but  for  the  unwelcome  rupture  in 
diplomatic  relations,  she  would  most  undoubtedly  have 
achieved. 

In    the    first   place,    then,   those  who   ridiculed    the 
policy  of  sinking  vast  capital  sums  in  territory  which 
was  only  leased,  even  if  the  lease  did  extend  for  ninety- 
nine  years,  paid  but  a  poor  compliment  to  the  astuteness 
of  Russian  diplomatists.     Those  responsible  knew  per- 
fectly well  what  they  were  doing,  for  they  knew  that 
they  had  a  master  clause  in  the  treaty  leasing  them  the 
land  for  the  railway,  which  constituted  them  in  reality 
the  owners  of  the  soil.     And  that  clause,  according  to 
the  French  explorer  M.   Chaffaujon,  reads  as  follows  : 
"  If  at  the  expiration  of  ninety-nine  years  China  desires 
to  enter  into  possession  of  the  line,  she  must  refund  to 
the  Company  all  the  expenses  of  construction  and  main- 
tenance of  the  line  from  the  first."     The  account,  we 
may  safely  presume,  will  be  one  which  the  Chancellor 
of  the  Chinese  Exchequer  in  1995  will  hardly  find  it 
convenient  to  settle.      So  when  Russia  spends  money 
on  her  Manchurian  railway  it  is  as  a  landowner  and 
not  as   a  tenant,   and   if  she  spends  lavishly  on   her 
property  she  has  excellent  reasons  for  doing  so. 

Secure  in  her  railway  property,  the  next  thing  was 
to  secure  the  trade.  I  have  referred  to  the  strenuous 
efforts  of  the  Russian  authorities  to  attract  the  com- 
merce of  Manchuria  to  Dalni,  and  I  have  also  pointed 
out  how  they  have  failed.  There  was  a  very  excellent 
reason   why    they    should   fail,    and    that    reason    was 


312  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

Niuchwang.  Opened  to  commerce  in  accordance  with 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Tientsin  in  1861,  Niuchwang 
has  become  the  fourth  in  importance  of  all  the  treaty 
ports  of  China,  and  is  to-day  the  commercial  door  to 
Manchuria.  But  the  trade  of  Niuchwang  was  in  the 
hands  of  British,  American,  and  Japanese  firms,  and 
it  became  necessary  to  Bussian  aspirations  that  this 
should  be  altered.  And  so  when  in  1898  the  Bussian 
railway  appeared  upon  the  scene  a  large  property  a 
little  distance  from  the  foreign  settlement  was  acquired 
through  Ministerial  pressure  at  Beking,  and  a  branch 
line  was  built  which  was  no  doubt  to  have  been  severed 
as  soon  as  Dalni  had  become  the  port  of  entry  into 
Manchuria — Niuchwang  thus  being  cut  off  beyond  the 
hope  of  competition.^  No  success,  however,  attended 
these  schemes  to  substitute  Dalni  for  Niuchwang  as 
the  commercial  gateway  of  Manchuria,  and  Bussia  was 
casting  about  in  her  mind  for  other  methods  when  the 
Boxer  outbreak  of  1900  played  most  opportunely  into 
her  hands. 

It  is  not  my  intention  here  to  go  into  the  history 
of  the  Boxer  rising  of  1900  :  all  I  wish  to  do  is  to 
recall  its  effect  upon  Bussian  plans.  The  course  of 
events  in  Pechili,  and,  to  use  the  language  of  'The 
Official  Messenger,'  published  in  St  Petersburg  on 
March  24  (April  6),  1901,  "a  series  of  acts  of 
aggression  committed  by  Chinese  insurgents  on  the 
frontier  of  Bussia,  rendered  necessary  the  occupation 
of  the  port  of  Niuchwang  and   the  entry  of  Bussian 

^  The  plague  bogey,  which  the  Eussians  have  found  so  useful  an  instru- 
ment of  obstruction  against  Indian  trade  in  other  parts  of  Asia,  would 
probably  have  been  the  weapon  called  in  here.  After  the  Russian  occupa- 
tion of  Niuchwang,  the  administrator,  Mr  Gross,  told  Consul  Fulford  that 
"Russia  must  protect  her  railway,  and  might  cut  oflf  the  branch  line  to 
Niuchwang  in  the  event  of  epidemics  unless  proper  control  were  allowed." — 
Parliamentary  Paper,  China  No.  2,  1904. 


THE  SITUATION  AT  NIUGHWANG.  313 

troops  into  Manchuria  "  ;  and  though  repeated  pledges 
were  given  that  such  occupation  was  only  a  tem- 
porary measure,  and  a  Convention  was  signed  in  April 
1902  regulating  the  gradual  evacuation  of  the  country, 
the  temptation  to  retain  the  port  which  was  of  such 
vital  importance  to  their  schemes  was  found  when 
the  time  came  to  be  too  strong  for  Russian  states- 
men, and,  in  spite  of  diplomatic  pressure  brought  to 
bear  by  Great  Britain  and  other  Powers  interested 
in  the  matter,  the  curtain  which  rose  on  the  drama 
of  1904  displayed  to  the  world  the  too  familiar  scene 
of  Russia  in  triumphant  possession  of  the  stage — 
superbly  contemptuous  of  the  injured  protestations  of 
her  vanquished  rivals  at  the  sheaves  of  dishonoured 
promises  and  engagements,  at  the  expense  of  which 
she  had  secured  her  position.  She  had  yet  to  learn 
that  a  little  Power  had  risen  in  the  East,  which,  by 
standing  firm  to  its  word  and  refusing  to  throw  down 
its  hand  before  Russian  bluff,  proved  itself  a  match 
for  Russian  duplicity.  And  the  lesson  has  not  yet 
been  completed. 

The  situation  at  Niuchwang  at  the  time  of  the  com- 
mencement of  hostilities  has  been  accurately  summed 
up  by  Mr  H.  Fulford  Bush,  in  a  paper  read  before 
the  Liverpool  Chamber  of  Commerce,  as  follows  :  "A 
Russian  administrator,  backed  by  Russian  troops,  in 
place  of  the  Chinese  authorities  ;  the  custom-house, 
with  the  Russian  administrator  at  its  local  head  ;  the 
revenue  paid  into  the  Russo- Chinese  Bank,  pending 
Russia's  settlement  with  China ;  the  sanitary  control 
Russian,  in  all  matters  affecting  the  Chinese ;  Russian 
prestige  and  power  paramount ;  the  province  a  prey 
to  the  brigands  and  riffraff  generally ;  the  usual  trade 
channels  impeded  and  obstructed  by  the  confusion  and 
disruption  prevailing  throughout  the  province ;   and  a 


314  THE  EAST  CHINESE  RAILWAY. 

gradual  diminution  in  the  export  of  light  sundries,  the 
trade  in  which  the  Russian  authorities  were  doing  their 
utmost  to  divert  towards  Russia." 

In  other  words,  the  bear's  claws  had  closed  over  the 
victim,  which  was  to  be  strangled  or  absorbed  as  the 
future  might  dictate.  The  calculations  upon  which 
such  action  was  based  have,  as  I  have  already  pointed 
out,  been  rudely  and,  from  the  Russian  point  of  view, 
unexpectedly  shaken  by  the  resolute  action  of  Japan, 
and  further  by  the  courage  of  China,  which  has  grown 
from  that  action,  and  which  decided  her,  in  face  of 
violent  opposition  from  Russia,  to  open  the  towns  of 
Mukden  and  Antung  to  foreign  trade.  In  what  exact 
proportions  the  balance  of  power  in  the  Far  East  will 
be  readjusted  at  the  expiration  of  the  present  war  it 
is  impossible  to  say ;  but  of  this  much  we  may  rest 
assured — that,  in  the  event  of  the  success  or  partial 
success  of  our  aUy,  British  trade  and  intercourse  will 
be  delivered  from  the  shadow  of  that  cloud  which 
was  rapidly  spreading  from  the  north,  and  which  the 
diplomatic  efforts  of  our  own  statesmen  showed  them- 
selves powerless  to  dispel. 

From  Port  Arthur  and  Chifu  I  travelled  on  to 
Tientsin  and  Peking,  and  later  spent  some  time  at 
Wei-hai-Wei  before  leaving  for  Japan  ;  but  in  the 
Celestial  capital,  which  has  been  described  too  often 
and  too  well  to  require  any  further  comment  from 
my  pen,  the  immediate  objective  of  my  journey  across 
Asia  was  achieved  :  and  for  the  purposes  of  this  book 
I  take  my  leave  of  the  reader,  as  far  as  the  narrative 
of  travel  is  concerned,  within  the  massive  walls  of  the 
Chinese  capital,  which,  thanks  to  improved  communica- 
tions in  recent  years,  has  opened  its  gates  to  the 
curiosity  of  the  world,  and  has  therefore  at  last  ceased 
to  be  answerable  to  the  charge  of  "  not  making  itself 


THE  END   OF   THE   JOURNEY.  315 


intelligible  or  interesting  to  mankind  other  than  as 
an  archaic  curiosity."  ^  If  he  be  imbued  with  a  pleas- 
ing imagination,  it  will  be  beneath  the  shadow  of  the 
pagoda,  or  in  view  of  the  gaudeous  outlines  of  the 
Temple  of  Heaven,  or  listening  perhaps  to  the  rolling 
sound  of  the  Buddhist  litanies,  chanted  in  unison  by 
the  yellow -robed  inmates  of  the  great  Lama  temple, 
that  he  will  wish  me  farewell,  rather  than,  as  truth 
might  compel  me  to  admit,  ploughing  my  way  along 
those  "  receptacles  of  indescribable  abominations,  where 
the  dust  is  acrid  to  nose  and  eyes,  from  the  dessicated 
refuse  of  generations,"  ^  which  serve  for  streets  in  a 
"  wilderness  of  garbage."  ^  Let  it  be  so.  It  is  as  the 
home  of  sunshine  and  romance,  of  temples  and  palaces, 
of  dazzling  colour  and  bewildering  animation,  of  men 
and  manners  that  set  soaring  the  imagination,  of  mys- 
terious priests  and  titled  kings,  rather  than  as  the 
seat  of  poverty  and  vice,  of  squalor  and  sordid  mate- 
rialism— of  all,  in  fact,  that  is  of  the  earth  earthy — 
that  I  prefer  to  look  back  upon  the  cities  of  the  East. 

^  The  Englishman  in  China.     Alexander  Michie. 
2  Ibid.  ^  Ibid. 


ENGLAND   IN    ASIA 


"The  problem  of  Asia  is  a  world  problem,  which  has  come  upon  the 
world  in  an  age  when,  through  the  rapidity  of  communication,  it  is  wide- 
awake and  sensible  as  never  before,  and  by  electrical  touch,  to  every 
stirring  in  its  members,  and  to  the  tendency  thereof." 

— Captain  A.  T.  Mahan,  The  Problem  of  Asia. 


CHAPTER    XXYI. 

THE    NEAR    EAST. 

England  and  Russia  in  the  East— The  point  of  view  from  -which  Asiatic 
questions  must  be  regarded— "  Without  India  the  British  Empire 
could  not  exist"  — The  value  of  prestige  — The  commercial  and 
strategic  aspects  of  the  Near  Eastern  and  the  Far  Eastern  questions 

Turkey  —  The    long-standing    antagonism    between    Russia    and 

Turkey— Enter  Germany— A  novel  solution  of  the  Turkish  imbroglio 
— The  Baghdad  railway — Persia — Resemblance  between  the  Persian 
and  Turkish  problems— Indifference  of  Great  Britain  in  the  past— 
The  financial  blunder  of  1900— The  Russo-Persian  railway  agreement 
of  1890— A  policy  adopted— The  Viceroy's  visit  to  the  Persian  Gulf 
and  the  Garter  Mission  to  Teheran- The  Koweit  incident— Ways  and 
communications  —  Activity  in  the  field  of  commerce  — The  Nushki- 
Sistan  route — The  British  Government  should  become  shareholders 
in  the  Imperial  Bank  of  Persia  — The  recrudescence  of  British 
power. 

When  embarking  upon  the  task  which  lies  before  me 
in  the  concluding  chapters  of  the  present  volume — in 
making,  that  is,  an  attempt  to  analyse  the  situation  as 
it  affects  Great  Britain  in  Asia — I  find  myself  con- 
fronted with  a  dilemma  at  the  very  outset.  For  to 
give  a  comprehensive  exposition  of  the  problems  which 
await  solution  at  the  hands  of  Great  Britain  in  the 
East  would  require  far  greater  space  than  can  here  be 
given  to  it,  while  any  attempt  to  deal  briefly  with  a 
number  of  questions,  each  one  of  which  carries  in  its 
train  a  whole  host  of  subsidiary  ramifications,  must 
necessarily  provide  innumerable  loopholes  for  misunder- 
standing.    Nevertheless,  since  there  is  no  alternative, 


320  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


the  attempt  must  be  made,  an  elementary  acquaintance 
with  Asian  affairs  being  necessarily  presupposed  on 
behalf  of  the  reader. 

In  the  opening  chapter  of  this  book  I  have  been  at 
pains  to  point  out  that  as  the  kingdoms  of  the  East 
have  slowly  but  surely  sunk  into  a  decline,  they  have 
naturally  been  absorbed  by,  or  fallen  under  the  aegis  of, 
that  Power  which  by  its  geographical  position  was 
brought  into  contact  with  them — Russia.  It  is  equally 
clear  that  without  geographical  juxtaposition  command 
of  the  sea  could  alone  give  to  a  Western  nation  do- 
minion in  the  East,  and  it  was  naval  supremacy  in 
conjunction  with  commercial  activity  that  gave  an 
Eastern  empire  to  another  European  Power — Great 
Britain.  So  it  is  "  England  and  Russia  in  the  East," 
the  title  that  appears  upon  the  backs  of  a  whole  host 
of  books  written  upon  the  subject  during  recent  years, 
that  sums  up  the  Eastern  phase  of  the  past  century. 
The  exclusive  claims  of  the  two  nations  must  inevitably 
undergo  modification  in  the  future,  since  the  awaken- 
ing of  Japan,  the  commercial  rivalry  of  Western 
nations,  notably  of  Germany,  and  the  improved  com- 
munications which  have  opened  up  the  markets  of  the 
Eastern  world  of  late  years,  have  introduced  additional 
competing  forces  into  the  arena ;  but  nevertheless, 
with  every  allowance  made  for  the  ambitions  of  other 
Powers,  the  one  nation  that  confronts  England  now,  as 
in  the  past,  whether  it  be  across  the  waters  of  the 
Euxine,  or  over  the  crumpled  outline  of  the  Persian 
highlands,  or  from  behind  the  rugged  buttresses  of  her 
Indian  stronghold  that  she  directs  her  gaze,  is  and  for 
long  must  continue  to  be  Russia.  Whose  were  the 
war-hardened  legions  that  rattled  at  the  portals  of 
Constantinople  and  shook  the  Ottoman  Empire  to  its 
foundations    while     England     looked     on    aghast  ?  — 


THE  IMPORTANT  POSITION  OF  INDIA.  321 

Bussia's  !  Whose  the  serried  ranks  that  a  century 
ago  were  to  have  been  hurled  against  the  bastions  of 
India,  whose  the  insinuating  diplomacy  that  is  even 
now  undermining  the  glacis  of  our  Indian  fort,  preparing 
the  ground  for  the  lodgment  of  a  hostile  force,  and 
opening  out  an  avenue  of  approach  whereby  to  render 
us  vulnerable  to  a  flank  attack  ? — Russia's !  Whose 
the  grey-clad  sentinel  who  through  all  the  clash  of 
conflicting  interests  stands  threateningly  on  the  shores 
of  the  Eastern  Sea,  a  menace  to  British  commercial 
aspirations  and  to  the  peace  of  the  nations  of  the 
world  ?  The  answer  is  for  ever  the  same — Russia's ! 
And  so  the  antagonism  and  the  irreconcilable  nature 
of  the  ambitions  of  Great  Britain  and  Russia  form  one 
leading  factor  to  be  borne  in  mind  when  reviewing  the 
problem  of  Asia ;  and  there  is  yet  another,  the  point  of 
view  from  which  Asiatic  questions  should  be  regarded. 
For  as  India  is  the  pivot  of  British  supremacy  in  the 
East,  so  questions  dealing  with  the  East  should  be 
looked  at  largely  from  an  Indian  point  of  view.  A  half- 
way house  between  Great  Britain  and  Australia,  New 
Zealand  and  the  Far  East ;  a  stronghold  in  the  long 
line  of  communications  that  weld  together  the  com- 
ponent parts  of  a  widely  scattered  whole;  the  home 
and  raison  d'etre  of  British  power  in  Asia, — India  oc- 
cupies a  unique  position  among  the  constituent  parts  of 
empire.  "It  is  not  intrinsically  only,"  writes  Captain 
Mahan,  "that  India  possesses  the  value  of  a  base  to  Great 
Britain  ;  the  central  position  which  she  holds  relatively 
to  China  and  to  Egypt  obtains  also  towards  Australia 
and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  assisting  thus  the  concen- 
tration upon  her  of  such  support  as  either  colony  can 
extend  to  the  general  policy  of  an  Imperial  Federation." 
The  safeguarding  of  India,  then,  must  ever  remain  one 
of  the  cardinal  articles  of  the  belief  of  British  states- 

X 


322  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


men,  for,  as  was  long  since  observed  by  India's  present 
Viceroy,  "  without  India  the  British  Empire  could  not 
exist." 

It  is  well,  therefore,  before  going  further,  since  Asian 
problems  depend  for  their  solution  so  largely  upon  India, 
to  define  the  position  of  that  country  from  an  interior 
point  of  view.  This  has  been  done  by  Lord  Curzon, 
than  whom  there  is  no  man  living  better  qualified  to 
pronounce,  only  so  lately  as  the  spring  of  the  present 
year :  "  India  is  like  a  fortress,  with  the  vast  moat 
of  the  sea  on  two  of  her  faces,  and  with  mountains  for 
her  walls  on  the  remainder ;  but  beyond  those  walls, 
which  are  sometimes  of  by  no  means  insuperable  height, 
and  admit  of  being  easily  penetrated,  extends  a  glacis 
of  varying  breadth  and  dimension.  We  do  not  want 
to  occupy  it,  but  we  also  cannot  afford  to  see  it  occupied 
by  our  foes.  We  are  quite  content  to  let  it  remain  in 
the  hands  of  our  allies  and  friends ;  but  if  rival  and  un- 
friendly influences  creep  up  to  it  and  lodge  themselves 
right  under  our  walls,  we  are  compelled  to  intervene, 
because  a  danger  would  thereby  grow  up  that  might 
one  day  menace  our  security.  This  is  the  secret  of  the 
whole  position  in  Arabia,  Persia,  Afghanistan,  Tibet, 
and  as  far  eastwards  as  Siam.  He  would  be  a  short- 
sighted commander  who  merely  manned  his  ramparts 
in  India  and  did  not  look  out  beyond ;  and  the  whole 
of  our  policy  during  the  past  five  years  has  been  directed 
towards  maintaining  our  influence,  and  to  preventing 
the  expansion  of  hostile  agencies  on  this  area  which  I 
have  described."  To  preserve  India  free  from  danger, 
therefore,  and  not  only  India,  but  our  line  of  communi- 
cations with  India,  Australia,  and  the  Far  East,  it  is 
necessary  that  those  countries  which  border  on  India 
and  impinge  upon  such  communications  should  remain 
in  the  hands  of  friendly,  or  at  any  rate  of  innocuous, 


THE  IMPORTANCE   OF  PRESTIGE.  323 

peoples,  and  be  kept  free  from  the  control  of  a  strong 
and  possibly — probably — hostile  Power. 

There  are  two  more  general  points  to  be  borne  in 
mind  —  firstly,  that  in  dealing  with  oriental  races 
prestige  is  a  factor  the  influence  of  which  can  hardly 
be  overestimated ;  and  secondly,  that  whereas  there 
is  much  that  is  common  to  both  the  Near  Eastern  and 
Far  Eastern  questions,  there  is  this  great  diff'erence, 
that  while  the  one  is  in  the  main  a  political  and 
strategic  question,  the  other  is  equally  in  the  main  a 
commercial  one. 

Instances  of  the  effect  of  a  falling  or  rising  prestige 
can  be  quoted  without  end.  In  the  low  ebb  of  British 
influence  in  the  councils  of  the  Shah  in  the  'Eighties, 
Lord  Curzon  saw  the  shadow  of  the  calamitous  policy 
pursued  by  the  British  Government  of  1880-85  in 
various  parts  of  the  Empire.  "  The  retreat  from  South 
Africa,  the  evacuation  of  Kandahar,  the  everlasting 
disgrace  of  Khartum,  the  '  bolt '  from  the  Murghab, — 
all  these  incidents  rang  like  a  trumpet-blast  through 
the  whispering-galleries  of  the  East,  and  were  inter- 
preted as  presages  of  an  impending  ruin,"  ^  A  weak 
or  magnanimous  policy,  which  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Oriental  are  synonymous  terms,  is  fatal,  and  calculated 
to  invite  disaster.  In  spite  of  the  length  of  our 
experience  in  dealing  with  oriental  races,  we  have  yet 
fully  to  appreciate  this  fact,  and  to  realise  the  difficulties 
which  we  sedulously  lay  up  for  ourselves  by  an  obstinate 
refusal  to  observe  it.  The  recent  operations  in  Tibet 
add  yet  another  example  to  the  long  list  bequeathed 
to  us  by  the  past.  Impressions  of  British  impotence 
drawn  from  our  almost  inconceivable  forbearance  have 
sunk  deep  into  the  Tibetan  mind,  and  are  likely  to  be 
the  cause  of  much  trouble  and  loss  of  life,  which,  had 

1  Persia,  vol.  ii.  p.  606. 


324  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


we  acted  with  less  timidity  and  rather  more  common- 
sense  at  the  outset,  might  well  have  been  avoided. 
"  We  have  in  fact,"  writes  Colonel  Younghusband,  "  as 
I  have  so  often  remarked,  not  one  ounce  of  prestige  on 
this  frontier.  I  have  therefore  nothing  to  work  with 
in  making  a  settlement."  ^ 

Bussian  intelligence  was  not  slow  to  grasp  this  fact, 
with  a  result  that  Russian  dealings  with  native  races 
show  a  marked  superiority — if  success  be  any  criterion 
— over  our  own.  "  The  native,"  to  quote  one  of  the 
most  recent  writers  on  the  Russian  advance,  "  soon 
understands  that  there  is  no  trifling,  and — usually — 
becomes  resigned.  He  is  given  to  understand  un- 
mistakably what  is  Russian  power."  ^  Native  races 
throughout  the  length  of  Asia  from  west  to  east  who 
have  once  come  into  contact  with  Russia  have  perhaps 
disliked  her,  they  have  certainly  feared  her.  "  As  the 
Daimios  of  Japan  in  their  anti- foreign  manifestoes 
declared  that  every  foreigner  could  be  insulted  with 
impunity  except  the  Russians,  so  in  China  the  name 
was  a  talisman  of  security."  ^  M.  Popoff,  the  Russian 
secretary  at  Peking  at  the  time  of  the  Anglo-French 
expedition,  had  occasion  to  spend  a  night  at  a  Chinese 
inn.  Chinese  soldiers  swarmed  in  during  the  night, 
and  finding  a  "  foreign  devil,"  at  once  decided  to  make 
an  end  of  him.  His  salvation  lay  in  his  nationality. 
"  That  foreigner  is  a  Russian,"  quoth  the  innkeeper ; 
"  it  will  be  dangerous  to  lay  a  hand  on  him."  *  And 
M.  Popoff  was  left  untouched. 

The  last  point  which  I  mentioned  with  regard  to  the 
commercial  and  strategic  element  being  the  dominant 

1  Further  Papers  relating  to  Tibet  (CD.  2054). 

2  The  Eussian  Advance.     A.  J.  Beveridge. 
^  The  Englishman  in  China.     A.  Michie. 

4  Ibid. 


TURKEY.  325 

characteristic  of  the  Far  Eastern  and  Near  Eastern 
questions  respectively,  is,  of  course,  a  general  one. 
Commerce  plays  an  important  part  in  the  Near  East, 
and  the  Far  East  has  its  strategic  aspect  for  us  as  well 
as  its  commercial  side,  more  especially  since  we  became 
the  allies  of  Japan,  Hongkong  and  Wei-hai-Wei  are 
strategic  bases,  and  the  long  access  into  the  interior 
afforded  by  the  Yangtse-Kiang  is  a  valuable  asset  in 
the  strategic  capital  of  the  Power  which  has  command 
of  the  sea.  But,  broadly  speaking,  it  may  be  said 
that  the  question  of  the  Far  East  is,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, a  commercial  one,  while  the  question  of  the 
Near  East  is  a  strateofic  one  first  and  a  commercial  one 
afterwards  ;  and  when  a  writer  in  '  The  Spectator '  of 
May  9,  1903,  gave  expression  to  his  opinion  that  "a 
great  war  to  guard  our  petty  trade  in  the  Persian  Gulf 
would  be  a  financial  folly,"  he  merely  showed  that  he 
had  entirely  failed  to  grasp  the  real  issues  involved. 

Bearing  in  mind  these  brief  generalisations,  it  re- 
mains for  me  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  situation  in 
the  different  countries  individually  with  which  Great 
Britain  is  at  the  present  time  closely  concerned. 

Turkey. 

Beginning  on  the  extreme  west,  we  have  the  Turkish 
Empire,  forming — thanks  to  its  geographical  position — 
the  starting-point  of  that  belt  of  territory  of  unsettled 
political  status  which  stretches  across  Asia  from  west 
to  east,  and  which  merits  the  description  of  Captain 
Mahan  of  "  the  debatable  and  debated  ground."  From 
the  days  when  the  germ  of  the  Russian  Empire  first 
fell  upon  Russian  soil  up  to  the  present  time  an  unin- 
terrupted antagonism  has  existed  between  the  two 
countries.     The  peoples  have  changed  but  the  antag- 


326  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


onism  remains.  The  crescent  and  star  of  the  ancient 
Greeks  now  blaze  on  the  green  banners  of  Islam,  and 
the  two-headed  eagle  of  Byzantium  is  flaunted  across 
Asia  on  the  standards  of  a  northern  Power,  while  a 
Russian  Tsar  sits  on  the  throne  of  his  Viking  prede- 
cessors of  a  thousand  years  ago.  Nevertheless,  despite 
such  changes  of  ownership,  there  is  a  curious  similarity 
in  the  antagonism  of  the  two  countries  then  and  now, 
and  when  the  Grand  Duke  Nicholas  flouted  Turkish 
authority  in  1902,  and,  with  a  protesting  Turkish 
official  on  board,  steered  the  battleship  Georgi  Pobie- 
donosets  derisively  up  the  Golden  Horn,  he  was  un- 
wittingly repeating  the  insult  flung  at  the  city  by  his 
ancestor  Oleg,  ten  centuries  before,  when  he  hung  his 
shield  on  the  gates  of  Byzantium  in  derision  of  its 
inhabitants. 

As  the  power  of  Eussia  has  consolidated  and  in- 
creased, the  vigour  of  the  Turk,  as  of  almost  every 
other  Asiatic  nation,  has  proportionately  declined,  and 
it  is  thanks  only  to  the  rivalry  of  Western  Powers 
that  "the  sick  man"  still  sits  on  the  throne  at  Yildiz. 
For  since  Turkey  is  one  of  those  states  which  impinge 
upon  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Mediterranean,  and 
is  laved  by  the  waters  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  "  the  integ- 
rity of  Turkey  "  has  of  necessity  been  the  watchword  of 
British  policy  in  this  portion  of  the  globe.  Twice  in 
the  course  of  the  past  century  has  Russia  let  loose  the 
dogs  of  war  that  she  might  get  possession  of  the  keys 
of  the  Bosphorus,  and  twice  has  Great  Britain  stepped 
forth  to  wrest  them  from  her  grasp— once  in  1853  by 
appeal  to  the  arbitrament  of  war,  once  again  in  1878 
by  aid  of  the  masterful  diplomacy  of  Lord  Beaconsfield. 

As  a  result  of  this  want  of  success  Eussia  diverted 
her  energy  for  the  time  being  into  other  channels,  and 
a  whole  crop   of  political   questions    in   Central  Asia 


THE  ENTRANCE   OF  GERMANY.  327 

immediately  came  into  being  ;  but  though  frustrated 
for  the  time,  she  still  looks  with  longing  eyes  at  the 
object  of  her  desire,  and  no  chance  which  comes  in  the 
way  of  her  astute  and  indefatigable  diplomatists  for 
oiling  the  wheels  of  her  endeavour  is  ever  allowed  to 
pass  by. 

In  the  meantime,  however,  another  Power,  which, 
in  the  days  of  the  Berlin  Conference,  knew  little  of 
and  cared  less  for  the  attractions  of  the  Near  East, 
has  raised  its  voice  in  the  councils  of  the  Turk,  and 
to-day  the  trumpet-blast  of  German  ambition  resounds 
through  the  streets  of  Constantinople.  The  blandish- 
ments of  Count  Hatzfeldt,  and  the  ability  and  force  of 
character  of  General  von  Goltz,  paved  the  way  for 
the  magnetic  personality  of  the  Emperor  William  II., 
who  was  completely  successful  in  securing  the  friend- 
ship of  the  Sultan,  and  with  the  royal  visit  to  Con- 
stantinople in  1899  a  third  Power  was  hurried  incon- 
tinently into  the  forefront  of  the  theatre  of  Ottoman 
diplomacy  and  intrigue. 

Needless  to  say,  Russia  regarded  with  feelings  of 
undisguised  aversion  this  latest  intruder  in  the  field  of 
her  hereditary  ambition,  and  the  Russian  censor  has  in 
nowise  prevented  Russian  opinion  from  sounding  loudly 
in  the  Russian  press,  and  a  novel  solution  of  the  Turk- 
ish  imbroglio  was  a  short  time  ago  put  tentatively 
forward. 

A  spark  was  to  be  applied  to  the  Ottoman  volcano, 
— that  was  necessary  to  create  an  excuse  for  active 
operations, — upon  which  Russia,  with  England's  acqui- 
escence, should  secure  the  Bosphorus,  and  England, 
Russia  assenting,  should  secure  Gallipoli  and  the 
command  of  the  Dardanelles.  With  the  Bosphorus  in 
her  possession,  Russia  would  be  content  to  leave  the 
Mediterranean  to  others.     With  Gallipoli  fortified  and 


328  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


in  British  hands,  no  reasonable  grounds  for  British 
suspicion  of  Russia  in  regard  to  the  Mediterranean 
could  exist.  The  dominating  note  which  sounded 
throughout  the  whole  suggestion  was  jealousy  of  Ger- 
many. "  Germany,"  it  ran,  "  has,  it  is  true,  made  her 
appearance  in  the  field.  German  intrigue  at  Constan- 
tinople has  latterly  been  strongly  in  evidence,  but  the 
solution  of  the  Russian  problem  can  and  will  be  found 
without  particular  reference  to  Germany.  The  Ger- 
mans may  yet  find  that  they  might  with  profit  have 
been  content  to  wait  inevitable  developments  around 
the  Euxine  before  putting  so  many  eggs  into  their 
Baghdad  basket." 

The  whole  scheme  is  delightful,  but — and  they  are 
rather  big  buts — despite  the  sanguine  anticipations  of 
its  author,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Germany  would 
have  a  good  deal  to  say  In  any  such  arrangement,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  Turks,  who  might  not  unnaturally 
commit  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  they  had  some 
claim  to  a  voice  in  the  matter  of  the  partition  of  their 
own  country.  Finally,  all  mention  of  the  future  of 
that  vast  portion  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  which 
stretches .  from  the  Black  Sea  on  the  north  to  the  Bed 
Sea  on  the  south,  and  from  the  Mediterranean  on  the 
west  to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  Indian  Ocean  on  the 
east,  is  conveniently  ignored.  The  head  is  to  be 
severed,  but  what  of  the  trunk  ?  "  Where  the  carcass 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together." 

The  Russian  press,  moreover,  were  at  considerable 
pains  to  lay  emphasis  upon  the  incompatibility  of 
British  and  German  interests  in  general,  and  in  con- 
nection with  the  Baghdad  railway  in  particular,  and 
the  chorus  of  their  congratulation,  when  the  cold  re- 
ception accorded  to  the  scheme  by  the  House  of  Com- 
mons in  the  spring  of  1903  became  known,  was  inde- 


THE  BAGHDAD  RAILWAY.  329 


corously  loud.  I  have  already  dealt  with  this  question 
at  some  length  in  a  previous  chapter,  and  there  is  no 
occasion  for  me  to  do  more  here  than  to  emphasise 
what  I  have  already  said.  Germany  in  sole  and  undis- 
puted control  of  Mesopotamia  and  the  hinterland  of 
the  Persian  Gulf  would  be  bad ;  but  Eussia  with  her 
long  land  frontier,  already  stretching  from  Armenia 
to  Chinese  Turkestan,  with  its  ingrained  tendency 
towards  expansion  to  the  south,  would  be  infinitely 
worse.  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  of  these  two 
eventualities  the  chances  are  at  present  in  favour  of 
the  first,  and  I  have  also  pointed  out  how  it  lies  in 
our  power  to  modify  such  prospective  position  in  our 
favour.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Baghdad 
railway  will  eventually  be  built,  and  it  cannot  be 
too  strongly  urged  that  the  real  reason  why  this 
country  must  participate  in  such  a  scheme  should 
not  be  lost  sight  of  That  reason  is  no  desire  to 
pander  to  or  inordinate  affection  for  Germany,  but 
the  protection  of  our  own  interests.  It  is  of  vital 
importance  that  when  the  time  comes  for  the  British 
Government  to  reconsider  the  question  of  the  Bagh- 
dad railway,  they  should  secure  for  this  country  that 
voice  in  the  councils  of  the  Imperial  Ottoman  Bail- 
way  Company  which  in  her  position  she  has  every 
right  to  demand.  So  that,  when  the  history  of  the 
question  comes  to  be  written,  the  next  generation 
may  accord  to  the  present  that  measure  of  gratitude 
for  securing  to  them  a  share  of  control  of  the  land- 
route  to  the  East,  that  the  present  accords  to  the 
past  for  a  similar  service  rendered  in  connection  with 
the  sea-route,  which  ensured  our  present  position  with 
regard  to  the  Suez  Canal. 


330  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


Persia. 

The  Persian  question  is  by  no  means  a  new  one. 
It  has  been  in  a  state  varying  from  comparative 
quiescence  to  feverish  activity  for  more  than  a  cen- 
tury, and  receives  spasmodic  recognition  from  the 
British  pubhc.  The  Shah  indulges  in  a  meteoric 
trip  to  Europe,  and  the  world  is  all  agog  to  cast  a 
curious  eye  upon  the  "  King  of  kings,"  and  to  learn 
something  about  what  it  hastily  christens  the  "  Per- 
sian problem."  With  his  departure  public  interest 
ebbs,  and  except  when  some  more  than  usually  un- 
abashed violation  of  Persian  territory  or  Persian 
prerogatives  is  perpetrated  by  her  northern  neigh- 
bour, which  excites  an  ephemeral  indignation  in  the 
British  press,  the  crooked  course  of  Persian  progress 
is  relegated  willingly  enough  to  the  cabinets  of 
statesmen  and  the  chancellories  of  diplomatists. 
None  the  less  is  the  path  of  Persian  progress  a  diffi- 
cult and  thorny  way,  for  Persia,  like  China,  is  being 
irresistibly  swept  into  the  swirling  vortex  of  world 
movement. 

Generally  speaking,  the  position  of  Persia  as  re- 
gards England  and  Russia  closely  resembles  that  of 
Turkey,  for  Persia  is  the  second  of  those  countries 
with  regard  to  which  our  policy  has  been  "  the 
maintenance  of  our  predominant  influence  and  the 
prevention  of  the  expansion  of  hostile  agencies,"  And 
it  is  all  the  more  important  from  the  fact  that  not 
only  would  a  hostile  Power  in  possession  of  Persia 
be  disastrous  to  British  and  Indian  trade  with  that 
country,  but  it  would  also  render  nugatory  to  some 
extent  the  advantao^es  which  accrue  to  us  from  our 
supremacy  in  the  Persian   Gulf,  and   would  turn  the 


PRESENT  IMPOTENCE  AND  PAST  SPLENDOUR.         331 


flank  of  the  land  defences  of  our  Indian  Empire. 
*'  Concessions  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  whether  by  posi- 
tive formal  arrangement  or  by  simple  neglect  of 
the  local  commercial  interests  which  now  under- 
lie political  and  military  control,  will  imperil  Great 
Britain's  naval  situation  in  the  farther  East,  her 
political  position  in  India,  her  commercial  interests 
in  both,  and  the  imperial  tie  between  herself  and 
Australasia.  "1  Moreover,  the  blow  to  British  prestige, 
none  too  high  even  now,  would  in  such  an  eventuality 
be  extremely  dangerous,  and  shake  to  its  foundations 
the  whole  structure  of  British  dominion  throughout 
the   East.  2 

There  is  another  point  of  resemblance  between  the 
two  countries  —  the  pitiable  state  of  their  present 
impotence  as  compared  with  the  splendour  of  their 
past.  Time  was  when  the  fame  of  a  great  Shah^ 
rang  clarion-like  through  all  lands,  when  a  Russian 
Tsar  thought  it  no  dishonour  to  borrow  from  a  Per- 
sian king,^  and  when  a  monarch  of  Iran  contemp- 
tuously   ordered    the    impure    footprints    left    by    an 

1  The  Persian  Gulf  and  International  Relations.     Captain  A.  T.  Mahan. 

2  All  who  are  acquainted  with  the  East  are  well  aware  how  sensitive  an 
instrument  is  the  pulse  of  public  feeling  in  Asiatic  countries.  A  corres- 
pondent writing  from  Quetta  at  the  outset  of  hostilities  in  the  Far  East 
says  :  "  It  is  extraordinary  the  exact  information  the  people  in  the  bazaars 
have  of  the  relative  forces  of  Russia  and  Japan.  Our  frontier  men  are 
keen  politicians.  .  .  .  The  firm  alliance  between  .Japan  and  Britain  while 
Russia  and  .Japan  were  evidently  drifting  into  war,  created  the  warmest 
feeling  of  admiration  for  our  country,  while  it  excited  some  astonishment. 
The  result  of  the  Japanese  victories  has  been  to  raise  British  prestige 
higher  than  even  a  successful  frontier  campaign  could  have  done." 

3  Shah  Abbas  the  Great,  under  whom  modern  Persia  reached  its  highest 
pinnacle  of  renown. 

*  The  Tsar  Michael  Romanoff  was  reduced  to  such  straits  in  the  first 
years  of  his  reign  that  in  1617  he  borrowed  7000  roubles  from  Shah 
Abbas. 


332  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


English  envoy  on  the  soil  of  the  sacred  palace  as 
he  retired  from  the  Persian  Court  to  be  effaced 
with   a  basin  of  sand !  ^ 

With  the  swing  of  the  pendulum  of  time  the  tables 
have  been  rudely  turned,  the  resources  of  Persia  are 
heavily  mortgaged  to  her  former  debtor,  the  antics  of 
her  court  recall  the  buffooneries  of  an  English  sovereign 
when  surprised,  in  the  midst  of  frivolity  and  feasting 
in  company  with  the  ladies  of  his  seraglio,  by  the 
thunder  of  the  guns  of  Holland  in  the  Medway  and 
the  Thames,  and,  far  from  the  "  impure  footprints " 
being  effaced,  an  ill-disguised  impatience  was  exhibited 
for  the  arrival  of  the  expected  envoy,  bearing  a  coveted 
decoration  from  England's  king. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  English  statesmen  and  the 
British  public  have  at  times  shown  a  woeful  lack  of 
proper  appreciation  of  the  part  which  Persia  is 
destined  to  play  in  "Middle  Eastern"  developments. 
Periods  of  feverish  concern  in  the  affairs  of  the 
dominions  of  the  "King  of  kings"  have  alternated 
with  epochs  of  equally  distracting  apathy,  so  much  so 
that  one  of  the  ablest  of  English  writers  on  Eastern 
matters  has  been  led  into  raising  his  voice  in  a  scathing 
jeremiad  against  public  callousness.  "  If,  then,"  wrote 
Sir  Henry  Pawlinson  in  the  'Sixties,  "  there  was  danger 
to  British  India  from  the  attitude  and  possible  designs 
of  Russia  twenty-eight  years  ago,  that  danger  must  be 

^  The  envoy  was  Jenkinson,  one  of  the  company  of  merchant  adven- 
turers which  had  been  formed  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.  to  discover 
"regions,  kingdoms,  islands,  and  places  unknown  and  unvisited  by  the 
highway  of  the  sea."  Their  first  venture  took  them  to  that  strange 
sea  girding  the  north-eastern  countries  of  Europe,  spoken  of  by  Tacitus 
as  "a  sluggish  mere  and  motionless — which  forms  the  girdle  of  the  world, 
where  you  hear  the  sound  of  sun-rising  ! "  and  cast  them  eventually  on 
the  coast  of  Russia.  The  result  was  the  opening  up  of  commercial  inter- 
course between  England  and  Russia  and  the  little-known  lands  beyond. 
The  Shah  was  Shah  Tahmasp,  and  the  year  1562. 


BRITISH  PRESTIGE  IN  PERSIA.  333 

increased  a  hundredfold  at  the  present  day ;  yet  so  far 
from  being  now  betrayed  into  any  paroxysm  of  alarm, 
.  .  .  her  proceedings  fail  even  to  excite  our  curiosity, 
and  we  seem,  as  far  as  the  public  is  concerned,  to  await 
the  threatened  contact  of  the  two  empires  with  supreme 
indifference."  ^ 

One  of  the  most  gratifying  symptoms  in  British  policy 
in  recent  times  is  perhaps  the  intimation  that  her 
statesmen  have  at  length  realised  the  vital  importance 
of  laying  down  and  carrying  out  a  definite  policy  in 
matters  relating  to  her  Indian  neighbours.  British 
prestige  in  Persia  was  at  a  low  ebb  when  I  first  visited 
that  country  in  1900  and  1901.  We  had  been  given 
a  great  chance,  but,  with  a  singular  failure  to  grasp 
its  real  significance,  we  allowed  it  to  pass  to  our  rivals. 
A  combination  of  British  narrowness  and  Russian  in- 
sistence, assisted,  as  I  am  well  aware,  by  Persian 
duplicity,  placed  the  country  financially — and  finance 
is  the  alpha  and  omega  of  Persian  politics — under  the 
thumb  of  Bussia.  Persia  required  money,  and  she 
applied  to  England  for  a  loan.  English  capitalists 
were  shy  and  held  aloof, — they  doubtless  held  vivid 
memories  of  the  shock  administered  to  the  London 
market  in  1890  in  connection  with  the  notorious  "state 
lotteries  "  concession, — and  the  Government,  instead  of 
hailing  with  delight  the  chance  they  were  actually 
begged  to  accept,  delayed.  The  policy  of  investing 
money  outside  the  empire  was  perhaps  in  the  opinion 
of  pedantic  professors  contrary  to  the  tenets  of  sound 
economy,  and  the  Foreign  Office  would  accept  as  surety 
nothing  less  than  control  of  the  customs  by  British 
officials,  a  privilege  which  Persia  was  in  no  position  to 
concede.  And  so,  baffled  in  her  endeavour  to  raise 
money  in  England,  she  turned  to  the  only  alternative 

1  England  and  Eussia  in  the  East. 


334  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


source,  and  the  Russian  loan  of  £2,500,000  of  1900, 
the  harbinger  of  more  to  follow,  became  an  accom- 
plished fact.  Nor  was  this  all.  Persian  Cossacks 
under  Russian  officers  formed  the  nucleus,  and  indeed 
the  only  serviceable  asset,  of  the  Persian  army ; 
Russian  doctors  accompanied  by  Russian  Cossacks  were 
parading  ostentatiously  through  Eastern  Persia — dan- 
ger of  plague  from  India  was  the  excuse ;  Russian 
bounties  were  pushing  Russian  trade  from  one  end  of 
the  country  to  the  other ;  and  the  Russian  Banque 
des  Prets,  since  rechristened  the  Banque  d'Escompte, 
an  agency  of  the  Russian  Minister  of  Finance,  with  a 
strong  and  significant  resemblance  to  the  Russo- Chinese 
Bank  in  another  sphere,  was  entering  upon  that  policy 
of  cut-throat  competition  with  the  Imperial  Bank  of 
Persia — the  one  British  institution  of  importance  sur- 
viving in  the  country — which  is  being  pursued  with 
relentless  persistency  to  the  present  day.  Moreover, 
the  so-called  secret  convention  of  1890,  which  gave  to 
Russia  the  control  of  railway  construction  for  a  period 
of  ten  years,  had  been  further  renewed,  so  as  to  hold 
good  until  1905  or,  as  the  Persians  themselves  aver, 
until  1910.  British  prestige  was  indeed  at  a  discount. 
There  are  signs,  however,  that  the  tide  has  turned. 
The  game  that  is  being  played  is  an  uphill  one,  it  is 
true.  Many  of  the  factors  above  enumerated,  which 
have  undermined  British  influence,  are  still  there,  and 
others,  such  as  the  commercial  treaty  of  1902,  of  which 
I  have  already  written  in  an  earlier  chapter,  have  been 
added ;  but  some  things  have  been  said — definitely  and 
officially — and,  what  is  still  more  important,  some  few 
things  have  been  done,  which  have  not  been  without 
their  efiect  both  upon  the  Persians  themselves  and  upon 
their  neighbours  on  the  north,  and  it  was  impossible 
when  travelling  in  the  country  in  1903  to  be  insensible 


BRITISH  POLICY  IN  PERSIA.  335 


to   certain   indications   of   a   recrudescence    of  British 
power. 

I  have  outlined  briefly — how  briefly  I  am  only  too 
well  aware — the  difliculties  we  have  to  face,  and  the 
disadvantages  from  which  we  suffer.  It  remains  for 
me,  in  bringing  to  a  conclusion  this  short  survey  of  the 
situation  in  Persia,  to  make  rapid  mention  of  what  has 
been  said  and  what  has  been  done  to  counteract  and 
to  overcome  them. 

In  the  first  place,  the  British  Government  have 
taken  their  courage  in  their  hands,  and,  mirahile  dictu, 
have  declared  a  policy.  In  1902  the  Under-Secretary 
of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  laid  it  down  that  it  would 
be  impossible  for  us,  whatever  the  cause,  to  abandon 
what  we  look  upon  as  our  rightful  position  in  Persia. 
"  Especially  is  that  true  in  regard  to  the  Persian  Gulf 
It  is  true  not  only  of  the  Persian  Gulf  but  of  the 
southern  provinces  of  Persia  and  those  provinces  which 
border  on  our  Indian  Empire.  Our  rights  there  and 
our  position  of  ascendancy  we  cannot  abandon."  It  is 
satisfactory  to  observe  that  it  is  here  realised  that 
British  interests  do  not  reach  their  limit  with  the  high- 
water  mark  of  the  wild  sea- waves,  and  that  for  securing 
the  natural  rights  of  India  "  purely  naval  control  is  a 
very  imperfect  instrument,  unless  supported  and  re- 
inforced by  the  shores  on  which  it  acts."  ^  And  this 
declaration  was  repeated  and  emphasised  by  Lord 
Lansdowne  in  May  1903,  when  speaking  upon  the 
question  in  the  House  of  Lords  :  "  I  say  it  without 
hesitation,  we  should  regard  the  establishment  of  a 
naval  base  or  of  a  fortified  port  in  the  Persian  Gulf  by 
any  other  Power  as  a  very  grave  menace  to  British 
interests,  and  we  should  certainly  resist  it  with  all  the 
means  at  our  disposal." 

1  The  Persian  Gulf  and  International  Eelations.     Captain  A.  T.  Mahan. 


336  THE  NEAR  EAST. 

That,  at  any  rate,  is  satisfactory.     We  have  a  definite 
declaration  of  policy,  and  all  the  world  now  knows  the 
attitude    of    his   Majesty's    Government   towards    any 
Power  endeavouring  to  encroach  upon  declared  British 
interests,  so  long  at  least  as  the  Government  that  made 
it  remains  in  power — a  contingency  which,  unfortunately, 
has  to  be  postulated  in  any  declaration  of  British  policy. 
But  words  unsupported  by  deeds  are  of  little  value,  and 
it  is  in  the  outward  and  visible  signs  of  the  intention 
and  purpose  lying  behind  mere  oratorical  declamation 
that  men  judge  the  worth  and  probable  results  of  any 
policy.     Here,  too,  recent  years  have  been  fruitful  of 
much    that    is   satisfactory.     The  declaration   of  Lord 
Lansdowne  concerning  the  Persian  Gulf  found  concrete 
embodiment  in  the  royal  progress  of  an  Indian  Viceroy 
through  its  waters — an  expression  of  actual  power  so 
pregnant  of  meaning  to  the    oriental   understanding. 
No  cryptic  utterances  were  those  that  fell  from  the  lips 
of  Lord   Curzon   as   he  defined  the  position  of  Great 
Britain  for  the  benefit  of  the  littoral  chiefs  :  "  We  were 
here  before  any  other  Power  in  modern  times  had  shown 
its  face  in  these  waters  ;  we  found  strife,  and  we  have 
created  order;  it  was  our  commerce  as  well  as  your 
security  that  was  threatened  and  called  for  protection 
at  every  port  along  the  coasts  ;  the  subjects  of  the  King 
of  England  still  reside  and  trade  with  you ;  the  great 
Empire  of  India,  which  it  is  our  duty  to  defend,  lies 
almost  at  your  gates;  we  saved  you  from   extinction 
at   the  hands  of  your   neighbours ;    we   opened  these 
seas  to  the  ships  of  all  nations,  and  enabled  their  flags 
to  fly  in  peace ;  we  have  not  seized  or  held  jomy  terri- 
tory ;  we  have  not  destroyed  your  independence,  but 
preserved  it."  ^ 

Such  were  the  dictions  of  the  highest  representative 

1  Lord  Curzon  at  Shargah. 


THE   GARTER  MISSION.  337 


of  British  sovereignty  in  Asia  to  the  dwellers  on  the 
Persian  and  Arab  littoral,  supported  by  the  guns  and 
turrets  of  British  men-of-war.  And  the  people,  poten- 
tate and  pirate,  peasant  and  pauper,  saw,  and,  seeing, 
they  believed.  Should  any  doubt  be  cast  upon  the 
motive  actuating  the  Viceroy's  journey  to  the  Persian 
Gulf,  the  Indian  Budget  speech  of  March  1904  is  on 
record  to  dispel  it :  "  This  is  the  secret  of  the  whole 
position  in  Arabia,  Persia,  Afghanistan,  Tibet,  .  .  .  and 
the  whole  of  our  policy  during  the  past  five  years  has 
been  directed  towards  maintaining  our  predominant 
influence  and  to  preventing  the  expansion  of  hostile 
agencies  on  this  area  which  I  have  described.  It  was 
for  this  reason  that  I  visited  that  old  field  of  British 
energy  and  influence  in  the  Persian  Gulf 

There  was  all  the  external  pomp  and  circumstance 
so  necessary  in  impressing  any  particular  lesson  on  the 
tablets  of  an  oriental  brain,  both  in  the  Viceroy's  tour 
to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  in  the  Garter  mission  to  the 
capital, — the  former  illustrative  of  the  predominance  of 
Great  Britain  on  the  seas,  the  latter  of  the  friendship 
existing  between  the  Governments  of  London  and 
Teheran.  But  there  have  been  other  incidents  which, 
though  lacking  the  halo  of  public  acclamation, — the 
fanfare  of  trumpets  and  black-letter  headlines  being 
absent, — are  indicative  of  the  intention  of  this  country 
to  prepare  for  eventualities. 

In  the  gulf  itself  the  suborned  Turkish  attacks  upon 
the  independence  of  Koweit,  by  far  the  finest  harbour 
in  those  regions,  were  successfully  defeated  by  the 
prompt  appearance  upon  the  scene  of  British  war-ships, 
and  the  occupants  of  the  two  armed  dhows  which 
swooped  down  upon  the  territory  of  the  Sheik  in  the 
dead  of  a  September  night  (1902)  were  dispersed — 
though  not  without  the  loss  of  a  British  bluejacket — by 


338  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


the  timely  arrival  and  vigorous  action  of  the  commander 
of  H. M.S.  Lapwing. 

In  the  hinterland  British  activity  has  likewise  been 
displayed.  We  have  a  right  by  agreement  with  the 
Persian  Government,  whenever  railway  construction 
takes  place  in  Persia,  to  construct,  or  procure  the  con- 
struction of,  railways  in  the  southern  part  of  that 
country,  and  such  agreement,  "though  it  may  not  be 
recorded  in  any  very  formal  manner,"  is  looked  upon 
by  the  British  Government  as  "  a  binding  engagement 
on  the  part  of  the  Persian  Government."  ^  With  regard 
to  roads,  a  British  company,  with  the  title  of  "  the 
Persian  Boad  Company,"  has  lately  been  formed  to 
take  over  the  concession  held  by  the  Imperial  Bank  for 
building  roads  from  Kum  to  the  Karun,  and  from  the 
same  place  to  Ispahan  ;  and  as  a  concrete  example  of 
British  enterprise,  the  "  Lynch  road,"  between  Ahwaz 
on  the  Karun  and  Ispahan,  the  offspring  of  an  agree- 
ment arrived  at  in  1898,  under  the  auspices  of  the 
British  Legation,  has  recently  come  into  being.  Another 
feature  in  connection  with  ways  and  communications  is 
the  convention  providing  for  the  construction,  by  the 
staff  of  the  Indo-European  Telegraph  Department  under 
the  Government  of  India,  of  a  British  line  from  Kashan 
to  the  frontier  of  Baluchistan. 

In  the  field  of  commerce  a  vast  concession  for  exploit- 
ing the  oil-fields  of  the  whole  of  the  south  of  Persia 
has  been  secured  by  a  British  company,  a  vice-consulate 
has  been  established  at  Kermanshah, — which,  indeed, 
should  have  been  done  long  ago,  seeing  that  it  com- 
mands one  of  the  chief  avenues  of  British  trade, — and 
in  the  course  of  the  last  four  years  consular  ojfficials 
have  been  appointed,  or  have  received  increased  rank 
and  pay    at    Bandar  Abbas,    Sistan,   Bahrein,   Shiraz, 

^  Speech  by  Lord  Lansdowne  in  the  House  of  Lords,  May  5,  1903. 


THE  NUSHKI-SISTAN  TRADE-ROUTE.  339 

Tabriz,  and  Ispahan.  Last,  but  not  least,  a  trade-route 
has  been  opened  up  from  India  across  the  dividing  gulf 
of  Baluchistan,  though  this,  it  must  be  admitted,  has 
political  and  strategic  aspects  in  excess  of  its  commercial 
possibilities,  and  is  worthy,  therefore,  of  a  few  remarks. 

I  have  given  a  detailed  description  of  the  Nushki- 
Sistan  route,  which  I  travelled  over  in  November  1900, 
in  another  volume.^  Its  possibilities  as  an  avenue  of 
trade  appeared  at  one  time  to  be  considerable,  and, 
despite  the  recent  Persian  tariff,  are  still  no  doubt 
not  to  be  despised.  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that, 
apart  from  its  political  and  strategic  importance,  the 
Nushki  caravan  -  route  never  was  and  never  will  be 
a  particularly  inspiring  undertaking.  This  opinion  is 
corroborated  by  Mr  H.  W.  Maclean,  the  commissioner 
appointed  by  the  Commercial  Intelligence  Committee 
of  the  Board  of  Trade  to  visit  Persia  and  inquire  into 
the  openings  for  British  trade  in  that  country.  "  The 
opinion  generally  expressed  to  me  by  Meshed  traders 
who  have  tried  both  routes  was,"  writes  Mr  Maclean, 
"that  the  additional  expenses  incurred  via  Nushki 
made  the  total  charges  by  that  route  quite  as  heavy 
as  on  the  Bandar  Abbas  route."  And  again,  while 
admitting  that  some  of  the  disadvantages  unavoid- 
able in  the  case  of  a  new  route  may  disappear,  he 
opines  that  their  removal  "  will  still  leave  this  route  at 
a  disadvantage  with  the  older  routes  via  Bandar  Abbas 
and  Bushire.  These  considerations  lead  me  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  Sistan  route  is  not  of  any  com- 
mercial utility  to  direct  British  trade,  and  in  existing 
circumstances  is  at  the  best  only  an  alternative  route 
for  Indian  commerce.^'  Hardly  an  inspiring  horoscope 
for  a  commercial  undertaking ! 

The  fact  is,  as  I  have  frequently  urged,  that  while 

^  Sport  and  Politics  under  an  Eastern  Sky. 


340  TEE  NEAR  EAST. 


commercial  and  political  interests  in  Persia  are  prac- 
tically indissociable,  the  political  element  in  the  Nushki 
route  is  the  preponderating  one.  That  this  is  the 
view  taken  by  the  Indian  Government  is  demonstrated 
incidentally  by  the  fact  that,  contrary  to  the  essen- 
tially technical  advice  of  telegraphist  experts  who 
inclined  to  the  alignment  Quetta-Ladis  in  preference 
to  that  of  Quetta-Kobat  for  the  new  line  of  telegraph, 
the  latter  was  the  one  eventually  selected,  in  spite  of 
its  greater  distance  and  greater  estimated  cost  both 
in  capital  sunk  and  in  future  annual  expenditure.-^ 
This  line  was  completed  from  Quetta  to  Robat  on 
the  Persian  frontier,  and  an  office  opened  there  early 
in  the  present  year. 

The  Russian  press  were  likewise  not  slow  to  see  the 
political  importance  of  the  enterprise  ;  and  the  announce- 
ment that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  had  given 
his  sanction  to  the  construction  of  a  line  from  Quetta 
to  Nushki  in  the  autumn  of  1902  was  greeted  with 
a  chorus  of  hysterical  denunciation  from  the  Russian 
organs.^      The  Government   was  urged  to   take   steps 

1  The  distance  from  Quetta  to  Ladis  was  given  as  430  miles,  and  from 
Quetta  to  Robat  as  478  miles  ;  while  the  estimated  capital  cost  of  line  and 
offices  for  the  former  was  Rs.  9,79,000,  and  for  the  latter  Rs.  11,30,500  ;  and 
the  estimated  annual  maintenance  charges  for  the  former  Rs.  34,000,  and 
for  the  latter  Rs.  35,500. 

^  The  construction  of  the  Quetta-Nushki  railway  of  82^  miles  in  length 
was  sanctioned  in  August  1902  at  an  estimated  cost  of  about  Rs.  70,00,000, 
or  Rs.  85,000  per  mile.  Leaving  the  existing  Bolan  railway  at  a  point  12 
miles  from  Quetta  and  3  miles  from  Spezand,  the  line  will  encounter  three 
mountain  barriers — the  Chiltan,  the  Mashelak,  and  the  southern  tail  of  the 
Khwaja  Amram, — crossing  the  intervening  plains  of  Mastung  and  Shahrud. 
The  steepest  grades  are  1  in  50,  compensated  for  curvature,  and  the  sharpest 
curve  will  have  a  573-foot  radius.  Sanction  was  received  from  the  Secretary 
of  State  for  at  once  putting  in  hand  the  Nishpa  tunnel,  2600  feet  long,  5 
miles  from  the  point  of  departure,  and  the  heavy  works  in  the  Sheik 
Wasil  Gorge,  between  miles  27  and  32,  at  an  expenditure  of  Rs.  4,75,000. 
The  Nishpa  tunnel  is  now  finished,  and  the  laying  of  the  line  is  being  taken 
in  hand. 


THE   QUETTA-NUSHKI  RAILWAY.  341 

"to  paralyse  our  rivals,"  and  the  '  Novoe  Vremya' 
did  not  hesitate  to  describe  the  Quetta  -  Nushki 
railway  as  the  beginning  of  a  line  which  would 
eventually  place  the  British  on  the  flank  of  what  it 
describes  as  "  the  probable  path  of  E/Ussian  advance 
on  India."  Candour  with  a  vengeance,  recalling  a 
comment  of  Lord  Curzon  a  decade  ago :  "  When 
the  cat  is  to  be  let  out  of  the  bag,  commend  me  to 
a  Russian  newspaper  for  the  uncompromising  manner 
in  which  it  is  performed."  Once  more  has  the  '  Novoe 
Vremya '  been  stirred  to  remonstrance  —  this  time, 
seemingly,  by  the  Anglo-Persian  Boundary  Commission, 
which  still  bides  amid  the  physical  and  climatic  de- 
lights of  Sistan.  This  time  —  September  1903  —  a 
bitter  refrain  runs  through  the  plaint :  "  And  yet  if 
Russia  allows  Great  Britain  to  strengthen  its  in- 
fluence in  Sistan  and  South-East  Persia,  then  we  are 
preparing  for  ourselves  a  dismal  solution  of  the  Central 
Asian  Question." 

All  this  is  of  course  a  little  premature.  All  that 
has  so  far  been  taken  in  hand  is  a  short  line  82|- 
miles  in  length  from  the  Quetta  plateau  to  Nushki, 
which  place  is  itself  more  than  300  miles  from  the 
Persian  frontier.  At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  too 
strongly  urged  that  such  a  line  should  be  continued 
across  Baluchistan.  The  trade-route  as  it  is  can,  as 
I  have  been  at  some  pains  to  point  out,  only  be  re- 
garded as  a  questionable  success.  The  construction  of 
a  railway  would  not  only  develop  and  fortify  our  com- 
mercial interests  and  political  prestige  in  South  and 
East  Persia,  but  it  would  place  us  in  a  position  to 
take  that  part  in  the  future  railway  development  of 
Persia  which  will  some  day  inevitably  devolve  upon 
us.  If  I  might  venture  to  suggest  a  strategical 
advantage  attaching  to    such    a    consummation,    it   is 


342  THE  NEAR  EAST. 


that  we  should  be  securely  placed  on  the  flank  of  any 
attack  directed  against  Kandahar  from  the  North. 

Space  forbids  that  I  should  enlarge  further  upon 
the  question  of  Persia.  There  is,  however,  one  more 
suggestion  to  be  made,  though  I  have  no  very  great 
confidence  in  its  being  entertained,  and  that  is,  that 
the  British  Government  should  become  the  share- 
holders of  the  Imperial  Bank  of  Persia.  The  bank 
is  the  one  influential  British  institution  still  extant 
in  Persia,  the  one  weapon  which  it  is  still  in  her 
power,  if  she  will,  to  wield  with  some  eflect ;  and 
Russia,  well  aware  that  this  is  so,  is  doing  all  she  can 
through  the  Banque  d'Escompte  to  cut  the  ground 
from  under  it.  There  was  a  provision  in  the 
negotiations  connected  with  the  Russian  loan  by 
which  Persia  was  deprived  of  the  power  of  borrowing 
from  any  other  nation  until  Russia  had  been  paid  off. 
But  this  could  not  possibly  be  held  to  prevent  her 
from  borrowing  from  her  own  bank.  Indeed  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Persian  treasury, 
the  contents  of  whose  coffers  are  scattered  abroad  with 
such  reckless  levity,  has  been  to  some  extent  thus 
replenished  since  the  Russian  loan ;  and  I  need  hardly 
point  out  the  possibilities  that  would  follow  upon  such 
an  arrangement  as  I  have  suggested,  of  rectifying,  as 
far  as  rectification  is  now  possible,  the  financial  blun- 
der of  1900. 

I  have  painted  a  brighter  picture  of  the  Persian 
problem  than  is  usually  done,  and  I  have  laid 
stress  upon  those  points  —  the  things  that  Great 
Britain  is  doing  —  which  are  usually  ignored.  I  do 
not  for  a  moment  wish  it  to  be  inferred  that  I  am 
unaware  of  the  gloomy  side.  If  Great  Britain  is 
up  and  doing,  Russia  is  doing  too.  No  one  who 
travels  in  the   country  can   fail  to  be  aware  of  that. 


CHANGES  FOR   THE  BETTER.  343 

But  I  do  not,  I  admit,  take  the  ultra  pessimistic 
view  that  too  often  colours  the  works  of  writers 
upon  the  question,  and  I  do  not  by  any  means  find 
it  impossible  to  fall  in  with  the  belief  expressed 
by  his  Majesty's  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  when 
he  said,  "  If  there  have  been  changes  of  late,  those 
changes  have  been,  on  the  whole,  in  the  direction 
of  the  assertion  and  the  protection  of  British  interests," 
and  I  welcome  the  expression  of  hope  which  he  at 
the  same  time  vouchsafed,  that  as  time  goes  on  we 
may  be  able  to  make  further  progress  in  the  same 
direction. 


344  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 

A    TIBETAN    EPISODE. 

A  mystery -enshrouded  land  —  Europeans  who  have  seen  Lhassa  —  The 
Sikkini  Convention  of  1893 — Waddell's  definition  of  Lamaism — Sarat 
Chandra  Das — Decision  of  the  India  Office— Failure  of  the  negotiations 
for  sending  an  official  mission  to  Tibet— Tibetan  aggression — Fatuous 
policy  of  the  British  Government — The  Calcutta  Convention  of  1890 — 
Tibetan  disregard  of  the  Convention  of  1890 — The  sham  of  Chinese 
suzerainty — The  views  of  the  Government  of  India  in  1899  —  The 
Viceroy's  letter  to  the  Dalai  Lama  returned  unopened — The  appear- 
ance of  Eussia — A  supposed  Eusso-Chinese  convention — Negotiations 
at  Khamba  Jong — An  advance  to  Gyangtse  sanctioned — Tibetan  belief 
in  the  support  of  Eussia — Gyangtse  occupied — The  advance  to  Lhassa 
begun — The  policy  of  the  Government  of  India — A  possible  solution  of 
the  Tibetan  puzzle — The  case  of  Bokhara  an  analogy — The  Tibetan 
dispute  must  be  settled  without  reference  to  other  Powers. 

From  earliest  times  an  impenetrable  curtain  of  mystery- 
has  enshrouded  the  remote  highlands  of  Tibet.  Nature 
herself  has  reared  her  icy  barriers  round  this  strange 
enchanted  land,  and  her  people  have  taken  advantage 
to  the  full  of  her  natural  impenetrability.  And  so 
strange  stories  have  been  woven  round  the  people 
behind  the  veil,  their  customs  and  their  lives,  and 
the  mysterious  religion  which  they  practise.  A  few 
intrepid  travellers,  it  is  true,  have  at  odd  times  pierced 
through  the  curtain  of  obscurity  which  envelops  the 
sacred  haunt  of  Buddhistic  lore.  In  1811,  Manning, 
the  single  Englishman  able  to  boast  of  the  achieve- 
ment, penetrated  to  the  heart  of  the  country  and  set 


EUROPEANS  AT  LHASSA.  345 

foot  in  the  holy  city  of  Lhassa,  and  in  1845  the  Lazarist 
fathers  Gabet  and  Hue  were  likewise  successful  in 
effecting  a  lodgment  in  the  capital  ;  but  after  the 
forcible  expulsion  of  the  latter  the  veil  was  allowed 
to  fall  once  more,  and  for  sixty  years  no  single  rep- 
resentative of  the  West  has  succeeded  in  disturbing 
the  unruffled  calm  —  as  far,  that  is,  as  external  in- 
fluences are  concerned — which  has  for  the  whole  of 
that  period  brooded  over  the  hierarchy  at  Lhassa.^ 
There  were  those  who  saw  in  the  Sikkim  Convention 
of  1893  the  golden  key  that  was  to  unlock  for  them 
the  gates  of  the  forbidden  land  ;  but  such  sanguine 
expectation  was  based  on  a  defective  knowledge  of 
the  people,  and  it  has  been  left  for  the  twentieth 
century  to  supply  the  weapon  with  which  to  cut  the 
Gordian  knot  of  Tibetan  exclusiveness. 

Truth  to  tell,  he  would  have  to  be  of  a  peculiar 
disposition  who  could  see  in  the  barren  stony  wastes 
that  constitute  so  large  a  portion  of  Tibet  the  land 
of  any  one's  desire  ;  nor  indeed  can  it  be  said  that  in 
the  religion  of  that  country  is  to  be  found  any  founda- 
tion for  the  weird  tales  of  the  supernatural  to  which 
it  has  given  rise.  Lamaism  provides  something  of 
interest,  it  is  true ;  but  it  provides  much  that  is 
sordid  as  well,  as  is  inevitable  in  any  form  of  demon- 
ology.2  And  perhaps  the  best  that  can  be  said  of  it 
has  already  been  said  by  the  author  of  the  '  Buddhism 

1  Though  no  European  succeeded  in  reaching  Lhassa  during  this  period, 
it  was  visited  on  more  than  one  occasion  by  native  surveyors  in  the  service 
of  the  Indian  Government.  Nain  Sing,  an  intrepid  explorer  who  has  added 
much  to  our  knowledge  of  the  country,  was  there  in  January  1866  and 
again  in  November  1874,  and  a  semi-Tibetan  in  the  same  service  led  a 
small  party  there  in  March  1872.  The  babu  Sarat  Chandra  Das  was  also 
successful  in  reaching  the  capital. 

2  For  some  account  of  a  personal  visit  to  one  of  the  weird  performances, 
half-serious,  half-comic,  that  are  enacted  in  Tibet,  see  '  Sport  and  Politics 
under  an  Eastern  Sky,'  pp.  109-112. 


346  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

of  Tibet,'  ^  when  he  wrote  that  "  Lamaism  is,  indeed, 
a  microcosm  of  the  growth  of  rehgion  and  myth  among 
primitive  people,  and  in  large  degree  an  object-lesson 
of  their  advance  from  barbarism  towards  civilisation. 
And  it  preserves  for  us  much  of  the  old-world  lore 
and  petrified  beliefs  of  our  Aryan  ancestors." 

It  is  not,  however,  the  religion  or  customs  of  Tibet 
that  occupy  me  now  :  it  is  the  political  situation  to 
which  the  proceedings  of  its  rulers  have  given  rise  that 
I  am  engaged  in  portraying  here. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  prior  to  1885  the  Bengali 
babu,  Sarat  Chandra  Das,  had  on  two  occasions  paid 
successful  visits  to  the  authorities  at  Lhassa,  and  with 
care  and  tact  it  is  only  natural  to  suppose  that  the  thin 
end  of  the  wedge  thus  entered  might  have  been  success- 
fully driven  home.  Of  his  own  expeditions  the  babu 
has  himself  left  record  in  an  interesting  volume,  which 
has  had  the  advantage  in  its  revision  of  the  valuable 
services  of  so  competent  an  authority  as  Mr  W.  W. 
Eockhill.  The  object  aimed  at  was  at  that  time  of 
course  trade,  and,  as  I  have  said,  commercial  relations 
might  no  doubt  have  followed  upon  the  peaceful 
missions  of  Chandra  Das,  who  had  become  a  persona 
grata  with  certain  lamas  of  high  position,  from  whom 
he  had  received  a  cordial  invitation  to  return  to  their 
country.  But  other  counsels  prevailed,  and  the  India 
Office,  contrary,  it  is  said,  to  the  expressed  wishes  of 
the  Government  of  India,  became  impregnated  with  a 
desire  to  despatch  an  official  mission  to  Lhassa. 

The  whole  of  the  subsequent  proceedings  can  only 
be  described  as  resulting  in  a  dismal  and  humiliating 
fiasco,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  in  the 
first  instance  ourselves  that  we  have  to  thank  for  the 
present  imbroglio  in  Tibet. 

1  L.  Austine  Waddell,  M.B. 


A   PASSPORT  APPLIED  FOR.  347 

Amid  a  preliminary  flourish  of  trumpets  the  British 
envoy  proceeded  to  Peking  with  the  ostensible  object  of 
applying  for  a  passport,  a  proceeding  which  immediately 
aroused  the  easily  awakened  suspicions  of  China.  Why 
this  unnecessary  journey  to  the  capital  was  embarked 
upon  it  is  difficult  to  imagine.  According  to  the  Chifu 
Convention  of  September  1876,  the  British  envoy  was 
entitled  to  a  passport,  and  no  personal  application  was 
in  the  remotest  degree  necessary.^  However  that  may 
be,  one  thing  is  in  no  way  open  to  doubt,  that  from 
this  moment  the  expectations  of  the  mission  were 
doomed.  The  passport  was  of  course  granted, — it 
could  not  very  well  be  refused,  —  but  the  intricate 
wheels  of  the  Chinese  diplomatic  machine  were 
promptly  set  in  motion  to  render  abortive  the  per- 
mission thereby  ostensibly  granted.  The  Inspector- 
General  of  Customs — the  hero  of  a  hundred  diplomatic 
coups'^ — -was  once  more  called  in  aid,  and  to  such 
purpose    that    the    India    Office   were    constrained    to 

1  The  article  of  the  Chifu  Convention  of  1876  dealing  with  the  question 
of  a  contemplated  British  mission  of  exploration  reads  as  follows  :  "  If  the 
mission  .  .  .  should  be  proceeding  across  the  Indian  frontier  to  Tibet,  the 
Tsung-li  Yamen,  on  receipt  of  a  communication  to  the  above  effect  from 
the  British  Minister,  will  write  to  the  Chinese  Eesident  in  Tibet,  and  the 
Eesident,  with  due  regard  to  the  circumstances,  will  send  officers  to  take 
due  care  of  the  mission  ;  and  passports  for  the  mission  will  be  issued  by 
the  Tsung-li  Yamen,  that  its  passage  be  not  obstructed." 

2  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  how  much  the  Chinese  owe  to  Sir  Robert 
Hart  for  the  facility  he  has  shown  in  extricating  them  from  the  un- 
fortunate complications  into  which  they  are  always  falling  with  Western 
Powers.  In  the  same  year  in  which  he  was  induced  to  rid  them  of  the 
inconvenient  mission  to  Tibet  he  was  engaged  in  patching  up  a  peace 
between  China  and  France.  The  announcement  of  the  successful  conclu- 
sion of  these  negotiations  is  characteristically  described  by  Professor 
Douglas.  "  Nine  months  ago,"  said  Sir  Robert  Hart,  addressing  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Tsung-li  Yamen,  "  you  authorised  me  to  open  negotiations  for 

peace,  and  now "  "  the  baby  is  born,"  said  the  Ministers,  before  he  could 

proceed  further.     "  Yes,"  said  Sir  Robert  Hart,  "  the  preliminaries  of  peace 
are  arranged." 


348  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

revoke   their   decision,    thereby    hammering    the    first 
nail  into  the  Tibetan  coffin  of  British  prestige. 

For  a  while  the  question  of  Tibet  was  allowed  to 
slumber,  but  the  next  move  was  of  a  very  different 
nature,  consisting  of  an  absolutely  uncalled-for  act  of 
aggression  against  British  Sikkim  on  the  part  of  the 
people  of  Tibet.  The  first-fruits  of  the  fatuous  action 
of  1885  had  been  born. 

Once  more  did  we,  by  our  failure  to  seize  the  oppor- 
tunity thus  offered  of  settling  once  for  all  the  question 
of  Tibet,  lay  up  for  ourselves  trouble  for  the  future. 
India  had  been  invaded,  but  rather  than  take  prompt 
action  by  sending  a  small  force  to  Lhassa — a  proceeding 
which  would  have  had  the  desired  effect  of  dispelling 
the  unfortunate  illusion,  which  had  become  engrafted 
on  the  Tibetan  mind  as  a  result  of  our  previous  in- 
competency, that  Great  Britain  could  be  treated  with 
contempt, — we  preferred  to  fall  back  upon  that  pro- 
digious exjDedient  for  passing  time — Chinese  diplomacy. 
The  home  Government,  in  fact — as  distinguished  from 
Indian  statesmen  on  the  spot — continued  to  be  ruled, 
as  Mr  Michie  remarks,  "  by  influences  which  were 
neither  military,   nor  political,   nor  practical."  ^ 

The  net  result  of  an  incalculable  waste  of  foolscap 
indulged  in  by  the  two  countries  during  the  next  few 
years  was  the  Calcutta  Convention  of  1890,  supple- 
mented by  the  Sikkim  trade  convention  of  1893.  By 
the  Convention  of  1890  the  boundary  of  Sikkim  and 
Tibet  was  decided,  the  British  protectorate  over  Sikkim 
was  recognised,  and  British  and  Chinese  joint  com- 
missioners were  appointed  to  draw  up  arrangements 
for  providing  increased  facilities  for  trade,  to  decide 
the  question  of  pasturage  on  the  Sikkim  side  of  the 
frontier,  and  to  determine  the  method  in  which  official 

^  The  Englishman  in  China. 


THE   CALCUTTA    CONVENTION  DISREGARDED.  349 

communications  between  the  British  authorities  in 
India  and  the  authorities  in  Tibet  should  be  con- 
ducted. Three  weary  years  dragged  their  tedious 
length  along  before  these  points  of  discussion  found 
solution  ;  but  at  length  an  agreement  was  patched  up 
and  signed  in  December  1893,  an  arrangement  which 
it  is  well  to  observe  might  just  as  well  have  never 
been  concluded,  since  by  no  stretch  of  imagination 
can  it  be  said  that  it  has  ever  been  observed.  Under 
the  terms  of  the  convention  a  trade  mart  was  estab- 
lished at  a  place  which  never  has  been,  and  from  the 
nature  of  its  site  never  could  be,  a  real  market — 
namely,  Yatung — and  free  trade,  except  in  the  case 
of  certain  prohibited  articles,  was  sanctioned  for  a 
period  of  five  years. 

Both  the  Convention  of  1890  and  the  subsequent 
trade  regulations  of  1893  have  been  contemptuously 
disregarded  by  the  Tibetans,  who  have  persistently 
ignored  the  boundary  therein  agreed  upon,  removed 
the  landmarks  set  up,  and  contravened  the  regulations 
with  regard  to  trade.  In  face  of  the  article  stipulating 
for  free  trade  for  a  period  of  five  years,  the  jongpen 
of  Phari  was  found  to  be  gaily  levying  a  10  per  cent 
ad  valorem  duty  on  all  goods  that  passed  through  his 
district,  and  preventing  Tibetan  merchants  from  pass- 
ing beyond  that  place  with  their  goods,  a  proceeding 
on  his  part  which,  as  the  Government  of  Bengal  very 
sensibly  remarked,  undoubtedly  seemed  "to  be  incon- 
sistent with  the  terms  of  the  treaty."  The  utter 
worthlessness  of  Yatung  as  a  market  w^as  set  forth  by 
the  commissioner  of  the  Eajshahi  division  in  a  letter 
to  the  Government  of  Bengal,  dated  June  30,  1896: 
"It  is  a  mistake  to  connect  it  [the  increase  of  trade] 
with  the  provision  made  in  the  regulations  of  1893  for 
the  opening  of  a  trade  mart  at  Yatung,  as  no  mart  has, 


350  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

in  fact,  been  established.  Some  merchants  visited  that 
place  from  India  during  the  year  for  the  purpose  of 
trade,  but  they  had  to  return  without  doing  any  busi- 
ness, as  the  Tibetans  were  prohibited  by  their  officials 
from  meeting  them." 

So  the  arrangements  of  1890  and  1893  were  studi- 
ously ignored,  as  indeed  was  only  to  be  expected, 
since  the  people  who  ignored  them  were  in  no  way 
responsible  for  them,  and  had  never  been  anything 
but  opposed  to  them.  China,  in  other  words,  had 
stood  sponsor  for  Tibet,  and  China,  however  loud  her 
protestations,  was  in  no  position  to  do  so,  a  fact 
which  had  not  dawned  upon  the  understanding  of  the 
negotiators  of  1890  and  1893.  It  came  home  later, 
it  is  true,  which  is  why  we  are  now  dealing  with 
Tibet. 

In  ,1899  the  Government  of  India  summed  up  the 
situation  as  it  had  been  summed  up  many  times  be- 
fore :  "  No  real  progress  has  as  yet  been  made  towards 
the  settlement  of  the  frontier,  while  the  stipulations 
as  to  trade  have  been  practically  inoperative."  But 
there  was  a  healthy  sign  visible  in  the  same  despatch, 
for  the  sham  of  Chinese  suzerainty  was  at  length 
officially  laid  bare :  "  We  do  not  desire  to  conceal 
from  your  lordship  our  opinion  that  negotiations  with 
the  Chinese  Resident — although  they  now  have  the 
sanction  of  long  usage,  and  although  the  attempts 
that  have  so  far  been  made  to  open  direct  communi- 
cation with  the  Tibetan  authorities  have  resulted  in 
failure — are  not  likely  to  be  productive  of  any  serious 
result."  The  whole  question  rested  on  an  unsatisfac- 
tory basis.  Applications  to  Tibet  were  referred  to 
the  Chinese  Resident,  while  applications  to  the  latter 
were  put  off  on  the  plea  of  his  inability  to  put  any 
pressure  on  Tibet,  and  there  can  be  few  who  will  not 


ARROGANGE   OF  THE  DALAI-LAMA.  351 

agree  with  the  Government  of  India  that  as  a  poHcy 
this  appeared  to  be  "  both  unproductive  and  in- 
glorious." ^  What  was  an  urgent  necessity  was  that 
both  China  and  Tibet  should  plainly  understand  that 
as  the  suzerain  Power  was  unable  to  see  that  treaties 
were  observed,  we  should  be  obliged  to  enforce  their 
observance  for  ourselves,  and  that  as  the  Chinese 
were  unable  to  exercise  the  requisite  authority  over 
their  dependency,  it  was  necessary  for  Great  Britain 
to  deal  direct  with  such  dependency  itself.  This 
principle  was  recognised  by  the  Government  of  India 
and  approved  by  Lord  Salisbury  at  the  end  of  1899. 

So  far  the  question  was  confined  to  Great  Britain, 
China,  and  Tibet.  Lamaist  obstruction  had  been 
allowed  a  liberal  lease  of  life,  but  it  could  not  be 
expected  that  so  unsatisfactory  a  state  of  affairs  should 
be  allowed  to  continue  for  ever.  A  crowning,  insult 
was  added  when  the  Dalai-Lama  returned  unopened 
a  letter  from  the  Viceroy  of  India,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  Government  of  India  fully  realised  that 
the  time  had  come  when  stronger  measures  must  be 
resorted  to. 

At  this  juncture  a  new  figure  flashed  comet-like  on 
to  the  Tibetan  stage,  and  developments  arose  which 
had  for  immediate  effect  the  raising  of  the  hitherto 
little  -  considered  state   to   a   position   of  international 

1  This  state  of  affairs  was  admirably  explained  in  the  despatch  already- 
quoted  :  "  We  regard  the  so-called  suzerainty  of  China  over  Tibet  as  a 
constitutional  fiction — a  political  affectation  which  has  only  been  maintained 
because  of  its  convenience  to  both  parties.  China  is  always  ready  to  break 
down  the  barriers  of  ignorance  and  obstruction,  and  to  open  Tibet  to  the 
civilising  influence  of  trade  ;  but  her  pious  wishes  are  defeated  by  the 
short-sighted  stupidity  of  the  lamas.  In  the  same  way  Tibet  is  only  too 
anxious  to  meet  our  advances,  but  she  is  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the 
despotic  veto  of  the  suzerain.  This  solemn  farce  has  been  re-enacted  with  a 
frequency  that  seems  never  to  deprive  it  of  its  attractions  or  its  power  to 
impose. " 


352  A   TIBETAN  EPISODE. 


prominence.  Russia  had  arrived,  and  when  the  curtain 
rang  up  on  the  Tibetan  drama  of  1900  it  was  to  dis- 
play Russia  figuring  only  too  prominently  upon  the 
boards.  From  this  time  on  it  became  not  merely  a 
question  of  settling  trade  disputes  with  an  obstructive 
and  ignorant  people,  but  of  preventing  hostile  agencies 
from  taking  root  beneath  the  walls  of  our  Indian 
frontier.^ 

Russia's  first  card  was  the  reception  by  Russia's  Tsar 
of  a  mission  from  Tibet,  and  Russia's  second  card  was 
of  a  like  nature.  The  first  mission,  consisting  of  a 
Russian  huriat,  Aharamba-Agvan-Dorgieff,  who  had 
ingratiated  himself  with  the  authorities  at  Lhassa,  and 
secured  the  title  of  first  Tsanit  Hamba  to  the  Dalai- 
Lama  of  Tibet,  was  received  by  the  Tsar  in  October 
1900.  The  second  mission,  granted  an  imperial  audi- 
ence in  July  1901,  was  a  much  more  imposing  affair, 
consisting  of  a  number  of  Tibetan  officials,  described 
as  envoys  extraordinary  of  the  Dalai-Lama  of  Tibet. 
It  may  be  said  that  under  ordinary  circumstances  there 
was  nothing  particularly  disquieting  in  such  an  event. 
That  may  well  be ;  but  the  circumstances  were  by  no 
means  ordinary.  Tibet  does  not  abut  upon  any  Russian 
territory,  Lhassa  is  upwards  of  1000  miles  from  any 
Russian  possession,  while  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
but  a  short  distance  from  the  Indian  frontier,  and, 
as  coterminous  states,  we  have  necessarily  special  in- 
terests in  the  country ;  and  yet,  while  the  Grand 
Pontiff  of  Lhassa  returns  unopened  an  autograph  letter 

1  See  the  Viceroy's  speech  on  the  Budget,  already  frequently  referred  to  : 
"  This  [the  prevention  of  the  expansion  of  hostile  agencies  on  the  Indian 
border-lands]  also  is  in  part  the  explanation  of  our  movement  into  Tibet ; 
although  the  attitude  of  the  Tibetan  Government,  its  persistent  disregard 
of  treaty  obligations,  and  its  contemptuous  retort  to  our  extreme  patience, 
would  in  any  case  have  compelled  a  more  active  vindication  of  our 
interests." 


REPORTED  RUSSO-GHINESE  AGREEMENT.  353 

from  an  Indian  Viceroy,  he  sends  autograph  letters 
by  the  hands  of  special  envoys  to  the  statesmen  on 
the  Neva. 

The  case  was  obviously  one  for  inquiry,  and  when 
a  year  later  reports  became  current  of  a  secret  Russo- 
Chinese  agreement  relating  to  Tibet,  involving  a  vir- 
tual Russian  protectorate  over  the  country,  a  definite 
denial  from  the  former  Power  became  imperative.  In 
the  first  instance,  Count  Lamsdorff  declared  that  the 
mission  "  could  not  be  regarded  as  having  any  political 
or  diplomatic  character."  He  had,  he  admitted,  re- 
ceived an  autograph  letter  from  the  Dalai-Lama,  which, 
however,  contained  nothing  of  very  grave  import.  It 
was,  in  fact,  found  on  translation  to  merely  express  a 
hope  that  he — Count  Lamsdorff" — was  in  enjoyment  of 
good  health  and  prosperous,  and  to  inform  him  that 
the  Dalai-Lama  was  happy  to  be  able  to  say  that 
he  himself  enjoyed  excellent  health !  The  reports  of 
any  agreement  about  Tibet  were  categorically  denied 
by  both  the  Chinese  and  Russian  Governments,  and 
the  origin  of  such  reports  —  '  The  China  Times ' 
actually  gave  the  text  of  the  agreement  in  twelve 
articles  !  ^ — remained  a  mystery. 

1  The  articles  of  the  alleged  Eusso-Chinese  agreement  relating  to  Tibet, 
as  published  by  'The  China  Times'  in  July  1902,  even  if,  like  the  will  of 
Peter  the  Great,  apocryphal,  afford  interesting  reading.  The  most  import- 
ant items  are  as  follows  : — 

I.  "  The  Chinese  Government,  conscious  that  China's  power  is  weakening, 
agrees  to  relinquish  her  entire  interest  in  Tibet,  with  all  privileges  and 
benefits,  to  Eussia,  in  exchange  for  Eussian  support  and  assistance  in  main- 
taining the  Chinese  Empire." 

II.  "  In  the  event  of  any  trouble  occurring  in  the  interior  of  China  which 
the  Chinese  Government  finds  itself  unable  to  cope  with,  Eussia  undertakes 
to  suppress  it." 

IV.  "  Eussia  will  hereafter  establish  Government  officers  in  Tibet,  and 
control  Tibetan  afiairs." 

VIII.  "Chinese  merchandise  imported  into  Tibet  shall  be  either  duty 
free  or  very  lightly  taxed." 

Z 


354  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 


Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  Russian  denials  of  any  deal- 
ings with  Tibet,  she  left  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the 
interest  she  took  in  that  country,  and  in  February  1903 
she  took  occasion  to  take  Great  Britain  brusquely  to 
task  on  account  of  a  supposed  military  expedition  which 
she  was  informed  had  been  despatched  across  the 
Indian  frontier,  "  In  view  of  the  very  great  import- 
ance which  the  Imperial  Russian  Government  attaches 
to  the  avoidance  of  any  cause  of  trouble  in  China,  it 
M^ould  consider  such  an  expedition  into  Tibet  as  cal- 
culated to  produce  a  situation  of  considerable  gravity, 
which  might  eventually  force  the  Russian  Government 
to  take  measures  for  the  protection  of  its  interests  in 
those  regions."  And  this  was  the  Government  which 
had  not  hesitated  to  despoil  China  of  the  vast  territory 
of  Manchuria  ! 

The  "  authoritative  information  "  of  the  supposed  ex- 
pedition was  without  the  slightest  foundation,  and  it  is 
not  surprising  to  find  Lord  Lansdowne  characterising 
the  language  of  the  Russian  Embassy  as  "  unusual  and 
almost  minatory  in  tone."  It  is  refreshing  to  find  the 
Foreign  Office  taking  a  firm  stand,  and  to  hear  it 
declaring  that,  in  view  of  our  special  interests  in  Tibet, 
it  followed  that  should  there  be  any  display  of  Russian 
activity  in  that  country,  we  should  be  obliged  to  reply 
by  a  display  of  activity  not  only  equivalent  to  but 
exceeding  that  made  by  Russia. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  such  declarations,  Russian 
officiousness  made  itself  felt,  as  may  be  seen  from  the 
despatches  from  the  India  Office,  dated  February  27 
and  May  28  respectively.      In  the  former  it  is  admitted 

XI.  "All  mining  and  railway  interests  will  be  in  Eussian  hands,  but 
Chinese  will  be  allowed  to  participate." 

XII.  "  Russia  undertakes  in  the  construction  of  railway  lines  or  forts  not 
to  destroy  or  interfere  with  temples  or  other  sacred  spots." 


NEGOTIATIONS  AT  KHAMBA   JONG.  355 


that  the  question  at  issue  is  no  longer  one  of  details  as 
to  trade  and  boundaries,  "  but  the  whole  question  of*  the 
future  political  relations  of  India  with  Tibet."     Russian 
influence    is    seen    towards    the    end  of  the   despatch. 
The  proposals  of  the  Indian  Government  to  send    an 
armed  mission  to  Tibet  and  to  establish  a  Resident  at 
Lhassa  might,  it  is  admitted,  be  justified  as  a  legitimate 
reply  to  the  action  of  the  Tibetan  Government  were  the 
issue   simply  one  between   India    and    Tibet,  and    the 
despatch    concludes    with    the    statement    that,    after 
hearing  from  the  Russian  Government,  his  Majesty's 
Government  "  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  decide  on 
the  scope  to  be  given  to  the  negotiations  with  China, 
and  on  the  steps  to  be  taken  to  protect  India  against 
any  danger  from  the  establishment  of  foreign  influence 
in    Tibet."       By   the    end  of  May,    when   the    second 
despatch  alluded  to  was  sent,  the  "  Russian  terror"  had 
sunk  deeper  into  the  official  mind,  and  the  old  timidity 
and  pliability  before  Russian  bluster  is  again  apparent. 
Whereas  it  was  recognised  in  the  former  despatch  that 
the    issue    at   stake  was   "the   whole  question  of  the 
future  political  relations  of  India  with  Tibet,"  it  is  now 
laid  down  as  the  wish  of  the  Government  that  "  the 
negotiations  should  be  restricted  to  questions  concern- 
ing trade  relations,  the  frontier,  and  grazing  rights," 
and  a  desire  is  expressed  that  no  proposal  should  be 
made  for  the  establishment  of  a  political  agent  either 
at  Gyangtse  or  Lhassa. 

The  result  was  that  negotiations  were  again  resorted 
to,  though  on  this  occasion  Khamba  Jong,  the  place 
selected  by  the  Government  of  India,  was  sanctioned  as 
the  point  of  meeting  of  the  British  and  the  Chinese 
and  Tibetan  envoys,  and  the  essential  principle  was 
recognised  of  Tibet  being  represented  in  the  negotiations 
by  a  duly  accredited  Tibetan  representative.      Needless 


356  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 


to  say,  the  same  old  story  was  repeated,  innumerable 
excuses  for  delay  were  hatched  in  the  fertile  Chinese 
brain,  and  the  Tibetans,  less  versed  in  the  art  of  polite 
diplomacy  than  their  more  accomplished  co-commis- 
sioners, uncompromisingly  refused  to  negotiate  at  all. 
Moreover,  they  proceeded  to  emphasise  their  contempt 
for  diplomatic  subterfuge  by  deciding  upon  war  in  the 
National  Council  at  Lhassa,  by  collecting  soldiers  with 
every  display  of  hostility,  and  by  casting  two  unoffend- 
ing British  subjects  incontinently  into  prison. 

By  October  1903  it  seems  to  have  at  last  dawned 
upon  Downing  Street  that  the  Government  of  India 
did,  after  all,  perhaps  know  something  about  Indian 
affairs  and  India's  neighbours,  and  in  November  his 
Majesty's  Government  reluctantly  sanctioned  the  ad- 
vance of  the  mission  to  Gyangtse,  though  they  at  the 
same  time  repeated  that  they  were  not  prepared  to 
sanction  any  form  of  permanent  intervention  in  Tibetan 
affairs. 

So  accustomed  had  those  concerned  become  to  find 
invariable  success  crown  their  policy  of  trifling  with 
Great  Britain,  that  the  news  of  the  above  decision  came 
upon  the  Chinese  Foreign  Office  as  an  absolute  bolt 
from  the  blue.  The  Wai-wu  Pu,  electrified  to  action, 
fell  to  telegraphing  wildly  to  the  new  Amban,  who 
had  been  appointed  to  proceed  to  Lhassa  and  to  take 
charge  of  the  Tibetan  question  generally,  and  who  was 
wandering  unconcernedly  among  the  deserts  and  oases 
of  the  interior,  to  hasten  by  forced  marches  to  his  post, 
and  exact  obedience  from  the  Government  of  Tibet  to 
the  imperial  commands  forthwith  to  resume  negotia- 
tions with  the  British  commissioners.  The  communica- 
tion made  to  the  Chinese  Minister  did  indeed  seem,  as 
his  Majesty's  Minister  at  Peking  somewhat  dryly  re- 
marked, "  to  have  awakened  the  Chinese  Government 


THE  ARROGANCE   OF  TIBET.  357 

out  of  their  apathy."  Russia,  of  course,  took  violent 
and  unreasoning  exception  to  the  action  of  the  British 
Government,  so  much  so  that  Lord  Lansdowne  felt  con- 
strained to  remark  to  the  Russian  Ambassador  that  it 
seemed  to  him  "  beyond  measure  strange  that  these 
protests  should  be  made  by  the  Government  of  a 
Power  which  had,  all  over  the  world,  never  hesitated 
to  encroach  upon  its  neighbours  when  the  circumstances 
seemed  to  require  it,"  and  to  ask  "  if  the  Russian 
Government  had  a  right  to  complain  of  us  for  taking 
steps  in  order  to  obtain  reparation  from  the  Tibetans 
by  advancing  into  Tibetan  territory,  what  kind  of 
language  should  we  not  be  entitled  to  use  in  regard 
to  Russian  encroachments  in  Manchuria,  Turkestan, 
and  Persia  ? "  The  one  people  who  regarded  the 
whole  advance  with  unconcealed  derision  and  con- 
tempt were  the  one  people  whom  it  really  concerned 
— the  Tibetans. 

Past  experience  was  no  doubt  largely  responsible  for 
the  arrogant  demeanour  of  Tibet,  but  there  was  another 
reason  too,  and  that  was  their  reliance  upon  another 
Power.  Whatever  the  attitude  of  Russian  diplomatists 
at  St  Petersburg  and  London,  there  is  no  room  for 
doubt  that  the  Russian  agent  Dorjieff  at  Lhassa  had 
given,  and  continued  to  give,  promises  of  Russian  aid. 
Colonel  Younghusband,  in  whose  experienced  hands  the 
conduct  of  the  mission  had  been  placed,  received  infor- 
mation from  various  independent  sources  that  the 
Tibetans  were  relying  on  Russian  aid,  and  that  Russian 
arms  had  been  introduced  into  Tibet.  The  Chinese 
official.  Colonel  Chao,  himself  complained  of  the 
Tibetans  having  openly  taunted  the  suzerain  Power, 
and  proclaimed  their  reliance  upon  a  stronger  and 
greater  nation  ;  and  in  January  of  the  present  year  the 
emissaries  from  Lhassa  themselves  informed  the  British 


358  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

mission  that  in  the  event  of  an  advance  and  the 
defeat  of  the  Tibetans  they  vi^ould  fall  back  on  another 
Power,  and  that  things  would  then  be  bad  for  Great 
Britain.^ 

With  the  opening  months  of  the  present  year  (1904) 
it  became  clear  that  the  Lama  hierarchy,  headed  by 
the  Dalai -Lama,  had  decided  to  act  independently  of 
Chinese  interference,  and  were  determined  to  oppose 
vi  et  armis  the  farther  advance  of  the  mission,  the  first 
material  expression  of  this  determination  being  the 
armed  opposition  to  the  advance  at  Guru  on  March  31, 
a  short  time  after  a  body  of  lamas  of  high  rank  from 
Lhassa  had  solemnly  cursed  the  mission  camp  for  a 
period  of  five  consecutive  days  ! 

Early  in  April  the  mission  proceeded  to  Gyangtse, 
which  was  occupied  after  a  sharp  encounter,  in  the 
course  of  which  the  Tibetans  sustained  further  heavy 
losses,  and  here  a  halt  was  made  until  July  6,  when 
the  great  jong,  which  frowns  down  upon  the  low,  white, 
two-storeyed  houses  of  the  town  from  its  600  feet  of 
massive  isolated  rock — "  a  Corfe  Castle  of  ten  times 
the  size,  on  a  hill  ten  times  as  high" — was  gallantly 
stormed  by  General  Macdonald's  mixed  force  of  Fusiliers, 
Sikhs,  Gurkhas,  and  Pathans. 

The  three  months'  halt  at  Gyangtse  might,  no  doubt, 
appear  to  the  impartial  observer  to  be  a  wholly  super- 
fluous waste  of  time,  but  in  coming  to  such  a  conclusion 

^  According  to  the  special  correspondent  of  '  The  Times,'  Dorjieff,  on  his 
return  to  Tibet  after  his  first  mission  to  Russia  in  1898,  was  the  bearer  of  a 
large  number  of  valuable  presents  to  the  Dalai-Lama,  whose  influence  he 
was  determined  to  secure  in  the  interests  of  Russia.  "Not  the  least 
remarkable  argument,"  writes  the  correspondent,  "he  brought  forward  to 
effect  a  rapprochement  between  his  two  masters  was  the  insidious  plea  that 
if  the  Dalai-Lama  would  but  consent  to  visit  St  Petersburg,  he  would  not 
only  secure  for  Tibet  the  valuable  alliance  and  protection  of  Russia,  but 
might  even  convert  to  Buddhism  the  Tsar's  wavering  faith  in  Christianity  ! " 
— '  Times,'  May  24,  1904. 


THE  ADVANCE   TO  LHASSA.  359 

he  would  be  guilty  of  ignoring  the  extraordinary  ap- 
preciation on  the  part  of  Great  Britain  of  the  "majesty 
of  custom"!  At  the  end  of  each  fresh  move  it  is  our 
custom  to  ignore  all  that  has  happened  in  the  interim, 
and  to  return  to  our  original  starting-point ;  so  having 
reached  Gyangtse,  we  sent  a  polite  invitation  to  the 
Tibetans  to  negotiate,  as  if  nothing  had  ever  happened  ! 
June  25  was  fixed  as  the  date  up  to  which  delegates 
would  be  received  as  peace-bearers,  and  to  June  25, 
and  indeed  for  some  days  longer, — for  we  gave  them 
a  few  extra  days'  grace, — the  mission  patiently  waited, 
while  the  Tibetans,  whose  peaceful  envoys  it  was 
awaiting,  directed  a  continual  storm  of  bullets  and 
shell  upon  it  from  the  commanding  position  of  the 
jong !  And  there  are  those  in  England  itself  who 
would  accuse  us  of  wantonly  provoking  hostilities  ! 

But  custom  had  been  obeyed  in  another  respect ;  for, 
according  to  precedent,  the  operations  were  commenced 
with  a  force  that  was  wholly  inadequate  to  complete 
them,  so  that  while  the  mission  was  awaiting  the  peace 
envoys  from  Lhassa,  it  was  also  awaiting  reinforce- 
ments from  India  !  The  reinforcements  duly  arrived, 
as  did  also  the  envoys,  though  the  latter  were  a  few 
days  behind  their  time.  This  slight  lack  of  punctu- 
ality might  have  been  disregarded  had  they  proved 
competent  plenipotentiaries,  but  once  more  were  the 
representatives  of  Great  Britain  befooled ;  and  since 
little  material  progress  towards  a  satisfactory  settle- 
ment was  effected  by  the  religious  reflections  on  the 
situation  which  formed  the  gist  of  the  Dalai-Lamas 
latest  despatch,  nothing  remained  but  to  begin  the 
advance  to  Lhassa. 

This  was  actually  done  on  July  14,  the  peaceful 
intentions  ot  Great  Britain,  and  the  desire  of  the 
Government  to  give  to  Tibet    a    further   opportunity 


360  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

of  coming  to  a  reasonable  settlement,-^  being  made 
known  to  the  people  through  an  official  proclamation 
issued  by  Colonel  Younghusband  ;  and  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  before  these  pages  appear  in  print  a 
British  force  will  have  torn  aside  the  anomalous  cur- 
tain of  mystery  that  has  for  so  long  enveloped  the 
sacred  city  of  Lhassa. 

In  reviewing  the  developments  in  this  quarter  in 
recent  years,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Indian 
Government  did  not  fail  to  grasp  the  full  meaning  of 
the  question,  and  having  done  so,  were  not  slow  to 
make  up  their  minds  as  to  the  procedure  which  they 
considered  necessary.  In  January  1903  they  earnestly 
urged  that  a  British  mission  should  be  despatched 
to  Lhassa,  there  to  conclude  a  definite  treaty  signed 
by  both  Chinese  and  Tibetan  officials,  and  they  ex- 
pressed the  opinion  that  such  action  should  culminate 
in  the  appointment  of  a  permanent  British  repre- 
sentative, consular  or  diplomatic,  to  reside  at  the 
capital. 

It  was  no  desire  for  political  or  territorial  aggran- 
disement that  prompted  such  counsels,  but  rather  the 
clearly  recognised  necessity  for  protecting  our  un- 
doubted interests,  and  for  rendering  abortive  any 
future  endeavour — only  too  clearly  foreseen — by  any 
other  Power  to  secure  vested  interests  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  Indian  frontier,  which  would  undoubtedly 
become  sooner  or  later  a  grave  menace  to  the  security 
of  our  Indian  Empire.  The  vital  importance  which 
they  attached  to  their  views  was  emphasised  by  their 

^  "The  nature  of  the  terms  to  be  exacted  will  greatly  depend  on  the 
attitude  of  the  Tibetan  Government,  to  whom  further  opportunity  of  a 
reasonable  settlement  of  the  matter  in  dispute  will  be  offered." — Extract 
from  the  proclamation  issued  by  Colonel  Younghusband  on  July  13,  1904. 


A   PROPOSED  SOLUTION.  361 


repeated  pressure  of  them  upon  the  British  Government 
during  the  period  in  which  that  body  was  passing 
through  an  unaccountable  phase  of  vacillation,  and  it 
is  a  matter  for  congratulation  that  the  progress  of 
events  has  rendered  the  carrying  out  of  their  policy, 
in  part  at  least,  probable.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  a 
treaty  recognised  and  agreed  to  by  all  parties  will 
eventually  be  concluded  at  the  Tibetan  capital,  and 
that  a  permanent  British  representative  will  ere  long 
be  acknowledged  at  Lhassa.  For  it  is,  as  the  Govern- 
ment of  India  so  tersely  put  it,  "  the  most  extraordinary 
anachronism  of  the  twentieth  century  that  there 
should  exist  within  300  miles  of  the  borders  of 
British  India  a  State  and  a  Government  with  whom 
political  relations  do  not  so  much  as  exist,  and  with 
whom  it  is  impossible  to  exchange  a  written  com- 
munication." 

Exactly  how  a  practical  solution  of  the  Tibetan 
difficulty  is  to  be  brought  about  with  a  minimum  of 
friction,  is  of  course  a  question  which  can  best  be 
solved  by  those  on  the  spot.  An  interesting  suggestion 
has,  however,  recently  (May  1904)  been  put  forward  by 
a  writer  in  '  The  Contemporary  Review.'  ^  The  course 
therein  advocated  is  the  creation  of  a  religious  revolu- 
tion by  raising  aloft  the  standard  of  a  Buddhist  anti- 
pope  with  the  goodwill  of  Great  Britain  behind  him. 
The  whole  of  the  Buddhist  world,  thinks  the  writer, 
except  of  course  the  Lhassa  council  of  five,  would 
accept  the  sudden  political  intervention  of  the  Tashe- 
Lama  at  a  moment  when  the  Church  was  in  danger, 
and  with  an  anglophile  Buddhist  pope  raised  to  supreme 
power  by  British  support,  Anglo-Tibetan  intercourse 
would   be   assured,   while   the   star   of   Great   Britain 

^  Alexander  Ular. 


362  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 

would  be  ill  the  ascendant  in  the  heavens  of  the  whole 
Buddhist  world. ^ 

The  scheme  is  one  of  attraction  and  is  worthy  of  con- 
sideration, though  it  is  perhaps  open  to  doubt  whether 
the  present  Tashe  -  Lama  would  prove  favourable  to 
foreigners,  and  if  so,  whether  he  could  be  persuaded  to 
assume  the  temporal  authority  of  the  Dalai -Lama  at 
Lhassa.  Spiritually  he  is  the  superior  of  the  high 
priest  at  the  capital,  as  being  the  reincarnation  of  the 
Dhyani  Buddha  Amitabha,  while  the  latter  is  only 
the  reincarnation  of  the  Bodhisat  Avalokita ;  but  his 
spiritual  superiority  is  also  due,  no  doubt,  as  suggested 
by  Waddell,^  to  his  being  less  contaminated  with  tem- 
poral government  and  worldly  politics.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Tashe-Lama  appears  in  the  past  to  have  seen 
no  objection  to  interesting  himself  in  mundane  affairs. 
Mr  Bogle,   for  instance,  the  capable  envoy  of  Warren 

1  The  so-called  double-hierarchy  of  the  Dalai-  and  Tashe-Lamas  originated 
with  the  Grand  Lama  Nag-wan  Lo-zan,  the  sixth  in  descent  from  the 
great  reformer  and  originator  of  the  system  of  perpetual  reincarnation, 
Geden-dub,  who  had  founded  the  Tashe-llunpo  Monastery  in  1445.  At  his 
instigation  a  Mongol  prince  conquered  Tibet  in  1640  and  presented  it  to  him, 
together  with  the  title  of  Dalai-Lama,  thus  raising  him  to  the  high  position 
of  priest-king.  In  this  position  and  title  he  was  confirmed  by  the  Emperor 
of  China  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to  Peking  in  1650.  It  seems,  however, 
that  the  regency  was  usually  held  by  a  vice-regent  called  the  Gesub  Einpoche, 
who  occupied  the  position  of  a  temporal  sovereign.  Early  in  the  eighteenth 
century  the  tyranny  and  oppression  of  the  administration  of  the  vice-regent, 
Wang  Cusho,  who  was  in  power  at  that  time,  and  his  intention  of  becoming 
independent  of  China,  were  reported  by  the  Dalai-Lama  to  Peking.  As  a 
result  of  this  report  Wang  Cusho  was  put  to  death,  and  the  administration 
placed  by  the  Chinese  Emperor  in  the  hands  of  the  Dalai-Lama  himself, 
who  has  retained  an  increased  temporal  power  ever  since.  At  the  time  of 
Mr  Bogle's  mission  he  found  the  executive  administration  in  the  hands  of  a 
regent — the  then  Dalai-Lama  being  under  age — assisted  by  a  council  of  four 
other  ministers  styled  hthlons.  This  appears  to  be  the  position  at 
Lhassa  at  the  present  time,  though  for  the  first  time  for  many  years  the 
position  of  regent  is  occupied  by  a  Dalai-Lama  who  has  been  so  fortunate 
as  to  have  lived  to  attain  his  majoi'ity. 

2  In  his  '  Buddhism  of  Tibet.' 


BOKHARA   AN  ANALOGOUS  CASE.  363 


Hastings,  reports  to  his  chief  that—"  Although  Tashe- 
Lama  is  not  intrusted  with  the  actual  government  of 
the  country,  yet  his  authority  and  influence  appear 
fully  equal  to  accomplish  the  views  which  you  entertain 
in  regard  to  the  encouragement  of  trade.  His  passports 
to  merchants  and  travellers  are  obeyed  universally 
throughout  Tibet."  ^ 

However  that  may  be,  and  whatever  be  the  details 
of  any    future   settlement,    Russia   has   no   legitimate 
grounds  whatsoever  for  interference.      The  deference 
which  British   statesmen  have  always  seemed  to  find 
it  incumbent  on  them  to  pay  to  Russian  susceptibilities 
constitutes  one  of  the  most  egregious  traditions  of  the 
British  Foreign  Office.     When  Russia  embarked  upon  a 
policy  of  wholesale  annexation,  and  absorbed  territory 
after  territory  in   Central  Asia,  she  did   not  deem   it 
either  expedient  or  necessary  to  consult  the  wishes  or 
the  feelings  of  Great  Britain,  nor  am  I  aware  that  she 
considered  it  necessary  to  obtain  the  permission  of  this 
country  prior  to  concluding  the  treaty  of  Bokhara  of 
1873.     Should  Russia  feel  obliged  to  raise  objections 
to  the  appointment  at  any  future  time  of  an  English 
representative  at  the  capital  of  Tibet,  she  might  with 
advantage  be  asked  to  rehearse  article  xvi.  of  the  said 
treaty,  which  presents  a  striking  analogy  :  "  The  Russian 
Government   may  in   like  manner  have   a  permanent 
representative  in  Bokhara,  who  shall  be  near  the  person 
of  his  Eminence  the  Amir."     There  is  very  little  likeli- 
hood of  our  ever  finding  it  necessary  or  desirable  to 
demand  from  Tibet  a  fraction  of  the  concessions  that 
Russia  upon  that  occasion  demanded  and  secured  from 
Bokhara ;  but  even  if  we  did,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how, 
with   the  words  of  that  treaty  before  her,  she   could 
manufacture  any  logical  objection  to  our  doing  so. 

1  See  Markham's  '  Tibet.' 


364  A    TIBETAN  EPISODE. 


The  question  of  Tibet  must  be  settled  between  Great 
Britain  and  that  country,  without  reference  to  any 
exterior  Power.  And  in  a  pohcy  such  as  the  declared 
policy  of  the  Indian  Government,  which  is  a  policy  not 
of  aggrandisement  or  aggression,  but  directed  solely 
towards  the  consolidation  and  protection  of  our  lawful 
interests,  they  may  rest  assured  that  they  have  the 
support  and  confidence  of  the  British  people. 


A   LARGE  QUESTION.  365 


CHAPTER    XXVIIL 

THE    FAR    EAST. 

Commerce  of  the  Far  East  —  Great  Britain's  ideal  '  the  open  door '  — 
Russia's  first  mouthful  of  Manchurian  territory — The  second  phase 
of  the  Manchurian  question — Events  following  upon  the  conclusion 
of  the  treaty  of  Shimonoseki — England's  isolation— Action  of  Russia, 
Germany,  and  France — The  Port  Arthur  incident — British  ignorance 
of  Far  Eastern  conditions  and  affairs— The  Intelligence  Department 
— The  duty  of  British  statesmen  to  stay  the  disintegration  of  the 
Chinese  Empire. 

The  Chinese  question,  like  the  Chinese  Empire  and 
its  population,  is  a  large  one,  and  to  write  of  it  in 
all  its  bearings  would  require  many  pages.  All  that 
I  aspire  to  do  here  is  to  touch  upon  certain  phases 
which  Far  Eastern  events  have  of  late  years  assumed, 
and  in  doing  so  I  shall  keep  mainly  to  those  parts 
of  the  empire  with  which  the  journey,  the  descrip- 
tion of  which  forms  the  foundation  of  this  book, 
happened   to   bring   me    in    contact. 

Commerce,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  is  the 
lever  which  has  raised  China  to  its  present  unen- 
viable prominence  in  w^orld  politics,  and  commerce 
it  is  that  must  continue  to  be  the  will-o'-the-wisp 
to  draw  Western  Powers  on  through  the  laby- 
rinthine pathways  of  diplomatic  mazes  in  the 
remote  East — for  commerce,  large  as  it  already  is, 
must    inevitably    continue    to    expand    and    further 


366  THE  FAR  EAST. 


increase,  though  not  perhaps  to  the  extent  that 
the  mere  abstract  expression  "  400,000,000  of  con- 
sumers "  might  not  unnaturally  suggest.  It  is  not 
perhaps  sufficiently  recognised  when  talking  of  the 
commercial  possibilities  of  China  that,  as  Sir  Robert 
Hart  puts  it,  "  China  needs  neither  import  nor  ex- 
port, and  can  do  without  foreign  intercourse,  .  .  . 
and  foreign  traders  can  only  hope  to  dispose  of  their 
merchandise  there  in  proportion  to  the  new  tastes 
they  introduce,  the  new  wants  they  create,  and  the 
care  they  take  to  supply  what  the  demand  really 
means."  ^ 

Still,  commerce  always  did,  and  always  will  lie 
at  the  root  of  the  Chinese  question,  though  not  so 
exclusively  perhaps  in  the  future  as  in  the  past. 
For  a  desire  among  European  nations  to  secure  each 
for  itself  as  large  a  share  of  the  trade  as  possible, 
has  led  to  not  always  amicable  contact  among  them, 
and  to  an  unfortunate  failure  on  the  part  of  some 
of  them,  as  far  as  China  itself  is  concerned,  to  make 
any  accurate  distinction  between  meum  and  tuum. 
Moreover,  reservations  must  be  made  in  this,  as  in 
other  generalities,  more  especially  in  this  instance 
in  the  case  of  Russia  and  Japan,  the  former  of 
which  has  been  largely  influenced  in  her  Far 
Eastern  progress  by  her  innate  craving  for  access 
to  a  warm -water  sea,  and  the  latter  by  the  ne- 
cessity, owing  to  her  geographical  position  and  the 
encroachment  of  the  former,  of  securing  the  safety 
of  her  empire. 

Great  Britain's  ideal  in  the  Far  East,  as  else- 
where, can  be  summed  up  in  the  words,  "  the  open 
door."  There  are  many  other  terms  by  which  it  has 
been  expressed,  such  as  "  integrity,"  or  "  a  fair  field 

^  These  from  the  Land  of  Sinim. 


POLICY  OF  THE   OPEN  DOOR.  367 


and  no  favour "  ;  but  this  variety  of  nomenclature  in 
no  way  affects  the  guiding  principle,  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  this  ideal  has  from  first  to  last  re- 
mained constant,  -  however  inconsistent  the  methods 
by  which  it  has  been  sought  from  time  to  time  to 
secure  it.  Other  Powers  that  neither  enjoyed  the 
same  start  that  British  enterprise  gave  to  British 
merchants  in  China,  nor  possess  the  same  commer- 
cial aptitude,  entertain  no  such  admiration  for  the 
policy  of  the  open  door,  and  therein  is  to  be  found 
one  of  the  factors  which  are  always  threatening  to 
create  a  destructive  upheaval  of  the  Chinese  vol- 
cano. The  other  is  the  innate,  indestructible,  and 
illimitable  hatred  of  the  Chinese  themselves  for 
every  one  and  every  thing  that  is  not  of  their 
own    race. 

One  of  the  greatest  blows  that  have  as  yet  been 
struck  at  the  integrity  of  China,  and  de  facto  at 
the  British  ideal,  is  the  absorption  of  Manchuria; 
and  as  it  is  only  Northern  China,  if  I  except  the 
extreme  western  limits  of  that  empire,  that  I  have 
any  personal  acquaintance  with,  Manchuria  is  the 
core   round   which    I    weave   my    tale. 

The  first  mouthful  of  Manchurian  territory  which 
Eussia  swallowed  was  bitten  oft'  in  the  'Fifties,  when 
the  indefatigable  Muravieff  was  pushing  his  activity 
down  the  Amur  river.  The  treaty  of  Aigun,  con- 
cluded in  1858,  corrected  some  of  the  mistakes;;^,made 
by  Golovin  in  1689,  and  a  further  treaty  concluded 
at  Peking  in  1860  gave  diplomatic  sanction  to  the 
already  eff'ected  occupation  of  Possiet  Bay,  by  ceding 
to  Bussia  the  whole  of  the  coast-line  of  Manchuria 
as  far  as  the  borders  of  Korea.  The  victorious 
armies  of  England  and  France  were  in  occupation 
of  Peking,  and  the  nightmare  of  a  prolonged^;  Euro- 


368  THE  FAR  EAST. 


pean  occupation  hung  heavily  upon  the  minds  of 
Chinese  statesmen,  when  a  friend  in  need  appeared 
upon  the  scene.  General  Ignatieff,  who,  of  course, 
saw  that  the  occupation  could  be  only  temporary, 
likewise  saw  that  the  Chinese  understanding  was  so 
unhinged  with  terror  as  not  to  be  able  to  grasp 
so  obvious  a  fact  for  itself,  and  was  not  slow  to 
take  advantage  of  this  aberration.  Russia  had 
always  entertained  feelings  of  deep  friendship  for 
China,  she  would  now  give  tangible  proof  of  her 
kindly  feeling,  she  would  induce  the  allies  to  with- 
draw. So  ran  the  tenor  of  his  tale.  Grateful  China, 
or  rather  China  as  represented  by  Prince  Kung,  fell 
at  her  benefactor's  feet.  What  could  she  do  to  repay 
such  kindness?  The  General  thought  that  a  slight 
readjustment  of  the  Russo- Chinese  frontier  might  be 
accepted  as  a  token  of  Chinese  gratitude,  and  the 
treaty  of  Peking  was  signed.  Of  course  the  allies 
withdrew,  equally  of  course  their  withdrawal  had 
nothing   to   do   with    the    Russian    envoy. 

So  ended  the  first  phase  of  the  Manchurian  question. 
The  second  phase  opened  amid  the  clash  of  arms,  and 
the  country  that  had  slumbered  in  obscurity  for  thirty 
years  was  displayed  to  the  Powers  of  the  West  under 
the  lurid  light  of  war.  A  new  star  had  ascended  in 
the  Eastern  sky,  and  henceforth  Japan  became  a  Power 
to  be  reckoned  with  in  the  councils  of  the  East. 

The  cause  of  the  Chino- Japan  war  of  1894  has  never 
been  disclosed.  "  To  defeat  China  "  appears  to  be  the 
only  definite  reason  that  has  ever  been  assigned,  though 
the  moral  right  of  one  Power  to  make  war  on  another 
for  the  mere  pleasure  of  defeating  it  would  seem  to  be, 
to  say  the  least  of  it,  questionable.  The  probability  is 
that  Japan  was  blessed  with  far-seeing  statesmen,  who 
foresaw   the  likelihood  of  a  powerful    rival   some   day 


JAPAN   VICTORIOUS.  369 


raising  up  hostile  influences  in  territory  unpleasantly 
close  to  their  island  empire,  and,  realising  with  unerring 
intuition  the  menace  to  their  security,  determined  to  be 
first  in  the  field.  They  had  doubtless  watched  with 
interest  the  invariable  outcome  of  diplomatic  encounters 
between  British  and  Russian  statesmen  in  Asia  in  the 
past,  and  were  consequently  able  to  gauge  at  its  correct 
value  the  pledge  given  to  Great  Britain  by  Russia  in 
1886,  that  she  would  not  occupy  Korean  territory 
"  under  any  circumstances  whatever."  Be  that  as  it 
may,  war  was  waged  with  a  success  that  elicited  a 
chorus  of  approbation  from  the  European  press ;  the 
pretensions  of  China  to  be  regarded  as  an  entity  in  the 
comity  of  nations  were  rudely  shattered,  and  a  treaty 
was  signed,  which  among  other  things  gave  over  to 
Japan  that  part  of  Manchuria  which  is  known  as  the 
Liao-tung  Peninsula. 

The  proceedings  which  immediately  followed  upon 
the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  of  Shimonoseki  are  only  too 
well  known.  Japan  in  possession  of  the  southern 
coast  of  Manchuria  was  inimical  to  Russian  aspirations. 
The  object  of  years  of  patient  toil  and  persevering 
diplomacy  was  thereby  frustrated,  and  Japan's  enjoy- 
ment of  territorial  acquisition  was  doomed  to  be  short- 
lived. It  is  generally  admitted  that  Li  Hung  Chang 
proceeded  to  Shimonoseki  with  the  comforting  know- 
ledge that  the  more  grasping  the  demands  of  the  victor, 
the  more  certain  was  the  prospect  of  European  inter- 
vention. And  so  he  signed  away  integral  portions  of 
the  Chinese  Empire  with  unabashed  complacency.  Nor 
was  he  disappointed  at  the  sequel.  With  the  co- 
operation of  Germany  and  France,  Russia  addressed 
Japan  in  April  1895  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Imperial  Russian  Government,  having  ex- 
amined  the    terms  of  peace    demanded    of  China    by 

2  A 


370  THE  FAR  EAST. 


Japan,  consider  that  the  contemplated  possession  of  the 
Liao-tung  Peninsula  by  Japan  will  not  only  constitute 
a  constant  menace  to  the  capital  of  China,  but  will  also 
render  the  independence  of  Korea  illusory,  and  thus 
jeopardise  the  permanent  peace  of  the  Far  East. 
Accordingly,  the  Imperial  Government,  in  a  spirit  of 
cordial  friendship  for  Japan,  hereby  counsel  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  Emperor  of  Japan  to  renounce  the 
definitive  possession  of  the  Liao-tung  Peninsula." 

The  result  of  this  note,  which  practically  amounted  to 
an  ultimatum,  could  never  be  in  doubt.  Japan  was  at 
the  time  in  no  position  to  defy  three  first-class  Powers, 
and  since  England  stood  aside  in  self-laudatory  isola- 
tion, nothing  remained  to  be  done  but  to  obey.  Her 
endeavour  to  obtain  a  pledge  from  China  that  the  terri- 
tories she  was  evacuating  should  never  be  ceded  to 
another  Power  was  unavailing,  Russia  professing  an 
injured  resentment  at  such  an  imputation  upon  her 
disinterestedness. 

It  has  been  the  practice  with  a  certain  section  of 
English  politicians  to  extol  the  policy  of  masterly  in- 
activity of  the  Rosebery  Cabinet  upon  this  occasion. 
Nevertheless  there  is  no  doubt  whatsoever  that  therein 
lay  the  first  of  a  series  of  extraordinary  blunders  which 
characterised  British  policy  in  China  during  the  imme- 
diately succeeding  years.  British  interference  could 
only  have  been  directed  towards  emphasising  the  demand 
of  Japanese  statesmen  for  a  guarantee  that  the  Liao- 
tunp-  Peninsula  should  not  be  alienated  in  the  future,  a 
pledge  which  would  have  rendered  the  subsequent  pro- 
ceedings of  Russia  indefensible.  Moreover,  whatever 
paroxysms  of  delight  our  voluntary  isolation  may  have 
excited  in  the  breasts  of  the  Rosebery  following,  our 
immediately  resulting  involuntary  isolation  in  affairs 
Chinese  when  the  claims  of  the  three  protesting  nations 


FOREIGN  AGRESSIVENESS.  371 


had  to  be  settled,  and  might,  beneath  whose  brutal 
sway  treaties  and  agreements  were  scattered  as  chaff 
before  the  wind,  became  sole  arbiter,  was  nothing  less 
than  disastrous  to  British  commerce  and  prestige. 

France  opened  the  ball  by  extracting  China's  signa- 
ture to  a  treaty  the  provisions  of  which  were  in  direct 
contravention  to  those  of  an  already  existing  agreement 
between  England  and  China  ;  but  England  was  now  a 
negligible  quantity  as  compared  with  the  Russo-Franco- 
German  combination,  and  could  be,  and  in  fact  was, 
ignored. 

Eussia  lost  little  time  in  making  her  presence  felt. 
A  loan  for  £16,000,000,  arranged  for  between  China 
and  English  capitalists,  was  peremptorily  vetoed,  and 
the  Chinese  compelled  to  borrow  from  France, — Russia 
herself,  without  any  such  request  having  been  made 
by  China,  standing  security  for  the  solvency  of  that 
country  ;  and  in  1896  she  concluded  an  agreement 
which  prepared  the  way  for  carrying  out  her  ambitious 
programme  of  conquest  by  railway  in  Manchuria.  The 
acquisition  of  the  warm -water  port  which  was  to  con- 
stitute the  terminus  of  the  railway  was  facilitated  by 
the  high-handed  action  of  Germany  in  seizing  the 
harbour  of  Kiao  Chau,  and  in  exacting  official  sanction 
for  her  occupation  of  the  Shan-tung  Promontory  after 
she  had  done  so,  as  well  as  by  the  extraordinary  pro- 
cedure of  British  statesmen  at  this  critical  period. 

The  dramatic  proceedings  in  connection  with  the  Port 
Arthur  incident  are  of  such  recent  occurrence,  and  are 
so  well  known  to  all  who  have  interested  themselves  in 
Far  Eastern  affairs,  as  to  make  anything  more  than  a 
brief  summary  unnecessary.  The  first  act  opens  with  a 
soliloquy  by  a  British  Cabinet  Minister,  gratuitously 
informing  the  British  public,  in  an  audible  aside,  that 
"  so  far  from  regarding  with  fear  and  jealousy  a  com- 


372  THE  FAR  EAST. 


mercial    outlet  for   Russia    in    the    Pacific,"   he  would 
"  welcome  such  a  result  as  a  distinct  advance  in  this 
far-distant  region."  ^     Russian  statesmen  were  naturally 
astounded  at  so  unexpected  an  invitation  ;  and  having 
been  given  an  inch,  they  were  not  slow  to  take  the 
proverbial  ell.     In    December    1897  the  Russian  fleet 
received  permission  to  winter  at  Port  Arthur,  the  im- 
portance of  which  move  seems  to  have  been  fully  appre- 
ciated by  the  British  Minister  at  Peking,  for  on  being 
consulted  by  the  British  Government  as  to  what  they 
should  demand  from  China  in  return  for  the  advance  of 
a   British   loan,    he  promptly  replied,   the   opening   of 
Talienwan  as  a  treaty  port.      But  Russia  was  pursuing 
a  determined  and  definite  policy,  and  unconditionally 
opposed  such   a  step.       No   doubt  Russian  statesmen 
saw  in  England's  demand  for  the  opening  of  Talienwan 
a  distinct  breach  of  faith  when  viewed  in  the  light  of 
the  unfortunate  declaration  of  1896;  and  it  is  difficult 
to  see  under  the  circumstances  any  flaw  in  the  Russian 
Ambassador's  statement  to   Lord   Salisbury,   "  that   it 
was  generally  admitted  that  Russia  might  claim  a  com- 
mercial de'bouche  upon  the  open  sea,  and   in  order  to 
enjoy  that  advantage  fully  she  ought  to  be  at  liberty  to 
make  such  arrangements  with  China  as  she  could  obtain 
with  respect   to  the  commercial  regime  which  was  to 
prevail  there."  ^      Since  British  statesmen  had  declared 
that  the  Anglo-Russian  agreement  of  1886  concerning 
Korea  was  still  binding,  what  other  port  but  Talien- 
wan could  she  secure  as  the  offered  "  commercial  out- 
let "  ?     Needless  to  say  Talienwan  remained  closed. 

But  this  decline  of  British  influence  at  Peking  before 
the  increased  prestige  of  Russia  was  not  the  only  humili- 
ation that  overtook  Great  Britain  in  the  gloomy  days 

1  Mr  Balfour  at  Bristol,  February  3,  1896. 
'^  January  19,  1898. 


^.^SSj^ 


^..-:  r, •  Jii 'ifcfc.  '  '-^^  ..  '- 


:s 


THE    TEMPLE    OF    HEAVEN,    PEKING. 


BRITISH  SHIPS  LEAVE  PORT  ARTHUR.  373 

of  the  January  of  1898.  The  presence  of  a  British 
vessel,  H.M.S.  Iphigenia,  which  was  visiting  Port 
Arthur,  as  it  had  every  right  to  do  under  the  treaty  of 
Tientsin,  was  objected  to  by  the  Russian  authorities, 
who  made  representations  to  the  British  Government 
to  this  effect.  While  pointing  out  to  the  Russian 
Ambassador  that  British  ships  had  every  right  to  be 
there.  Lord  Salisbury  issued  no  orders  to  prevent  them 
leaving,  with  a  result  that  as  soon  as  the  Iphigenia  left 
the  port,  a  Reuters  telegram  was  published  in  Peking, 
stating  that  it  was  officially  announced  at  St  Petersburg 
that  British  men-of-war  had  received  orders  to  quit 
Port  Arthur  immediately  in  consequence  of  representa- 
tions made  by  Russia.  The  effect  of  this  report  may  be 
well  imagined. 

In  reply  to  these  unfortunate  occurrences  on  the 
Pacific,  the  Under-Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  stated 
in  the  House  of  Commons  in  February  that  "  the  right 
to  send  ships  of  war  to  Port  Arthur  was  a  right  which 
we  enjoyed  together  with  other  Powers  under  the 
treaty  of  Tientsin,  and,  when  occasion  arose,  we  should 
do  it  again."  Unfortunately  the  occasion  never  did 
arise,  nor  did  we  do  it  again ;  for  in  March  Russia 
forced  from  China  a  lease  of  both  Talienwan  and  Port 
Arthur,  and  included  in  the  convention  connected  with 
it  an  article  which  reads  as  follows  :  "  The  two  nations 
agree  that  Port  Arthur  shall  be  a  naval  port  for  the 
sole  use  of  Russian  and  Chinese  men-of-war,  and  be 
considered  as  an  unopened  port  so  far  as  the  naval  and 
mercantile  vessels  of  other  nations  are  concerned." 

Thus  did  we  stand  idly  by  and  view  our  treaty  rights 
played  fast  and  loose  with,  in  spite  of  the  heroic  state- 
ment by  the  Prime  Minister — that  there  was  no  effort 
which  this  country  would  not  make  rather  than  allow 
its  rights  to  be  destroyed  I     No  wonder  that  a  Russian 


374  THE  FAR  EAST. 


official  was  led  in  his  jubilation  to  exclaim,  "  We  knew 
very  well  that  England  would  solemnly  protest,  but 
we  also  knew  as  well  that  she  would  also  solemnly  do 
nothing,"  or  that  the  same  individual  candidly  confessed 
that  that  was  the  reason  why,  "  from  the  day  of  her  last 
statesman  Disraeli  until  now,  we  have  not  counted,  and 
do  not  count,  on  real  opposition  from  England." 

Russia  was  of  course  accused  of  bad  faith,  and  rightly 
too,  when  it  was  discovered  that  Port  Arthur  was  to  be 
a  closed  port.  But  Russian  aims  were  made  perfectly 
clear — if  indeed  they  had  not  been  long  before — by  the 
statement  of  Count  Muravieif  to  Sir  Nicholas  O'Conor 
on  March  13,  that  he  had  received  the  Emperor's  orders 
to  tell  him  that  "  Talienwan  would  be  open  to  foreign 
trade,  but  that  his  Imperial  Majesty  had  told  him  at 
the  same  time  that  Port  Arthur  would  be  regarded 
strictly  as  a  military  port."  Under  stress  of  British 
importunity  it  became  necessary  that  this  clear  lan- 
guage should  be  modified,  pending  negotiations  for  the 
acquisition  of  the  ports  in  question,  and  on  March  15 
the  British  ambassador  was  informed  that  "  both  Port 
Arthur  and  Talienwan  would  be  open  to  foreign  trade." 
Article  vi.  of  the  convention  already  quoted  is  of 
course  in  direct  contravention  of  these  assurances ; 
but  surely  British  statesmen  should  have  been  suffi- 
ciently well  acquainted  with  Russian  diplomatic 
methods  by  this  time  to  realise  that  Count  Muravieff 
would  find  little  difficulty  in  asserting — as  in  fact  he 
did — that  "the  ideas"  which  he  had  expressed  "very 
confidentially"  on  March  16,  with  regard  to  the  pro- 
posed lease  of  Port  Arthur  and  Talienwan,  "  ought 
never  to  have  been  interpreted  as  assurances,  and 
could  not  in  reality  have  had  such  a  significance." 

It  is  natural  to  seek  for    some   explanation  of  the 
extraordinary    vagaries   of  British    diplomacy   at    this 


LACK  OF  INFORMATION.  375 

period,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  was  in 
great  measure  due  to  ignorance  of  Far  Eastern  con- 
ditions and  affairs.  Lack  of  information  had  led  to 
the  policy  of  passive  spectatorship  at  the  time  of  the 
Chino- Japan  complications  of  1895,  and  a  complete 
failure  to  grasp  the  real  objects  of  Russian  desire,  or 
to  appreciate  the  modifying  effect  which  certain  in- 
cidents— such  as  the  German  seizure  of  Kiao  Chau — 
had  upon  the  mode  of  procedure  employed  by  her  in 
obtaining  them,  can  alone  have  been  responsible  for 
the  succeeding  period  of  ineptitude.  The  British  In- 
telligence Department  in  the  Far  East,  or  rather  the 
lack  of  it,  is  absolutely  astounding.  There  was  a 
story  current  when  I  was  in  those  parts  of  how, 
when  the  extension  on  the  mainland  opposite  Hong- 
kong was  ceded  to  Great  Britain  in  1898,  the  military 
authorities,  being  ignorant  of  the  lie  of  the  land, 
called  in  the  aid  of  some  Hongkong  sportsmen  who 
were  in  the  habit  of  indulging,  by  way  of  recreation, 
in  an  occasional  afternoon's  snipe-shooting.  Yet  it  is 
on  record  that  the  said  authorities  displayed  con- 
siderable annoyance,  if  not  indeed  indignation,  when 
they  found  themselves  floundering  in  a  snipe-bog  ! 

It  has  been  suggested,  with  a  view  to  increasing  our 
official  knowledge  of  China,  that  intelligence  depart- 
ments, with  a  head  officer  in  charge  in  each  case,  should 
be  created  at  Hongkong  or  Canton,  at  Shanghai,  and  at 
Tientsin,  a  third  of  the  country  being  assigned  to  each 
body ;  but,  as  far  as  I  know,  there  is  at  the  present 
time  only  one,  at  Tientsin.  It  is  only  fair  to  state  that, 
in  light  of  the  revelations  of  the  recent  War  Commis- 
sion, it  would  appear  that  the  intelligence  branch  itself 
is  not  to  be  blamed  for  its  inefliciency.  There  is  much 
that  is  significant  in  Sir  John  Ardagh's  reply  to  question 
5011  of  the  official  report  issued  upon  the  inquiry  into 


376  THE  FAR  EAST. 


the  conduct  of  the  war  :  "I  put  forward  an  official 
application  to  the  War  Office,  but  it  received  so  much 
cold  water  fronri  the  financial  point  of  view  that  it  came 
to  nothing.  The  end  of  my  proposal  of  £18,000  a-year 
for  ten  years  was  an  offer  of  £100  !  "  -^ 

The  events  of  1895-1898,  however,  cast  an  illuminat- 
ing light  upon  the  ambitions  of  certain  Powers,  and  it 
became  impossible  to  refuse  to  recognise  the  serious 
nature  of  the  process  of  decomposition  which  had  set  in. 
To  stay  the  collapse  of  the  Chinese  Empire,  as  they  were 
endeavouring  to  stay  the  collapse  of  more  than  one 
oriental  monarchy  in  other  parts  of  Asia,  became  the 
manifest  duty  of  British  statesmen — a  task  in  which,  as 
will  be  seen,  they  have  found  ready  coadjutors  in  the 
Government  of  Japan.  Events  had  proceeded  too  far 
to  admit  of  any  rapid  reversal  in  the  process,  and  the 
proceedings,  which  have  finally  culminated  in  the  pres- 
ent Far  Eastern  cataclysm,  were  spread  over  a  number 
of  years,  to  a  brief  account  of  which  T  shall  devote  the 
pages  of  another  chapter. 

1  It  must  be  admitted  that  private  enterprise  stands  out  in  strong  con- 
trast to  official  insouciance,  and  it  speaks  volumes  for  the  mettle  of  indi- 
viduals that  they  are  willing  to  secure  information  of  value  to  their 
country  even  at  the  risk  of  official  displeasure.  Here  is  a  case  in  point.  A 
young  officer  keenly  interested  in  the  advancement  of  his  country  gave  up 
his  leave  to  making  valuable  surveys  of  certain  parts  of  China.  In  order 
to  complete  them  he  outstayed  his  leave  by  a  few  days,  and  on  his  retui-n, 
after  successfully  accomplishing  his  object,  he  received  his  reward. 
"  Official  thanks  for  his  trouble  and  valuable  information,"  I  hazarded 
when  I  was  first  told  the  story.  "  Nothing  of  the  sort,"  was  the  reply. 
"  What  then  ? "  I  asked.  "  A  fine  for  missing  two  or  three  days'  regi- 
mental duty !  " 


BRITISH  CONCESSIONS.  377 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 
THE  FAR  EAST — continued. 

The  British  awakening  at  Peking— The  present  value  of  Wei-hai- Wei- 
Germany  at  Kiao  Chau— The  reform  movement— A  dramatic  coup 
d'etat— The  Boxer  outbreak  of  1900— A  colossal  scheme  of  regeneration 
— Russia's  demands  as  the  price  of  the  evacuation  of  Manchuria — 
The  Manchurian  Convention  of  1902— Manchuria  seen  once  more 
under  the  searching  light  of  war — Points  to  be  borne  in  mind  in 
weighing  the  chances  of  Russia  and  Japan — Russian  lack  of  organisa- 
tion—OfRcial  corruption— Capabilities  of  the  Siberian  railway— The 
Russian  army— The  soldiers  of  the  Mikado— 5ws/a(^o— The  patriotism 
of  the  people— Victory  in  the  field  likely  to  attend  the  Japanese 
forces— The  fate  of  Russia  rests  with  the  Russian  people. 

If  the  year  1898  was  remarkable  for  the  bold  execution 
of  Russian  designs,  it  was  also  made  memorable  by  two 
other  events — the  awakening  of  British  statesmen  from 
their  inexplicable  dream,  and  the  amazing  attempt  of 
the  Emperor  Kwang  Hsli  at  reform!  A  glimmering 
perception  of  the  real  goal  towards  which  events  in  the 
Far  East  were  rapidly  drifting  seems  to  have  at  length 
cast  a  ray  of  light  across  the  darkness  of  the  British 
mind.  Strong  representations  were  made  at  Peking, 
and  various  concessions  secured  in  the  opening  days  of 
the  year,  among  which  were  a  declaration  on  the  part 
of  the  Tsungli-Yamen  that  territory  in  the  Yang-tse 
region  should  not  be  mortgaged,  leased,  or  ceded  to 
another  Power,  and  a  promise  that  as  long  as  British 
trade  preponderated  over  that  of  any  other  Power,  the 


378  THE  FAR  EAST. 


post  of  Inspector-General  of  Customs  should  be  held  by 
an  Englishman  ;  while  Lord  Salisbury,  bearing  in  mind 
no  doubt  the  Bristol  speech  of  1896,  declared  in  March 
that  whereas  his  Government  had  always  looked  with 
favour  upon  the  idea  of  Bussia  obtaining  an  ice-free 
port  on  the  Pacific,  "  Bussia  had  now  given  a  most 
unfortunate  extension  to  this  policy."  The  tangible 
proof  of  the  official  awakening  was  the  acquisition  of 
Wei-hai-wei  for  such  period  as  Bussia  occupied  Port 
Arthur,  and  this  was  followed  nearly  four  years  later 
by  the  Anglo-Japanese  alliance,  contracted  at  a  time 
when  Bussia  was  endeavouring  to  extort  a  brand-new 
set  of  absolutely  preposterous  concessions  from  China 
as  the  price  of  her  evacuation  of  Manchuria — a  tardy 
recognition  of  the  dismal  failure  of  the  policy  of  isola- 
tion of  1895. 

The  value  of  Wei-hai-wei  ^  is,  as  I  have  had  occasion 
to  remark  in  a  previous  chapter,  under  existing  circum- 
stances hypothetical.  It  is  hardly  conceivable  that  in 
the  event  of  Great  Britain  going  to  war,  any  British 
captain  would  consent  to  allow  his  ship  to  remain  in  an 
open  harbour  where  it  could  at  any  moment  be  tor- 
pedoed, or  that  anything  else  could  be  done  with  the 
coal-supply  now  kept  on  the  island  in  the  harbour- 
mouth  than  to  shift  it  precipitately  into  the  sea.  When 
in  the  hands  of  China,  it  was  fortified  at  a  cost  of 
from  £5,000,000  to  £6,000,000,  and  no  doubt  thor- 
oughly to  refortify  the  island  and  the  mainland  now 

1  The  harbour  of  "Wei-hai-wei,  which  is  said  to  be  capable  of  holding 
from  thirty  to  forty  men-of-war, — though  I  believe  sixteen  is  the  largest 
number  that  we  have  ever  had  in  the  harbour  at  one  time, — is  faced  by  an 
island,  which  divides  the  entrance  into  two  channels.  The  narrow  entrance 
is  from  1200  to  1400  yard?  in  width,  and  the  broader  channel  from  2  to  3 
miles,  and  shallow  for  the  greater  part.  To  render  the  harbour  secure  from 
torpedo  attack  it  would  be  necessary  to  construct  a  breakwater  across  this 
passage,  at  a  probable  cost  of  £1,000,000. 


THE  REFORM  MOVEMENT.  379 

would  entail  a  very  large  expenditure,  and  would  neces- 
sitate the  presence  of  a  number  of  troops,  variously 
estimated  at  from  3000  to  10,000  men.  I  do  not  pre- 
tend to  decide  between  the  experts  who  are  in  favour  of 
or  opposed  to  the  fortifying  of  the  port ;  but  even  the 
disciples  of  the  latter  policy  appear  to  admit  that  a  few 
guns  might  be  of  advantage,  as  witness  the  words  of 
"Navalis"  in  'The  Times':  "No  one  doubts  certain 
ports  require  a  few  efficient  guns,  but  anything  more 
than  this  is  a  culpable  waste  of  the  national  resources." 
But  where  are  the  guns  at  Wei-hai-wei  ?  As  I  have 
already  pointed  out,  Wei-hai-wei  presents  to  the  aston- 
ished gaze  the  sublimely  ridiculous  spectacle  of  five  new 
and  scientifically  built  forts,  which  cannot  boast  of  so 
much  as  a  pop-gun  between  them  !  ^  And  while  we  are 
spending  a  modest  annual  sum  of  perhaps  £20,000  a- 
year  on  military  and  civil  administration  combined,^ 
Germany,  just  round  the  corner  at  Kiao  Chau,  is  con- 
structing a  harbour  at  a  cost  of  £1,000,000,  and  is 
willingly  spending  on  her  acquisition  at  the  rate  of 
£600,000  a-year! 

The  movement  of  reform  was  as  astonishing  as  it  was 
transient.  On  January  17,  1898,  was  issued  an  imperial 
edict  which  placed  it  on  record,  among  much  else,  that 
"  the  question  of  the  present  clay  is  that  we  begin  in 
reforming  ourselves,  and  diligently  reorganise  our  de- 
fences." Once  started,  edict  followed  edict  with  be- 
wildering rapidity,  all  overflowing  with  the  expression 

^  Vice- Admiral  C.  C.  Penrose  Fitz-Gerald  writes  :  "  Had  Wei-hai-wei 
been  given  the  modest  fortifications  which  were  decided  upon  three  years 
ago,  not  even  Eehoboam  in  a  gunboat  would  have  had  the  temerity  to 
attack  it,  and,  even  if  he  had,  it  would  probably  have  held  out  until  the 
squadron  returned  to  relieve  it." — 'Times,'  March  31,  1904. 

2  A  colonial  grant  of  £9000  a-year  is  allowed  for  civil  administration  on 
the  mainland,  while  the  cost  of  the  500  men  to  which  the  original  Anglo- 
Chinese  regiment  has  been  reduced  probably  amounts  to  £10,000  or 
£12,000.     The  island  is  given  over  to  the  Admiralty. 


380  THE  FAR  EAST. 


of  the  imperial  desire  for  reform.  "  If  we  wish  to  make 
ourselves  strong  once  more,  there  is  no  other  way  than 
to  cast  away  from  us  the  old  regime  and  inaugurate  a 
modern  one,"  or  again,  "  China's  weakness  really  lies  in 
her  lazy  officials  and  the  deep-rootedness  of  all  ancient 
vices,'  are  but  instances  of  the  admirable  tenor  of  the 
imperial  decrees. 

But  if  these  edicts  sounded  like  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  to  the  amazed  onlookers  from  the  West,  there  was 
one  near  by  upon  whose  ears  they  fell  with  all  the 
jarring  force  of  a  harsh  cacophony.  And  that  one 
waited  but  her  time  to  strike.  On  September  21  came 
the  dramatic  coup  d'etat  by  which  the  reformer  was 
relegated  to  the  poisoned  influences  of  forced  seclusion 
behind  the  prison  bars  of  the  hareem,  and  the  Dowager- 
Empress  Tze-hsi-tuan-yu  emerged  once  more  as  the 
dea  ex  machina  to  guide  her  erring  Government  back 
along  the  dark  pathway  of  reaction.  The  young  shoots 
of  incipient  reform  were  rudely  crushed  beneath  the 
reign  of  terror  that  immediately  ensued,  while  a  par- 
alysed world  looked  on  appalled.  Six  of  the  ministers 
most  closely  connected  with  the  movement  of  reform 
were  led  out  to  execution  by  the  notorious  Kang  Yi, 
who  marched  triumphantly  into  the  court  of  justice 
where  it  was  supposed  the  prisoners  were  to  be  tried, 
and  hilariously  read  out  the  sacred  contents  of  a  decree 
which  doomed  them  to  instant  death.  There  was 
nothing  more  to  be  said,  and  decapitation  followed 
without  further  loss  of  time.  Keform  was  at  an  end 
and  reaction  in  full  swing.  ^ 

1  The  decree  of  September  21,  1898,  framed  by  the  Dowager-Empress 
to  acquaint  the  people  with  the  abdication  of  the  Emperor,  is  worthy  of 
reproduction  :  "Our  empire  is  now  labouring  under  great  difficulties,  and 
therefore  it  is  necessary  to  delay  the  question  of  ordinary  reforms.  We 
have  worked  energetically  and  laboriously  at  our  duty,  day  and  night,  so 
that  after  attending  closely  to  a  myriad  of  matters  we  have  often  felt  much 


THE  BOXER  RISING   OF  1900.  381 

The  next  violent  upheaval  of  the  Chinese  volcano 
took  the  shape  of  the  Boxer  rising  and  siege  of  the 
legations  at  Peking,  and  it  was  not  until  an  inter- 
national force  had  dispelled  the  dark  cloud  of  obscurity 
which  enveloped  the  victims  of  the  troubles  of  1900 
that  reform  again  became  a  subject  of  discussion. 
There  is  evidence  of  some  slight  improvement  in  the 
internal  condition  of  the  country  in  the  past  two  years, 
and  the  Peking  correspondent  of  '  The  Times,'  while 
admitting  that  "  the  Wai-wu-pu  is  the  same  cumbrous 
body  as  was  the  Tsungli-Yamen,  the  only  change  be- 
inof  a  reduction  of  the  number  of  ministers  and  an 
alteration  of  the  shape  of  the  table  at  which  they  sit," 
affirms  that  the  internal  condition  of  the  country  is 
unquestionably  better  in  1904  than  it  was  at  the 
beginning  of  1903. 

There  is  little,  however,  to  suggest  that  the  colossal 
scheme  of  financial  and  military  reorganisation  which 
has  recently  been  propounded  by  Sir  Robert  Hart  has 
any  great  prospects  of  fulfilment.  Sir  Robert  Hart 
is,  as  I  well  know,  a  staunch  believer  in  the  future 
regeneration  of  China  ;  but  can  even  the  sturdiest 
believer  in  the  latent  possibilities  of  the  Chinese  re- 
lassitude  in  body.  This  brought  us  to  the  thought  that  her  Majesty,  the 
Empress-Dowager  Tze-hsi-tuan-yu,  &c.,  had  since  the  reign  of  the  late 
Emperor  Tung  Chih  twice  held  the  regency  with  much  success,  and  that 
although  the  empire  was  then  also  labouring  under  great  difficulties  she 
always  issued  triumphant  and  successful  when  grappling  with  critical 
questions.  Now  we  consider  the  safety  of  the  empire  handed  down  to  us 
by  our  imperial  ancestors  above  all  things  else  ;  hence  under  the  critical 
condition  of  things  now  pending  over  us  we  have  thrice  petitioned  her 
Majesty  to  graciously  accede  to  our  prayer  and  personally  give  us  the 
benefit  of  her  wise  instructions  in  the  government  of  this  empire.  She 
has,  fortunately  for  the  prosperity  of  the  officials  and  inhabitants  of  the 
empire,  granted  our  request,  and  from  to-day  on  her  Majesty  will  conduct 
the  affairs  of  State  in  the  ordinary  throne-hall."  This  and  the  other  reform 
edicts  of  the  Emperor  Kwang  Hsu  have  been  reprinted  in  pamphlet  form 
from  '  The  North  China  Daily  News.' 


382  THE  FAR  EAST. 


gard  as  anything  but  chimerical  a  measure  of  reform 
which  is  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  to  give  to  China 
an  increased  annual  revenue  of  £40,000,000,  a  fleet 
consisting  of  30  battleships  and  first-class  cruisers,  30 
second-class  cruisers  and  as  many  destroyers,  with  a 
flotilla  of  150  torpedo-boats,  three  naval  and  four 
military  colleges,  four  arsenals,  an  up-to-date  army  of 
500,000  on  a  peace  footing,  and  last,  but  not  least, 
a  new  and  incorruptible  set  of  ofiicials  !  Omnia  vincit 
labor  improhus !  But  are  the  difiiculties  which  await 
Sir  Robert  Hart  likely  to  prove  less  insurmountable 
than  those  that  attended  the  shades  of  the  daughters 
of  Danaus  ?  The  task  might  well  recall  the  unavailing 
endeavour  of  a  Sisyphus — 

"  One — but  the  type  of  all — 
EoUing  the  dreadful  ball 
In  vain  !  in  vain  /  "  •'■ 

The  Boxer  rising  of  1900,  as  all  the  world  knows, 
aflbrded  Russia  the  excuse  for  which  she  was  waiting 
to  complete  the  process  of  absorption  inaugurated  by 
Muravieff"  and  Ignatiefl"  in  the  'Fifties.  Had  there 
been  no  Boxer  outbreak  it  would  have  made  no  differ- 
ence, for  it  is  in  no  way  open  to  doubt  that  when 
Russia  spent  a  fortune  on  Manchuria  and  built  a 
railway  from  one  end  of  it  to  the  other  she  did  so 
with  the  fixed  conviction  that  that  country  was 
destined  to  be  hers.  "  Is  it  really  possible,"  asks 
the  '  Pre  -  Amur  Yiedomosti,'  "  that  the  Americans 
imagine  that  Russia  has  spent  so  much  treasure  and 
blood  on  Manchuria  simply  in  order  to  convert  it  into 
an  international  bazaar  ?  Do  American  editors  really 
seriously  imagine  that  Russian  officers  who  have 
traversed   Manchuria    through    and    through    in   peril 

^  Charles  Mackay. 


RUSSIAN  DEMANDS.  383 

and  suffering,  constructing  the  railway  and  defending 
it  from  hordes  of  Boxers ;  that  the  Russian  Cossacks 
and  soldiers  who  have  performed  miracles  of  valour  in 
the  last  Chinese  war — modestly  termed  troubles — have 
suffered  all  this,  and  fallen  on  the  field  of  battle,  for 
the  sake  of  foreign  commercial  firms  ?  It  was  not  for 
this  that  E/Ussia  has  done  what  she  has.  In  one  word, 
we  have  fought  and  laboured  in  Manchuria  not  for  the 
sake  of  open  doors."  And  so  the  Manchurian  phase 
of  1900-1904,  displaying  Kussia  in  occupation  of  the 
field,  was  the  natural  corollary  of  those  that  had 
already  been  enacted. 

Russian  statesmen  no  doubt  realised  that  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  Boxer  troubles  they  might  be  obliged 
under  external  pressure  to  effect  a  partial  and  tem- 
porary evacuation  of  the  country ;  and  bearing  this 
in  mind,  they  were  not  slow  to  determine  that  such 
evacuation,  if  it  became  necessary,  should  be  made  the 
lever  for  securing  important  and  valuable  concessions. 
Hence  the  many  troublesome  documents  which  dis- 
turbed the  peace  of  the  inmates  of  more  than  one 
chancellory  from  the  opening  days  of  1901  until  the 
early  part  of  1902,  when  the  publication  of  the  Anglo- 
Japanese  treaty  was  instrumental  in  hastening  on 
the  conclusion  in  March  of  that  year  of  a  more  or 
less  satisfactory  convention  for  the  evacuation  of 
Manchuria. 

The  demands  formulated  in  the  previous  documents 
are  of  considerable  interest,  as  showing  the  wide  scope 
of  Russian  aspirations.  The  chief  provisions  were  to 
have  been  as  follows  :  (1)  An  increase  in  the  number  of 
troops  originally  granted  for  the  protection  of  the  rail- 
way ;  (2)  the  numbers  of  any  future  Chinese  army  to 
be  fixed  in  consultation  with  Russia ;  (3)  no  subject  of 
another  Power  to  be  employed  to  train  naval  or  military 


384  THE  FAR  EAST. 


forces  in  the  northern  provinces ;  (4)  without  Russia's 
consent  no  mining,  railway,  or  other  privileges  to  be 
conceded  to  the  subjects  of  another  Power  in  Manchuria, 
Mongolia,  Tarbagatai,  Hi,  Kashgar,  Yarkand,  or  Khoten, 
and  China  herself  not  to  construct  a  railway  in  those 
provinces  without  Russia's  consent ;  (5)  indemnities  due 
to  Russia  to  be  set  off,  if  desirable,  against  privileges  of 
other  kinds  ;  and  (6)  Russia  to  have  the  right  to  build 
a  railway  to  the  Great  Wall  in  the  direction  of  Peking. 

The  convention,  eventually  concluded  in  March,  was 
a  vast  improvement  on  previous  propositions,  and  though 
there  were  several  points  which  were  not  deemed  com- 
pletely satisfactory  in  this  country.  Lord  Lansdowne 
informed  the  Russian  Ambassador  that  he  "did  not 
desire  to  examine  these  provisions  too  microscopically," 
and  hoped  that  "  the  Agreement  would  be  loyally  and 
considerately  interpreted  on  both  sides." 

But  if  the  convention  signed  in  March  1902  was  more 
or  less  satisfactory  to  other  interested  Powers,  it  was 
very  far  from  being  so  to  Russia ;  and  there  can  be 
very  little  doubt  that  when  she  signed  it,  under  pres- 
sure of  the  Anglo -Japanese  Alliance,  she  did  so  with 
the  mental  reservation  that  she  in  no  way  considered 
herself  bound  by  it.  Inconvenient  pressure  was  thereby 
temporarily  removed,  and  she  was  content  to  await  what 
the  future  would  bring  forth.  Those,  therefore,  who 
had  all  along  clearly  foreseen  what  was  the  real  object 
of  Russian  desire  were  no  doubt  fully  prepared  for  the 
delay  in  the  evacuation,  and  the  news,  which  came  a 
year  later,  of  a  further  set  of  Russian  demands,  and 
again  in  September  1903  of  similar  conditions. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate  the  various  subter- 
fuges under  cover  of  which  Russia  found  it  possible  to 
postpone  the  evacuation,  and  even  to  reoccupy  such 
portions  of  the  country  as  had  actually  been  given  back. 


RUSSIAN  ASSURANCES.  385 

The  old  cry  of  the  impotence  of  the  rightful  owners  to 
keep  order,  which  has  been  made  use  of  so  often  and 
with  so  great  a  degree  of  success  by  Russia  in  her 
dealings  with  oriental  countries,  of  course  played  its 
share  in  the  game,  and,  "  in  consequence  of  the  agitation 
which  prevailed  in  the  district,"  Russian  troops  re- 
entered Mukden  in  October  1903.  This  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  as  far  back  as  November  1902  Consul  Hosie 
reported  that  under  the  recently  appointed  Chinese 
Governor-General  at  Mukden  far  better  order  was  being 
maintained  than  during  the  Russian  occupation,  and 
that  "  numerous  heads  exposed  on  trees  along  the  high- 
ways "  bore  witness  to  the  vigorous  measures  that  were 
being  taken  to  suppress  brigandage  ! 

So  the  farce  dragged  on  until  the  audience  wearied  of 
the  gratuitous  repetition  of  Russian  assurances,  and 
even  diplomatists  were  seen  to  yawn  and  lose  some- 
thing of  their  usual  urbanity  in  shaping  their  replies. 
"  Russia,"  ran  a  memorandum  communicated  by  the 
Russian  Ambassador  so  recently  as  January  8  of  this 
year,  "  considers  it  indispensable  to  declare  from  this 
day  forth  that  she  has  no  intention  whatever  of  placing 
any  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  continued  enjoyment  by 
foreign  Powers  of  the  rights  acquired  by  them  in  virtue 
of  the  treaties  now  in  force."  In  reply  to  which  even 
so  courteous  a  diplomatist  as  Lord  Lansdowne  was 
unable  "  to  help  regretting  that  Russia  should  have 
found  it  impossible  to  take  even  a  single  step  in  pur- 
suance of  the  policy  which  she  had  thus  prescribed  for 
herself,"  or  to  show  "some  concrete  evidence"  of  her 
intention  to  make  good  her  promises. 

The  present  phase  of  the  Manchurian  question  is 
one  which  has  drawn  the  awakened  curiosity  of  the 
world  to  that  hitherto  little-considered  country,  for 
once  more  does  the  searching  light  of  war  play  upon 

2  B 


386  THE  FAR  EAST. 


the  dark  corners  of  the  ancient  home  of  the  Manchus, 
r.nvi    for    the    second   time    in   the    course  of  a   single 
dp  ade  are  the  mountains  and  valleys  of  Shing  King 
reverberating    with     the    stirring    strains    of    martial 
music,  and  the  deep  intonation  of  the  cannon's  roar. 
Russia  bluffed  high,  and  having  done   so  expected 
to   take  the  pool.     That  any  one  would  dare  to   call 
her   hand    seems    hardly    to    have    occurred    to    her. 
Yet    it   was   Russia  herself  who   only  nine  years  be- 
fore had    laid    down    the    circumstances  which   would 
constitute  a  case   for  war.      "The   contemplated  pos- 
session   of  the    Liao-tung    Peninsula    by   Japan   will 
not  only  constitute  a  constant  menace  to  the  capital 
of  China,   but  will   also   render    the    independence  of 
Korea    illusory,    and    thus  jeopardise    the  permanent 
peace  of  the  Far  East.''  ^     Fortunately  such  a  catas- 
trophe was  at  the  time  averted,  thanks  to  the  with- 
drawal of  Japan.     In  1904  Russia  possessed  the  Liao- 
tung   Peninsula,    and    not   only   did   she    possess    the 
Liao-tung     Peninsula     but     maintained     a     military 
occupation   of  the    whole    of  the    hinterland,    and    a 
threatening    force    the    whole    length    of  the    borders 
of  Korea.     Could  it  logically  be   said  that   the  Russ- 
ian  position    of   1904    was  less  likely   to   "constitute 
a  constant  menace  to  the  capital  of  China,  to  render 
illusory    the    independence   of   Korea,   and   thus  jeop- 
ardise   the  permanent   peace   of  the  Far  East,"   than 
the    Japanese   position  of   1895?     Russian  statesmen 
have  short  memories  when  it  is  convenient  for  them 
to  forget ;  but  with  these  little  facts  recalled  to  their 
toiind,   surely    they   should   be  the  last   people   in   the 
world  to  accuse  Japan  of  making  war  without  ample 
and  reasonable  grounds. 

Who  is  going  to  win  ?  is  the  question  which  every- 

1  The  Eussian  representation  to  Japan  in  April  1895. 


WAR  DECLARED.  387 


body  is  asking  everybody  else.  There  are  too  many 
unknown  quantities  to  tempt  any  one  to  prophesy, 
and  "  positiveness  in  such  matters,"  as  Captain 
Mahan  would  say,  "is  the  doubtful  privilege  of  the 
doctrinaire,  and  commonly  unfortunate  in  the  result." 
There  are,  however,  a  few  points  which,  being  borne 
in  mind  by  any  one  attempting  to  form  a  judgment, 
may  be  of  help  in  assisting  towards  arriving  at  a 
reasonable  conclusion. 

There  is  the  extraordinary  contempt  which  was  at 
the  outset  displayed  by  Russia  for  the  opposition  of 
Japan.  In  face  of  persistent  official  denial,  the  fact 
remains  that  on  the  historic  Monday  night  of  Feb- 
ruary 8  (1904),  while  the  ships  of  Admiral  Togo, 
which  were  destined  to  declare  the  fateful  message 
to  the  world  in  their  own  dramatic  way,  were  steal- 
ing up  to  their  sleeping  foe,  the  pleasure  -  loving 
Russians,  who,  in  view  of  the  extremely  critical 
state  of  the  relations  between  the  two  Powers, 
should  have  been  sleeping  at  their  post  on  the 
ships  and  in  the  forts,  had  betaken  themselves 
wholesale  to  a  gala  performance  at  a  circus !  For 
the  first  serious  reverse  which  they  sustained  the 
Russians  have  mainly  themselves  to  thank. 

There  are  two  points  which  must  never  be  lost 
sight  of  when  considering  the  prospects  of  any  Russ- 
ian military  undertaking  —  absence  of  organisation, 
and  ingrained  official  corruption.  Those  who  know 
Russia  well  will  tell  you  that  Russian  organisation 
is  a  hideous  travesty  of  the  word.  To  quote  a  single 
example  of  Russian  efficiency,  Sir  Robert  Hart,  when 
discussing  the  merits  of  the  various  units  of  the 
mixed  detachment  that  succeeded  in  making  its  way 
to  Peking  immediately  prior  to  the  siege  of  1900, 
writes  :   "As  for  the  Russians,  they  brought  a  thou- 


388  THE  FAB  EAST. 


sand  rounds  of  shell  for  their  gun  and  neglected  to 
bring  the  field-gun  itself,  which  remained  at  Tientsin 
— to  our  great  grief  afterwards,  when  it  would  have 
been  of  untold  value  at  Peking ! "  ^ 

Corruption,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is  deep-rooted  and 
widespread.  "Look  to  thy  office  and  indemnify  thy- 
self" was  the  perilous  advice  of  the  old  Russian  Tsars, 
advice  which,  it  must  be  admitted,  was  universally  acted 
upon.  Peter  the  Great,  it  is  true,  waged  unappeasable 
warfare  against  this  deeply-rooted  abuse,  and  on  one 
occasion  condemned  an  offending  governor  of  Astrakhan 
"to  be  torn  by  pigs  !  "  But  how  little  available  were 
his  laudable  endeavours  may  be  judged  by  the  fact  that 
Alexander  11. ,  when  campaigning  with  his  army  in 
Bulo-aria  durino;  the  Russo-Turkish  war,  is  reported  to 
have  said  that  there  were  only  two  honest  men  m  the 
Russian  army,  and  one  of  those  men  was  Tsar  Alexander 
II.  and  the  other  was  the  heir  to  his  throne  !  It  is 
only  too  probable  that  the  stories  to  the  effect  that 
bags  of  sand  masquerade  as  sacks  of  flour  in  many  a 
Russian  store,  and  that  cases  filled  chiefly  with  shavings 
and  sawdust  reach  the  troops,  in  place  of  the  offerings 
made  by  private  charity  for  their  comfort,  will  prove  to 
have  only  too  solid  foundation. 

In  the  case  of  the  present  war,  the  limited  possibilities 
of  the  Russian  communications  must  also  be  kept  in 
view.  Mr  Henry  Norman,  whose  Russian  sympathies 
are  well  known,  admits  that  "  the  expectation  that  the 
line  would  serve  at  a  moment  of  danger,  or  in  pursuit  of 
a  suddenly  executed  coup,  to  throw  masses  of  soldiers 
from  Europe  into  China,  is  yet  far  from  realisation. 
The  line,"  he  goes  on,  "and  its  organisation  would 
break  down  utterly  under  such  pressure,"  and  I  know  of 
no  single  instance  of  any  one  who  has  had  any  practical 

^  These  from  the  Land  of  Sinim. 


RUSSIAN  TROOPS.  389 


acquaintance  with  the  railway  having  come  to  any  other 
conclusion.  So  one  of  the  chief  essentials  in  which  the 
Russian  Empire  is  superior  to  Japan — that  of  numbers — 
is,  as  long  as  Japan  has  command  of  the  sea,  to  a  great 
extent  discounted. 

As  far  as  mere  material  goes,  she  has  little  to  com- 
plain off.  In  her  Cossacks  she  has  a  magnificent  force 
of  scouts  and  a  mobile  body  that  would  constitute  a 
valuable  asset  in  any  army.  Brave,  hardy,  intrepid, 
accustomed  to  nothing  but  the  most  strenuous  life,  the 
Cossack  is  ready  at  any  moment  to  go  anywhere  and  to 
undertake  any  adventure.  As  to  the  soldier  of  the  line, 
to  quote  Mr  Henry  Norman  once  more,  "from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  military  martinet  he  is  ideal 
kanonen-futter — chair  cl  canon."  He  has,  on  the  other 
hand,  what  many  will  vote  a  serious  defect  in  modern 
warfare — a  complete  lack  of  intelligence.  The  Russian 
soldier  of  the  line  is  in  fact  a  mere  rather  dirtily  clad 
machine,  who  is  never  under  any  circumstances  ex- 
pected to  be  able  to  think  for  himself.  He  will  fight 
with  a  stolid  stubborn  persistence  because  he  is  ordered 
to  do  so,  and  not  for  any  reason  that  his  own  intelli- 
gence might  suggest.  That,  however,  is  not  the  fault 
of  the  material,  but  of  those  who  have  moulded  it, 
though  the  fact  is  in  no  way  altered  because  the  re- 
sponsibility for  it  rests  upon  one  part  of  the  whole 
rather  than  upon  the  other.  It  has,  moreover,  yet  to 
be  proved  that  the  Russian  military  system  is  capable 
of  producing  strategists  of  a  standard  necessary  to 
predicate  success  when  pitted  against  a  foe  whose  plans 
of  campaign  are  so  thoroughly  and  so  systematically 
devised  and  so  conscientiously  and  so  doggedly  carried 
out  as  are  those  of  Japan. 

From  a  brief  consideration  of  such  points  as  I  have 
ventured  to  call  attention  to,  it  will  be  seen  that  the 


390  THE  FAR  EAST. 


command  of  the  sea  once  in  the  hands  of  Japan — and 
the  mastery  of  the  sea  was  the  first  object  of  Japanese 
strategists — the  prospects  of  a  decisive  Eussian  success 
were  by  no  means  so  bright  as  was  too  widely  supposed. 
This  impression  can  only  be  strengthened  by  a  con- 
sideration of  the  forces  at  the  disposal  of  the  island 
empire. 

The  calibre  of  the  Japanese  fighting  power  was  dis- 
played when  her  troops  came  into  contact  with  those 
of  China  in  1894,  though  her  real  power  was  perhaps 
scarcely  accurately  gauged,  since  China,  which  had  up 
to  that  time  been  proclaimed  a  tower  of  strength,  was, 
on    her    defeat,    dubbed,    with    easy    inconsistency,    a 
negligible  foe.     The  high  standard  of  efficiency  which 
she  had  then  displayed  was,  however,  maintained  when 
she  again  came  within  the  range  of  military  criticism. 
"  The  Japanese  contingent,"  writes  Sir  Eobert  Hart,  in 
the  same  paragraph  in  which  he  indulges  in  his  lament 
over  the  carelessness  of  the  Russians,  "  numbered  only 
twenty-five  men  ;  but  the  work  they  subsequently  did, 
and  the  way  they  did  it,  won  everybody's  admiration, 
and  would  have  done  honour  to  five  times  their  num- 
ber," 1  and  the  fact  that  it  was  that  part  of  the  city 
apportioned  to  the  troops  of  Japan,  when  the  time  came 
for  the  pacification  of  Peking,  that  was  first  resettled 
and  restored  to  order,  was  by  no  means  lost  upon  the 
minds  of  the  observant. 

Those  indeed  who  watched  carefully  the  operations 
of  the  international  force  did  not  hesitate  to  place 
the  soldiers  of  the  Mikado  in  the  foremost  rank,  and 
when  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  take  note  of  such  things 
came  to  interpret  what  they  had  seen  with  the  aid  sup- 
plied by  a  knowledge  of  the  ethics  of  the  nation,  they 
cannot  have  failed  to  realise  that  there  had  sprung  up 

1  These  from  the  Land  of  Sinim. 


BUSHIDO.  391 


within  the  confines  of  the  newly  born  empire  of  the 
East  a  force  that  was  capable  at  any  moment  of 
astonishing  the  world.  When  one  ponders  upon  the 
innate  contempt  for  death  which  must  be  the  birth- 
right of  a  people  accustomed  for  generations  to  the 
strange  national  institution  of  hara-kiri  (self-immola- 
tion) ;  upon  the  martial  spirit  which  has  for  centuries 
been  the  essence  of  their  national  existence ;  and  upon 
the  extreme  loyalty  and  love  of  king  and  country 
fostered  by  the  Shintoist  belief, — one  is  bound  to 
realise  the  potentialities  of  a  force  constituted  of  such 
material,  and  welded  into  shape  in  accordance  with 
the  accepted  tenets  of  the  highest  modern  military 
science  and  organisation. 

For  whatever  opinion  may  be  held  of  the  religion 
of  the  country,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  hushido, 
the  "  Precepts  of  Knighthood,"  the  philosophy  which 
became  an  abiding  principle  of  the  fighting  caste,  and 
finally  of  the  whole  people,  has  exercised  a  powerful 
influence  upon  the  history  of  Japan,  and  has  been 
a  determining  force  in  the  moulding  of  the  character 
of  the  nation.  And  hushido  is  not  dead,  for  the 
spirit  of  the  Samurai  still  walks  abroad  among  the 
people  who  are  their  descendants.  Rectitude,  courage, 
benevolence,  veracity,  honour,  and  loyalty,  the  principles 
of  a  moral  code  which  formed  the  directing  influence 
in  the  lives  of  the  military  caste  for  generations,  still 
blossom  with  their  old  fragrance  among  the  soldiers 
of  the  Mikado  to-day.  The  rectitude  of  the  Japanese 
soldier  of  to-day  is  still  "  the  power  of  deciding  upon  a 
certain  course  of  conduct  in  accordance  with  reason, 
without  wavering — to  die  when  it  is  right  to  die,  to 
strike  when  to  strike  is  right ; "  ^  the  duty  of  loyalty 
is  still  a  virtue   in   comparison  with  which  no  life   is 

^  Bushido.     Inazo  Nitob^. 


392  THE  FAR  EAST. 


too  dear  to  sacrifice,  and  what  further  proof  can  be 
required  than  the  heroic  storming  of  Kin  Chau,  to 
take  but  a  single  instance,  that  whenever  a  cause 
presents  itself  which  is  considered  dearer  than  life,  now 
as  in  the  past,  "  with  utmost  serenity  and  celerity 
life  will  be  laid  down."  An  intense  patriotism  per- 
meates the  whole  people.  To  the  Japanese  their 
country  is  "  more  than  land  and  soil  from  which  to 
mine  gold  or  to  reap  grain — it  is  the  sacred  abode 
of  the  gods,  the  spirits  of  their  forefathers  ; "  -^  to  them 
the  Emperor  is  "the  bodily  representative  of  Heaven 
on  earth,  blending  in  his  person  its  power  and  its 
mercy,"  ^  sentiments  which  are  inculcated  by  their 
national  religion. 

It  is  this  national  feeling,  the  evolution  of  genera- 
tions, which  has  become  a  part  of  the  national 
existence  of  Japan,  that  must  be  reckoned  with  as  an 
intangible  power,  fighting  in  the  midst  of  and  in- 
spiring her  armies.  "  What  won  the  battles  on  the 
Yalu,  in  Korea,  and  Manchuria,"  writes  the  Japanese 
author  already  quoted,  ^  "  was  the  ghosts  of  our  fathers, 
guiding  our  hands  and  beating  in  our  hearts.  To 
those  who  have  eyes  to  see  they  are  clearly  visible. 
Scratch  a  Japanese  of  the  most  advanced  ideas,  and 
he  will  show  a  Samurai."  Lastly,  honour  —  the 
treasured  honour  of  the  ancient  Samurai,  beneath 
whose  dazzling  ray  life  itself  appeared  of  small  account 
— has  been  sorely  slighted,  so  that  the  whole  popula- 
tion, from  highest  to  lowest,  smarts  keenly  under  the 
humiliation  of  1895,  and  is  prepared  to  wreak  vengeance 
upon  its  authors ; — national  feeling,  that  is,  is  deeply 
and  universally  stirred  against  Russia, 

In  light  of  such  considerations  the  success  which  has 

*  Bushido.     Inazo  Nitobd.  -  Ibid. 

^  Inazo  Nitobe, 


JAPANESE   VICTORIES.  393 

SO  far  attended  the  Japanese  arms  becomes  perfectly 
intelligible,  and  further  victories  are  indeed  to  be 
anticipated.  Local  conquest  may  well  prove  to  be  the 
reward  that  awaits  the  Japanese ;  but  whether  such 
success  is  destined  to  be  productive  of  lasting  material 
result  depends  neither  upon  the  generals  of  Japan  nor 
upon  the  Russian  armies  in  the  Far  East,  but  upon 
the  internal  condition  of  the  Russian  empire. 
"  Russia,"  say  her  supporters,  "  will  never  give  in ; 
she  will  carry  on  the  war  for  years  if  need  be, 
and,  by  sheer  brute  force  and  stamina,  wear  out  her 
antagonists."  That  may  be,  though  it  rests  neither 
with  the  admirer  nor  with  the  critic  to  decide.  How 
long  the  heart  of  the  Russian  people,  stirred  to  action 
by  repeated  reverses  in  a  war  in  which  they  have  no 
interest  and  which  they  do  not  understand,  will  bear 
with  a  governmental  system  beneath  whose  iron  heel 
they  have  long  been  crushed,  is  not  for  the  boldest 
vaticinator  to  foretell.  Be  it  remembered  only  that 
it  is  in  the  heart  and  fibre  of  the  people  in  the  last 
resort  that  the  fate  of  nations  is  fast  held. 


394  LAST   WORDS. 


CHAPTER    XXX. 


LAST    WORDS. 


The  object  of  British  policy — General  Chapman  quoted — Present  conditions 
cannot  be  permanent — Professor  Vambery  quoted — India  the  fulcrum 
of  British  rule  in  Asia — Lord  Curzon  on  the  internal  condition  of 
India. 

In  the  concluding  section  of  the  present  volume  I  have 
endeavoured  to  draw  attention  to  the  general  situation 
in  the  East,  as  it  affects  this  country  at  the  present 
time.  I  am  bold  enough  to  hope  that  in  the  earlier 
chapters  something  may  have  been  found  in  the  de- 
scription of  Eastern  life  and  Eastern  countries  that  may 
have  proved  of  interest  to  those  who,  while  unable  to 
visit  such  countries  for  themselves,  have  nevertheless  a 
fancy  for  casting  an  Asian  horoscope. 

The  present  object  of  British  policy  has,  I  hope,  been 
made  clear — namely,  to  so  guard  and  strengthen  those 
oriental  kingdoms  which  constitute  the  dividing  neutral 
zone  between  the  spheres  of  influence  and  interest  of 
this  country  and  Russia  as  to  preserve  from  dangerous 
contact  the  ambitions  of  the  two  great  Powers  from 
the  West  to  whom  has  fallen  the  golden  heritage  of 
the  East.  "  By  the  extension  of  our  Indian  railway 
system,"  writes  General  Chapman,  "  to  adjoining  states 
and  the  development  of  commerce,  we  may  oppose  a 
Russian  advance  by  means  other  than  those  of  war, 


THE  KINGDOMS   OF  ASIA   ARE  DOOMED.  395 

and  ensure  a  recognition  of  our  Asiatic  Empire  as 
aiming  at  the  wellbeing  and  civilisation  of  all  the 
countries  coming  under  its  influence,"  ^  and  there  can 
be  few  who  will  deny  that  in  the  gradual  extension 
of  railways  and  the  fostering  of  commercial  inter- 
course, together  with  the  assumption  of  a  firm  atti- 
tude at  Constantinople,  Teheran,  and  Peking,  are  to 
be  found  the  means  at  our  disposal  by  which  we  may 
seek  to  obtain  our  end. 

But  while  pursuing  a  policy  which  is  directed  towards 
such  a  goal,  it  would  be  folly  to  postulate  for  it  any 
probability  of  finality.  The  life  of  the  monarchies  of 
the  ancient  world  may  under  skilful  treatment  be  con- 
siderably prolonged,  but  sooner  or  later  collapse  must 
supervene.  For  "  the  kingdoms  of  Islam  are  crumbling," 
and  there  is  more  than  one  Eastern  ruler  who  may  well 
cry  with  the  Amir  of  Kabul, 

"  Around  me  a  voice  ever  rings, 
Of  death,  and  the  doom  of  my  country ; 
Shall  I  be  the  last  of  its  kings  ? "  ^ 

To  those  who  have  eyes  to  see  the  fatal  handwriting 
is  traced  clearly  upon  the  wall.  The  old  order  passeth 
away,  the  kingdoms  of  Asia  are  being  weighed  in  the 
balance  and  found  wanting,  and  the  days  that  remain 
to  them  are  numbered.  "  The  endeavour  of  the  Great 
Powers,"  writes  Professor  Vambery,  "  to  secure  the 
independence  and  integrity  of  Persia  has  only  an 
abstract  value,  for  maladministration,  anarchy,  and 
Asiatic  corruption  have  brought  that  country  to  the 
verge  of  ruin.  Its  neighbours  must  needs  reckon  with 
its  forthcoming  decay,  and  England  has  time  enough 
to  make  good  the  blunders  committed  and  to  protect 

1  "  Our   Commercial    Policy  in  the  East."      A   paper   read   before   the 
Central  Asian  Society  by  General  E.  F.  Chapman,  C.B. 

2  Verses  written  in  India.     Sir  A.  Lyall. 


396  LAST   WORDS. 


her  economic  and  political   interests  by   an   energetic 
policy."  ^ 

Let  us  not  be  blind,  then,  to  the  fact  that  the  day 
must  come,  be  it  far  off  or  near  at  hand,  when  all  that 
is  left  of  old-world  despotism  shall  have  been  ground 
to  chaff  between  the  inexorable  millstones  of  Western 
progress,  and  that  the  Power  that  has  toiled  and 
wrought  with  the  clearest  foresight  and  the  greatest 
amount  of  determination  to  secure  its  position  in  the 
present,  will  speak  with  commanding  voice  when  the 
day  of  disruption  is  at  hand.  An  energetic  and  con- 
sistent policy  may  retain  under  the  peaceful  segis  of 
Great  Britain  the  southern  provinces  of  Persia ;  a 
vacillating  and  half-hearted  procedure  can  only  result 
in  eventually  forcing  upon  her  the  unenviable  task  of 
creating  another  Gibraltar  upon  the  frowning  heights 
of  Oman,  even  should  no  worse  thing  befall  her. 

All  those,  then,  who  have  given  passing  thought  to 
the  great  problems  of  empire  in  the  East  must  welcome 
with  gratitude  the  straightforward  statements  of  a 
no  half-hearted  determination  to  protect  our  interests 
there,  which  have  more  than  once  been  made  in  recent 
years  by  responsible  statesmen,  and  must  view  with 
satisfaction  such  signs  as  are  visible  of  a  recrudescence 
of  British  power. 

And  as  it  is  in  India  that  is  to  be  found  the  fulcrum 
of  British  rule  throughout  the  East,  so  it  is  with  pardon- 
able pride  and  satisfaction  that  we  look  back  upon  the 
years  of  strenuous  endeavour  which  a  succession  of 
devoted  Englishmen  have  bestowed  upon  her.  No 
more  welcome  sound  could  fall  upon  the  ears  of  the 
people  to  whose  keeping  has  been  confided  the  sacred 
trust  of  an  Eastern  empire  than  the  words  uttered 
by  Lord  Curzon  at  the  conclusion  of  a  comprehensive 

1  Pester  Lloyd,  June  1903. 


PROGRESS  IN  INDIA.  397 


review  of  the  position  of  India,  when  he  modestly 
expressed  the  hope  that  from  a  period  of  stress  and 
labour  had  perhaps  emerged  an  India  "  better  equipped 
to  face  the  many  problems  which  confront  her,  stronger 
and  better  guarded  on  her  frontiers,  with  her  agricul- 
ture, her  industries,  her  commerce,  her  education,  her 
irrigation,  her  railways,  her  army,  and  her  police 
brought  up  to  a  higher  state  of  efficiency — with  every 
section  of  her  administrative  machinery  in  better  repair, 
with  her  credit  re-established,  her  currency  restored, 
the  material  prosperity  of  her  people  enhanced,  and 
their  loyalty  strengthened."  ^ 

With  courageous  and  far-seeing  statesmen  at  the 
helm,  backed  by  the  heart  and  feeling  of  the  British 
people,  inspired  by  a  true  appreciation  of  the  respon- 
sibilities of  a  world-wide  Empire,  the  ship  of  State, 
v^hose  ensign  flies  as  the  emblem  of  civilisation,  peace, 
and  justice  on  every  sea,  may  be  trusted  to  steer 
safely  through  the  storm-tossed  waters  of  the  Eastern 
hemisphere. 

1  Speech  on  the  Indian  Budget,  March  1904. 


w 


MAP    SHOWING    THE   AUTHOR'S  ROUTE    mij  Uie  |,r,.po,ed  ;/!.«:  of  Ihe  BA(;HDA71  UAILWAY 


o 


o 


INDEX. 


Abbas,  Joseph,  36,  75,  237. 
Abbott,  Captain,  173. 
Abd  us-Samad,  prime  minister  of  Bok- 
hara, 188. 
Abu  Hurareh,  59. 
Achinsk,  town  of,  294. 
Adana,  capital  of  Cilicia,   42,  47,  50, 

52,  88. 
Afforestation,     effect    on     climate    of 

Tashkent,   200. 
Afghanistan,  15,  19,  22,  166,  175. 
Afium  Kara  Hissar,  32. 
Afrasiab,  city  of,  193. 
Afrin,  river,  88. 
Agha     Mohammed,     173  ;     Hamadan 

destroyed  by,    130. 
Agriculture  in  Siberia,  268,  269. 
Aigun,  treaty  of  (1858),  215,  267. 
Ain  -  ed  -  Dowleh,    prime    minister   of 

Persia,    145. 
Aintab,  town  of,  92. 
Ak  Keupri,  38,  40,  89. 
Ak  Su,  river,  226. 
Akmolinsk,  territory  of,  267. 
Aksu,  town  of,  214,  227. 
Ala-ed-Dowleh,  116. 
Alatau  Mountains,  206. 
Albuquerque  the  Great,  16. 
Aleppo,  town  of,   52-55,  57,  58,   60, 

61,   85,  89,  91,   94. 
Alexander    I.,    mysterious^  death    of, 

278. 
Alexander  11. ,  388. 
Alexander    the    Great,    39,    60,    129, 

192. 
"Alexander's  House,"  at  Tomsk,  280. 
Alexandretta,  Gulf  of,  89,  94. 
Alexandrovski  Mountains,  206. 


Ali  Pasha,  commanding  at  Aleppo,  57, 

60. 

Alikhanoff,  Colonel,  167,  175. 

Alp  Arslan,  30. 

Altai,  sport  in  the,  chaps,  xxi.  and 
xxii. ;  discovery  as  a  sporting  coun- 
try of  the,  243  ;  description  of  the 
country  of  the,  275  ;  description  of 
journey  to  the,  244-246. 

Altai  mining  district,  the,  267,  268. 

Altin  Imel,  207. 

America,  18. 

Amu  Daria  (ancient  Oxus),  176. 

Amur,  river,  303. 

Anatolia,  32. 

Anatolian  railway,  32. 

Anazarba,  town  of,  41. 

Anchiale,  town  of,  46. 

Andijan,  town  of,  166,  168,  198. 

Andrew,  railway  schemes  of,  85. 

Angara,  river,  295. 

Anglo-Japanese  alliance,  the,  378. 

Anglo-Persian  Convention  of  1903, 
138,  142. 

Anglo-Persian  trade,  141. 

Annenkoff,  General,  quoted,  163,  165 
footnote. 

Antioch,  town  of,  52,  88. 

Autung  opened  to  foreign  trade,  314. 

Apiculture  in  Siberia,  271. 

Arabia,  8. 

'  Arabian  Nights,'  6,  79. 

Arabs,  56,  58,  59,  62,  63,  67,  68,  74, 

75,  93  ;  an  encounter  with,  63-66. 
Aral  Sea,  172. 

Ardagh,  Sir  John,  quoted,  376. 
Army  corps,  centres  of,  in  Turkey,  95. 
Arslani  Bell,  the,  88. 


400 


INDEX. 


Ashkabad,  town  of,  171. 

Ashtira  (days  of  mourning),  133. 

Asia  Minor,  43. 

Asshurnazirpal,  King,  73. 

Assouan,  dam  of,  77,  78. 

Assyria,  6. 

Atabeg-Azam,  prime  minister  of  Persia, 
145. 

"Athalik  Ghazi,"  Yakub  Khan  as- 
sumes title  of,  211. 

Athens,  31. 

Aulie  Ata,  207. 

Avicenna,  tomb  of,  125,  127. 

Ayas,  Bay  of,  44,  89. 

Azziz  Khan,  112. 

Baber,  Sultan,  193,  194. 

Babylon,  5,  7,  72,  73. 

Babylonia,  6  ;  agricultural  possibilities 
of,  77-79. 

Bacon,  Francis,  counsel  of,  to  the 
traveller,    12. 

Bagche,  pass  of,  88. 

Baghdad,  6,  58,  62,  79,  88  ;  as  a  com- 
mercial centre,  80-83. 

Baghdad  railway.  See  under  Rail- 
way. 

Baghdad-Teheran  trade-route,  115. 

Bahri  Pasha,  governor  of  Cilicia,  50. 

Baikal,  Lake,  14,  302. 

Bain  Chagan,  valley  of,  247,  248. 

Bairam  Ali,  ruins  of  old  Merve  at,  174. 

Baku,  112,  and  chap.  xiv. 

Balakhani,  oil-field  of,  156,  157. 

Balfour,  the  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  quoted, 
101,  372. 

Balkash,  Lake,  207,  208,  225, 

Baltistan,  mountains  of,  229. 

Baluchistan,  167,  169. 

Barasingh  stag,  226. 

Barnaul,  town  of,  202,  244,  267,  271  ; 
description  of,  274,  275. 

Basra,  town  of,  81,  82,  89. 

Beaconstield,  Lord,  326. 

Beazley,  C.  R.,  quoted,  16. 

Bekovitch,  Prince,  murdered  by  the 
Khivans,   173. 

Belgium,  18. 

Belik,  river,  60,  92. 

Bell,  Colonel  Mark,  quoted,  95  foot- 
note. 

Beveridge,  A.  J.,  quoted,  18,  324. 

Bibi  Eibat,  oil-field  of,  158. 

Bibi  Khanum,  mosque  of,  197. 

Bielinski,  builder  of  bridge  over  the 
Oxus,  167. 


Biisk,  town  of,   245,   246,   263,  267, 

269,  271,  275. 
Birejik,  town  of,  88,  92. 
Bishop,  Mrs,  quoted.  111. 
Bisitun  (Behistun),  122,  123. 
Black  Sea  Basin  Agreement,  95. 
Blagoveschensk,  town  of,  17,  296. 
Bobaido,  town  of,  297. 
Bogle,  Mr,  envoy  of  Warren  Hastings 

to  Tibet,  362. 
Bokhara,  10,   12,  21,  and  chap.   xvi. ; 

attraction  of,  179  ;  bazaars  of,  179  ; 

citadel  of,    181,    183;    diseases   of, 

180,    181  ;   present  status  of,    182, 

183  ;  prison  of,   185-187  ;  Rigistan 

of,   181,   183;   trade  of,   190,   191; 

treaty  of,   174,  363. 
Bosphorus,  the,  20,  29-31. 
Bostan,  rock  sculptures  of,  116-119. 
Boxer  rising  of  1900,  312. 
Bozanti,  vale  of,  37. 
Brown,  Sir  Thomas,  quoted,  72. 
Bulgar  Dagh,  35,  37,  87,  89. 
Bulgar  Maden,  silver-mine  at,  38. 
BuDJi  plain,  view  from,  229. 
Burns,    Sir  Alexander,    quoted,    181, 

190. 
Burnt  column  at  Constantinople,  29. 
Bush,  Mr  H.  Fulford,  quoted,  313. 
Bu-shido,  391. 
Byzantium,   27,   31  ;    vicissitudes   of, 

28. 

Cairo,  the  dervishes  of,  11. 
Calcutta  Convention  (1890),  348. 
Camels  in  Asia  Minor,  90 ;  failure  of, 

in  time  of  war,  165. 
Cape  of  Good   Hope,  passage  round, 

16. 
Caspian,  journey  across,  168. 
Celestial  Empire.     See  China. 
Central  Asia,  21. 

Chagan  Burgaza,  valley  of,  247,  248. 
Chald£ea,  6,  7,  96,  109. 
Chaman,  175. 

Chambers,  the  Rev.  W. ,  47. 
Chandra   Das,    babu,    explorations  of, 

in  Tibet,  345  footnote,  346. 
Chapman,  General,  quoted,  394. 
Chardjui,  167,  176. 
Chehel  Duckteran,  175. 
Chesney,  railway  schemes  of,  85. 
Chifte  Khan,  38. 
Chifu,   town  of,   310 ;    Convention   of 

(1876),  347. 
China,  14,  15,  22,  and  chaps,  xxviii. 


VL 


INDEX. 


401 


and  xxix. ;  Russia  stands  security 
for,  371  ;  reform  movement  in, 
379. 

Chino-Japan  war  (1894),  368. 

Chirol,  Mr  V.,  quoted,  221. 

Chita,  town  of,  303. 

Christie,  the  Rev.  Dr,  45. 

Chukur  Ova,  the  eastern  portion  of 
Cilicia,  41. 

Chumbi  valley,  fighting  in,  221. 

Chunghou,  Chinese  official,  214. 

Church,  Mr,  quoted,  226. 

Chuya,  river,  247,  276. 

Cicero,  39. 

Cicilian  Gates,  the,  37,  39  ;  not  to  be 
traversed  by  the  railway,  40,  88. 

Cilicia,  34,  40-42,  51,  52,  88,  90,  and 
chap.  iv. 

Cleopatra,  47. 

Communications,  importance  of,  be- 
tween England,  Australia,  and  the 
Far  East,  22,  322  ;  in  Persia,  143, 
144,  338 ;  lack  of,  in  Turkey,  80-83 ; 
necessity  of,  in  Siberia,  285. 

ConoUy,  Captain,  181  ;  the  story  of, 
187-190. 

Constantino,  Emperor,  27. 

Constantinople,  27,  29,  30,  and  chap, 
ii. 

Convicts  in  Siberia,  294. 

Corruption  in  Turkey,  48,  49 ;  in 
Russia,  388. 

Cossacks,  210,  389 ;  conquest  of 
Siberia  by,  284. 

Cotton    industry    in    Turkey,    50 ;    in 

Central  Asia,  202. 
Cumberland,  Major,  243. 
Cuneiform    writing,    method    of    deci- 
phering discovered,  128. 
Curzon,  Lord,  quoted,   9,  22,  37  foot- 
note,   123,    133  footnote,   166,    180 
footnote,   182,   194,  322,  323,  336, 
337,  341,  352  footnote,  397. 
Cydnus,  river,  44,  45,  47. 
Cyrus,  30,  39,  60. 

Dairy-farming  in  Siberia,  292. 

Dalni,  town  of,  161,  302  ;  description 

of,  308. 
Damascus,  54,  55. 
Daniel,  tomb  of,  197. 
Darcy,  oil  concession,  112. 
Darius,  9,  30,  60,  107;  inscriptions  of, 

109,   121,   128;   deciphered  by  Sir 

Henry  Rawlinson,   129. 
David,  tomb  of,  114. 

2 


Davidson,    Mr   J.    W.,    quoted,     305 

footnote,   307  footnote. 
Deir-el-Zor,  town  of,  55,  57,  59,  60, 

62,  68. 
Deir  Hafr,  village  of,  58. 
Demavend,  Mount,  229. 
Demidoff,  Prince,  243,  244,  248. 
Desert    of    Mesopotamia,    59,   63,   66, 

69,   92,  and   chap.    vi.  ;   of  Central 

Asia,   175,   176. 
Diala,  river,  110. 

Diarbekr,  town  of,  55,  57,  89,  92. 
Diaz,  Bartholomew,  16. 
Dinek  Tash  at  Tarsus,  45,  46. 
Dinner-party,  a  curious,  113,  114. 
Dizful,  113. 

DorjiefiF,  at  Lhassa,  220,  352. 
Douglas,  Professor,  quoted,  213,  347 

footnote. 
Dungans,  the,  212. 

"East    Chinese    Railway    Company," 

the,  301. 
Ecbatana,  129. 
Egypt,  139. 
Elias,  Mr  Ney,  243. 
Enzeli,  151. 

Eregli,  village  of,  35,  36,  87,  89. 
Erivan,  town  of,  144. 
Erzerum,  treaty  of,  139. 
Esarhaddon,  72. 
Eski  Sher,  32. 
Esther,  tomb  of,  125-127. 
Euphrates,  7,  55,  57-60,  62,  85,  88. 

Far  East,  the,  21  ;  question  of,  chaps. 

xxviii.  and  xxix.  ;  war  in,  386-393. 
Ferghana,  21. 

Ferhad,  of  Persian  myth,  110,  115. 
Ferhit  Pasha,  33. 
Ferry     across     the     Euphrates,     62 ; 

across    the    Hi,    228  ;     across    the 

Khabur,    66  ;    across    the    Tekkes, 

240. 
Fire,  natural,  at  Baku,  156. 
Fire-temple  at  Surah  Khani,  157. 
France,  18. 

Gabet  and  Hue,  Lazarist  fathers, 
reach  Lhassa,  345. 

Ganjnameh,  the,  128. 

Gardens  in  the  East,  8. 

Garter  Mission,  the,  337. 

Gaul,  31. 

Gavazzi,  Modesto,  quoted,  184  foot- 
note. 

C 


402 


INDEX. 


Gazelle  shot,  255. 

Genesis,  quotations  from,  7. 

Genoa,  traders  of,  31. 

Geolt  Su,  river,  225. 

Geok  Teppe,  12,  17,  166,  170. 

George  III.,  remarks  of,  19. 

Germanophobia  in  England,  98,  103. 

Germany,  18  ;  at  Constantinople,  327; 
promoters  of  the  Baghdad  Railway, 
chap.  viii. 

Ghilan,  province  of,  147,  150. 

Giaour  Dagh  (ancient  Amanus),  41, 
52,   88,   91. 

Gobi,  desert  of,  220. 

Gold  law  in  Siberia,  297. 

Golden  Horde,  the,  284. 

Golden  Horn,  the,  27. 

Goldsmid,  Sir  F.,  quoted,  80. 

Golovin,  treaty  of  Nertchinsk  con- 
cluded by  (1689),  367. 

Goltz,  General  Von,  327. 

Gordon,  General,  summoned  by  China, 
214. 

Gotarzes,  King  of  Parthia,  inscriptions 
of,  123. 

Gozan,  river,  7,  66. 

Granville,  Lord,  174. 

Grotefend,  first  to  decipher  cuneiform 
writing,  128. 

Guffa,  a  Babylonian  boat,  80. 

Guru,  village  of,  358. 

Guthrie,  Mr,  quoted,  156. 

Gyangtse,  mission  authorised  to  pro- 
ceed to,  356  ;  occupied,  358. 

Habor,  66. 

Halah,  66,  114. 

Haleb.     See  Aleppo. 

Hamadan,  80,  124-130  ;  population  of, 

124  ;  bazaars  of,  125. 
Hamah,  54. 
Hamidiyeh,  50. 

Hammum  Ali,  hot  baths  of,  93. 
"Happy  Valley,"  the,  248. 
Hardinge,  Sir  Arthur,  142,  145. 
Harran,  56,  57,  88,  92. 
Hart,     Sir     Robert,     347     footnote ; 

quoted,     366,    387,     390;     scheme 

of   Chinese    reorganisation  of,   381. 
Harthama,  192. 
Harun-al-Raschid,  30,  39. 
Hassan  Beyli,  village  of,  52,  88. 
Hatzfeldt,  Count,  327. 
Hazret  Meviana,   founder  of  Mevlevi 

dervishes,  33. 
Henry  the  Navigator,  Prince,  15. 


Hephsestion,  death  of,  129. 

Herat,  175. 

Herodotus  quoted,  78,  80,  107. 

Hippodrome  at  Constantinople,  29. 

Hit,  62. 

Hogarth,  Mr,  quoted,  58  footnote,  93. 

Hoh-Hah,  Kalmuk  hunter,  230. 

Holdich,  Sir  Thomas,  quoted,  20. 

Horns,  54. 

Hosie,  Consul,  quoted,  385. 

Hulvan,  river,  110. 

Ibex  (Capra  sibirica),  chap.  xx. ;  a  48- 
inch    head    secured,    232;     46 -inch 
and    49 -inch    heads    secured,    235 
a    46^  -  inch    head     secured,     237 
a    51|  -  inch    head    secured,     239 
a  50-inch  head  secured,  240  ;  horn 
measurements,    241. 

Ibrahim  Pasha,  39,  56  ;  depredations 
of,  92. 

Igde,  Russian  defeat  at,  173. 

Ignatieff,  General,  368. 

Hi,  river,  207,  216,  225,  228. 

Imam  Hussein  Askar,  tomb  of,  at 
Samara,   76. 

Imam  Mohammed  el  Mahdi,  mosque 
of,  at  Samara,  76. 

Immuration,  an  instance  of,  111. 

"Imperial  Ottoman  Baghdad  Rail- 
way Company,"  the,  101. 

India,  9,  19,  23  ;  the  pivot  of  British 
supremacy  Ln  Asia,  321,  396. 

Indo-Persian  trade,  141. 

Irkutsk,  161,  270,  281  ;  origin  of, 
295  ;  present  status  of,  295  ;  gold- 
smelting  laboratory  of,  296. 

Irtish,  river,  209,  284. 

Isaiah,  quotation  from,  8. 

Ishak  Khan,  at  Samarkand,  198. 

Islayeh,  52. 

Ismid,  town  of,  32. 

Ismil,  village  of,  35. 

Issi  Kul,  lake,  207. 

Ivanotf,  General,  199. 

Japan,  18  ;  the  soldier  of,  390. 
Jebel  Abdul  Azziz,  56,  67. 
Jebel  Nur,  41,  51. 
Jebel  Tek  Tek,  92, 
Jebul,  Lake,  57. 
Jengis  Khan,  17,  192. 
Jeremiah,  quotations  from,  8. 
Jergol,  Kalmuk  hunter,  230. 
Jews  at  Hamadan,  124. 
Jihun,  river,  51. 


INDEX. 


403 


Julfa,  town  of,  144. 

Justinian,    builder    of    mosque    of    St 

Sophia,  30  ;  course  of  river  Cydnus 

diverted  by,  45. 

Kagahn  (New  Bokhara),  177. 

Kaisariyeh,  town  of,  90. 

Kaleh  Shergat,  ruins  of,  76. 

Kalgan,  220. 

Kalifate,  the,  6. 

Kahnuks,  217,  225,  245,  275;  hunters, 

228,  229,  231,  247,  248. 
Kandahar,  175. 
Kang  Yi,  380. 
Kangavar,  village  of,  121. 
Kansk,  town  of,  294. 
Kara  Bunar,  village  of,  35,  36,  89. 
Kara  Su,  river  in  Western  China,  226. 
Kara  Su,  valley  of,  in  Asia  Minor,  52, 

88. 
Karaman,  village  of,  87,  89. 
Kashgar,  214,  227. 
Kashmir,  226,  229. 
Kasima,    proposed    terminus    of    the 

Baghdad   railway,    89. 
Kasr-i-Shirin,  110,  113. 
Katl,  ceremony  of,  135. 
Kaufmami,    General,    164,    174,    194, 

201. 
Kazimin,  mosqiae  of,  at  Baghdad,  81, 

94. 
Kazvin,  town  of,  144,  150. 
Kerbela,  89,  94. 
Kermanshah,    80 ;    strategic    position 

of,  115  ;  population  of,  116  ;  sculp- 
tures of  (see  Bostan). 
Khabur,  river,  56,  62,  66. 
Khamba  Jong,  355. 
Khamurabi,  King,  71. 
Khanikin,  town  of,  89,  110. 
Khanikofl;  190  ;  quoted,  186,  189. 
Kharbin,    town    of,    302 ;    description 

of,   304-308. 
Khingan  Mountains,  304. 
Khiva,  170,  172-174. 
Khokand,  170,  198,  211. 
Khorgos,  207. 
Khosroe,  King,  110. 
Khoten,  214. 
Kiachta,  220. 

Kiao  Chaix  seized  by  Germany,  371. 
Killis,  town  of,  52,  54,  56,  88,  89,  91. 
King,    Mr    L.    W.,    at    Nineveh,    73 

footnote. 
Kings,  quotations  from  the  book  of, 

66,  135. 


Kirgiz  of  Central  Asia,  206,  217,  225, 
229. 

Kizil  Arvat,  166,  170. 

Kizil  Robat,  110. 

Knight,  Mr  E.  F.,  quoted,  146. 

Kobdo,  town  of,  276. 

Kolpakofsky,  General,  212. 

Koiiiaroif,  General,  167. 

Konia,  tovni  of,  32-35,  87,  89. 

Kopala,  207. 

Korea,  Anglo-Russian  agreement  con- 
cerning (1886),  369. 

Kosh  Agach,  245-247,  263,  275. 

Koshkhor,  native  name  for  wild  ram, 
249,  256. 

Kowaik,  river,  88. 

Koweit,  89 ;  British  ascendancy  at, 
101  ;    Turkish  attacks  upon,   337. 

Koyunjik,  the  mound  of,  72,  73. 

Krasnovodsk,  town  of,  166,  169. 

Krasnoyarsk,  town  of,  279,  280,  294. 

Kulja,  207,  226,  and  chap.  xix.  ; 
taken  by  Russia,  212 ;  present 
position  of,  215,  216  ;  town  of, 
216,  218  ;  population  of,  216-218  ; 
future  of,  219,  220. 

Kumiss  (mare's  milk),  218. 

Kunetzsk,  town  of,  202,  267. 

Kurds,  56. 

Kurt  Dagh,  52,  88. 

Kushid  Khan  Kala,  the  fort  of  Merve, 
174. 

Kushk,  168,  175. 

Kutchum,  Tartar  chief,  284. 

Kuzmitch,  Feodor,  277,  280. 

Lamaism,  345. 

Landsell,  Dr,  190. 

Lansdowne,  Lord,  quoted,  335,  338, 
343,  357,  384,  385. 

Layard,  Sir  A.  H.,  quoted,  67  foot- 
note, 69,  115  footnote,  121  footnote, 
124  footnote,  129. 

Lena  Company,  gold-mines  of,  297. 

Leprosy,  180. 

Lessar,  M.,  166. 

Lesseps,  M.  de,  164,  201. 

Lhassa,  Eiiropeans  at,  344 ;  Russian 
intrigue  at,  352,  358  ;  advance  of 
British  mission  to,  359. 

Li  Hung  Chang,  369. 

Liaotuug  peninsula,  301. 

Lima,  oil-wells  of,  161. 

Liquid  fuel,  162  footnote. 

Liquorice,  59. 

Littledale,  Mr,  244. 


404 


INDEX. 


Livadia,  treaty  of,  214. 
Lomakin,  General,  164,  165,  170. 
Lu-tsu-han,  Chinese  official,  213. 
Lynch,  Messrs,  81,  94. 

Macao,  16. 

Maeedon,  31. 

Maclean,  Mr  H.  W. ,  quoted,  339. 

MacMahon,  Colonel,  143. 

Mahan,  Captain  A.  T.,  quoted,  77,  321, 

325,  331,  335. 
Malleson,  Colonel,  quoted,  22. 
Malwiyeh,  the,  76. 
Manas,  214. 
Manchuria,  4,  and  chaps,  xxv.,  xx^aii., 

and  xxix. ;  the  plains  of,  308  ;  Rus- 
sian   assurances    concerning,    306 ; 

Russian  enterprise  in,  310-314. 
Manchurian  Convention  of  1902,  305, 

384. 
Manning,  Mr,  the  only  Englishman  to 

visit  Lhassa  prior  to  the  mission  of 

1904,  344. 
Marash,  town  of,  52,  88,  92  ;  death  of 

Icaimakam  of,  38. 
Marcanda.      See  Samarkand. 
Mardin,  town  of,  55,  56,  92. 
Marghilan,  198. 
Mariinsk,  town  of,  294. 
Markosoif,   General,    defeated    by  the 

Khivans,    173. 
Marmot,  235. 
Massy,  Colonel,  40. 
"Masterly    inactivity,"    failure    of    a 

policy  of,  21. 
Mersina,    40,    42-44,    50 ;    unsuitable- 

ness  of,  as  a  port,   43,   91. 
Mersina    and    Tarsus-Adana    railway, 

40,  86. 
Merve,  Queen  of  the  World,   10,  21, 

167,   168,   174. 
Meshed,  144,  171,  173. 
Meskineh,  village  of,  55,  57-59. 
Mesopotamia,  4,  6,  56,  62,  67. 
Mevlevi  dervishes,  tekke  of,  at  Konia, 

33. 
Michie,  Alexander,  quoted,   315,  324, 

348. 
Miller,  Mr,  quoted,  307,  310. 
Minar  Kalan,  at  Bokhara,  184. 
Missis,  town  of,  50. 
Missovaiya,  303. 
Mohammerah,  port  of,  113. 
Mongolia,  220  ;  sport  in,  chap.  xxii. ; 

trade  of,  276. 
Mordeeai,  tomb  of,  125-127. 


Moscow,  14,  17,  203,  244,  245,  273, 
300. 

Moslemah,  30. 

Mosque,  ceremony  at  a,  10. 

Mossul,  5,  55,  56,  60,  62,  68,  69,  88, 
93  ;  description  of,  74. 

Motassem,  30. 

Muhammed  II.,  conqueror  of  Constan- 
tinople, 31. 

Mukden,  capital  of  Manchuria,  308  ; 
opened  to  foreign  trade,  314  ;  re- 
occupied  by  Russia  in  October  1903, 
385. 

Muravieff,  Count,  21,  367  ;  Amur 
region  annexed  by,  285. 

Muscat,  relics  of  Portuguese  suprem- 
acy at,  16. 

Mustapha  Pasha,  depredations  of,  92. 

Muzart  Pass,  227. 

Nadir  Shah,  173,  183,  197. 

Nahs,  239. 

Nain  Sing  reaches  Lhassa,  345  foot- 
note. 

Nakarreh  Khaneh  (dnim-tower),  117. 

Nasr-ed-Din  Shah,  quoted,  119,  120. 

Nasratabad,  143. 

NasruUah,  King  of  Bokhara,  181,  187; 
character  of,  188. 

Naus,  M.,  142. 

Near  East,  fascination  of,  7 ;  the  cities 
of,  9  ;  British  policy  in,  98 ;  the 
question  of,  chap.  xxvi. ;  the  ques- 
tion mainly  a  strategic  one,   325. 

Nebi  Yunus,  mound  of,  72. 

Nebuchadnezzar,  7,  72. 

Nejef,  94. 

Nertchinsk,  treaty  of,  21,  284. 

Newmarch,  Major,  Resident  at  Bagh- 
dad, 81. 

Nicholas  I.,  Tsar  of  Russia,  policy  of, 
20. 

Nicholas,  the  Grand  Duke,  steams  up 
the  Golden  Horn,  326. 

Niebuhr,  drawings  of  inscriptions  of 
Persepolis  made  by,    128. 

Nimrud,  the  mound  of,  73,  76. 

Nineveh,  5,  72,  73. 

Nissibin,  56,  88,  92. 

Nitobe,  Inazo,  quoted,  391,  392. 

Niuchwang,  treaty  port,  311  ;  situ- 
ation at,  in  autumn  1903,   313. 

Norman,  Mr  Henry,  quoted,  190,  273, 
286,  388,  389. 

Novo  Nicholaewsk,  settlement  of,  273, 
291. 


INDEX. 


405 


'  Novoe    Vremya,"  quotations     from, 

341. 
Nurah,  Kalmuk  hunter,  230. 
Nushki-Sistan  trade-route,  140,  339. 

Oannes,  the  fish  god,  6. 

Ob,  244,  245,  263. 

O' Donovan,  Mr,  174. 

Oil-wells  in  Persia,  112;  at  Baku, 
157-162. 

Oil-trade,  statistics  of,  159-162. 

Okhotsk,  Sea  of,  284. 

Old  Testament,  the  scene  of  the  story 
of,  7,  66. 

Oleg,  326. 

Olives,  groves  of,  near  Aleppo,  57. 

Omsk,  town  of,  209. 

Onguidai,  village  of,  245,  246,  263, 
275,  276. 

Orenburg,  town  of,  183. 

"Orient  Express,"  30. 

Oriyaas,  river,  226,  227  ;  beauty  of 
scenery  of,  228,  229. 

Orlandi,  Giovanni,  183;  death  of,  184. 

Osmaniyeh,  village  of,  51,  52. 

Ovis  Ammon,  chaps,  xxi.  and  xxii. ; 
first  seen,  249  ;  first  ram  shot,  250  ; 
four  large  rams  sighted,  251  ;  a  57- 
inch  head  secured,  259  ;  a  55-inch 
head  secured,  261  ;  a  successful 
right-and-left,  261  ;  horn  measure- 
ments, 263. 

Oxus,  bridge  across,  167,  176. 

Pakhoboff,  Ivan,  founder  of  Irkutsk, 
295. 

Palmerston,  Lord,  deputation  to,  in 
1857,  87. 

Pamirs,  the,  20. 

Paris,  treaty  of,  139. 

Peacock  throne,  the,  134. 

Peking,  14,  21,  314  ;  treaty  of  (1860), 
367  ;  occupied  by  England  and 
France,   367. 

Pendjeh  incident,  the,  167. 

Pennsylvania,  oil-wells  of,  161. 

Percy,  Earl,  quoted,  37  footnote. 

Persia,  4,  6,  15,  19,  22,  and  chaps, 
ix.-xiii. ;  a  piece  on  the  Eastern 
chess-board,  330-343. 

Persian  amenities,  116;  characteristics, 
107,  108  ;  loan  of  1900,  333  ;  rail- 
way convention  of  1890,  334  ;  tariff 
of  1903,  139,  140. 

Perso-Afghan  boundary  of  1872,  142. 

Peter  the  Great,  388. 


Petrusevitch,  General,  transport  scheme 
of,  165. 

Phunsah,  60. 

Piru,  inscriptions  of,  109,  121. 

Pishpek,  207. 

Pistachio-trees  near  Aleppo,  57. 

Polonoshnaya,  proposed  junction  of 
Tomsk-Tashkent  and  Siberian  rail- 
ways, 202. 

Pombo,  Kalmuk  hunter,  248-250,  253, 
256,  258-262. 

Porsuk,  90. 

Port  Arthur,  14,  300,  302,  308  ;  port 
charges  introduced  at,  309  ;  incident 
of,  371  ;  Russian  convention  con- 
cerning, 373. 

Porter,  Sir  R.  Ker,  quoted,  122,  124, 
130. 

Portugal,  16. 

Possiet  Bay,  367. 

Post-road  in  Asia,  12  ;  travelling  on, 
204,  205 ;  rate  of  speed  attained 
on,  205  ;  the  Biisk  -  Kosh  Agach 
road,  245. 

Prestige,  importance  of,  in  the  East, 
323. 

Pyramus,  river,  44. 

Rabino,  Mr  H.,  115. 
Railways — 

The  Anatolian,  32. 

The  Baghdad,  32,  56,  79,  83,  328, 
329,  and  chap.  viii. ;  present  pos- 
ition of,  101,  102  ;  trac6  of,  87. 

The  Damascus-Aleppo,  95. 

The  East  Chinese,  chap.  xxv. 

The  Euphrates  valley,  87. 

The  Haida-Pasha-Ismid,  86. 

The  Hurnai  and  Bolan,  167. 

The  Mersina-Adana,  88. 

The  Murgab,  175. 

The  Orenburg-Tashkent,  164,  201. 

The  Qiietta-Nushki,  340,  341. 

The  Smyrna- Aidin,  86. 

The  Smyrna-Cassaba,  86. 

The  Tomsk-Tashkent,  202,  268. 

The  Transcaspian,  chap,  ix.;  origin 
of,  163-166  ;  construction  of,  167, 
168  ;  journey  over,  168-177. 

The  Trans-Siberian,  244,  and  chap, 
xxiv. ;  early  schemes,  286 ;  the 
inauguration  of,  288  ;  the  cost  of, 
288  ;  description  of,  289  ;  cost  of 
travelling  on,  289 ;  defects  of, 
293. 
Rakka,  60. 


406 


INDEX. 


Ramazan,  fast  of,  29. 

Rambaud,  Alfred,  quoted,  278. 

Ramsay,  Professor,  quoted,  38,  39,  90 
footnote. 

Ras-el-Ain,  56,  57,  88,  92. 

Rawlinson,  Sir  H.,  inscriptions  de- 
ciphered by,    122  ;  quoted,  332. 

Rebecca,  well  of,  92. 

Resht,  capital  of  Ghilan,  150. 

Rhages,  ruins  of,  136. 

Rishta,  worm,  180. 

Roads  in  the  East,  35,  37. 

Roe-deer,  Asiastic,  226. 

Rome,  31. 

Russell,  Dr,  quoted,  54. 

Russia,  13,  17-22  ;  enterprise  of,  in 
Persia,  148,  149  ;  organisation  in, 
387  ;  the  soldier  of,  389  ;  troops  of, 
in  Manchuria,  304. 

Russo-Persian  Convention  of  1901, 
138  ;  railway  convention  of  1890, 
144. 

Saadi,  the  Persian  poet,  quoted,  194. 

Sabkah,  60. 

Sadiyeh,  89. 

St  Paul's  Institute  at  Tarsus,  45. 

St  Petersburg,  treaty  of  (1881),  215  ; 
made  capital  of  Russia,  285. 

St  Sophia,  mosque  of,  30. 

Sajur,  river,  88. 

Salaiire,  coal  and  iron  mines  at,  202. 

Salisbury,  Lord,  351  ;  quoted,  378. 

Samara,  town  of,  76. 

Samarkand,  10,  12,  33,  170,  and  chap, 
xvii. ;  capital  of  Timur,  193;  cap- 
tured by  the  Russians,  194,  195; 
monuments  of,  195-197  ;  the  Rigis- 
tan  at,  196. 

Sardanapalus,  45,  46. 

Sar-i-pul,  114. 

Saros,  river,  44,  47. 

Sarts  of  Central  Asia,  218. 

Saxsaul,  shrub,  176. 

Schemai,  the  ataman,  172. 

Schlumberger  quoted,  48  footnote, 
51. 

Schouvaloff,  Count,  174. 

Schuyler,  Mr  E.,  190;  quoted,  197, 
207,   213. 

Semipalatinsk,  202,  267  ;  population 
of,  208  ;  town  of,   209. 

Semirechensk,  207. 

Sennacherib,  7. 

Sergiopol,  town  of,  208. 

Seyid-ibn-'Othman,  192. 


Shah,  Mozuffer-a-Din,  interview  with, 

133. 
Shah  Zindeh,  mosque  of,  197. 
Shahraban,  village  of,  110. 
Shahrisabs,  town  of,  195. 
Shakespeare,  Sir  Richmond,  173. 
Shalmanezer,  66,  73. 
Sharrukin,  King  of  AgadS,  71. 
Shehdadi,  56,  66. 
Shimonoseki,  treaty  of,  369  ;  Russian 

note  to  Japan  as  a  result  of,  369. 
Shinar,  land  of,  7. 
Shir  Khan,  113. 
Shirin,    the    bride    of    King   Khosroe, 

110,  115. 
Shumir  and  Accad,  the  land  of,  6,  7. 
Shushter,  113. 
Siberia,    4,    13,    14,   208,    and    chaps. 

xxiii.  and  xxiv. ;  conquest  of,   283  ; 

villages  of,  271  ;  peasants  of,  272. 
Sikkim  Convention  (1893),  348. 
Simpson,  Mr  J.  Y.,  quoted,    2b9,  271, 

273,  279. 
Sinjar  Mountains,  56,  57,  66,  67,  69. 
Sistan,  143. 

Skobelefl;  General,  166,  170. 
Skrine  and  Ross  quoted,  168  footnote, 

187. 
Smuggling   on  the    Siberian    frontier, 

263. 
Sparta,  31. 
Sport  in  the  Thian  Shan,  chap,  xx.;  in 

Mongolia,  chaps,  xxi.  and  xxii. 
Stambul.      See  Constantinople. 
"State  lotteries  concession,"  333. 
Stempel,  Major,  194. 
Stoddart,   Colonel,  181  ;  the  story  of, 

187-190. 
Storks,  110. 

Story-teller  of  Asia,  the,  110,  196. 
Strabo  quoted,  46. 
Stretensk,  303. 
StroganofF,  merchants,  283. 
Stumm,  Herr,  quoted,  217. 
Suidon,  "215. 
Suleiman,  30. 
Sungari,  river,  306. 
Surah  Khani,  157. 
Swayne,    Major   H.   G.    C,   244,   246 

footnote. 

Ta-ShihChiao,    junction    for    Niuch- 

wang  and  Peking,  308. 
Tabriz,  Russian  engineers  at,  144. 
Taganrog,    death   of  Alexander  I.   at, 

278. 


INDEX. 


407 


Taigar,  junction  for  Tomsk,  292. 

Talienwan,  372. 

Tamarisk,  59. 

Tamerlane.     See  Timur. 

Taotai,  Chinese  official,  visit  to,  219. 

Tarantass,  description  of,  12,  203. 

Tarantchis,  212,  217. 

Tarsus,  town  of,  37,  41-43,  45,  46,  50. 

Tashkent,  12,  164.  168,  170,  198-200. 

Taurus  Mountains,  37,  41,  88,  89,  229. 

Tavernier  quoted,  6. 

Tazziehs  (religious  plays  in  Persia), 
135. 

Tchakid  Su,  38,  40,  88,  90. 

Tchernaieff,  General,  166,  207  ;  Tash- 
kent captured  by,  200. 

Tchernayevo,  198. 

Tchimkent,  170,  202;  capture  of, 
207. 

Teheran,  chap.  xi. ;  gates  of,  132,  133; 
palace  at,  134. 

Teheran-Resht  road,  148. 

Tekir  plateau,  38. 

Tekkes  valley,  217,  225,  226,  240. 

Tekrit,  76. 

Tel  Habesch,  54,  S9. 

Telegraph  concession  in  Persia,  338, 
340. 

Tent,  drawbacks  to,  6. 

Tewtic  Pasha,  33. 

Thapsacus  identified  with  Tipsah,  60. 

Thian  Shan  Mountains,  211,  226. 

Tiari  Mountains,  69. 

Tibet,  15,  19,  22,  220,  and  chap, 
xxvii. ;  situation  summed  up  by  the 
Government  of  India,  350  ;  appear- 
ance of  Russia,  351  ;  reported 
Russo-Chinese  convention  concern- 
ing, 353  ;  suggested  solution  of  the 
Tibetan  problem,  361. 

Tientsin,  treaty  of  (1861),  312,  373. 

Tigris,  5,  7,  57,  69,  88  ;  a  journey 
down,  75-79  ;  the  lands  of,  chap, 
vii. 

Time  the  destroyer,  72. 
Timur    (Tamerlane),    10,    17,    30,    92, 
192;  Hamadan  destroyed  by,  130; 
personal  appearance,  193,  194  ;  tomb 
of,  197. 
Tobolsk,  267. 
Toghrul  Bey,  30. 
Togo,  Admiral,  387. 
Tomsk,  government  of,  245,  267-277  ; 
town  of,  277  ;  the  mystery  of,  278- 
280  ;  university  at,  280  ;   technolo- 
gical institute  at,  281. 


Toprak  Kalek,  51. 

Transcaspia,  4,  15,  21. 

Trypanni,  Messrs,  cotton  manufac- 
turers, 50. 

Tseng,  Marquis,  concludes  treaty  of 
St  Petersburg,  215. 

Tso-Chungt-'ang,  General,  213. 

Tsybikofif,  Professor,  at  Lhassa,  220. 

Turkestan,  4,  10,  15,  164,  170,  206, 
221,  and  chap,  xviii. 

Turkey,  15,  22  ;  a  piece  on  the  Eastern 
chess-board,  325-329  ;  a  suggested 
solution  of  the  Turkish  problem, 
327. 

Turkey  in  Asia,  4,  10,  and  chaps,  ii.- 
viii.  ;  maladministration  in,  55. 

Turkomania,  10,  21. 

Turkomans,  170. 

Tze-hsi-tuan-yu,  Dowager-Empress  of 
China,  380. 

Ukhtomski,  Prince,  quoted,  221. 

Uliissatai,  276. 

Ulukishla,  37. 

Unification     of     the     Ottoman     debt, 

96. 
Ural  Mountains,  283,  284. 
Urfa,  town  of,  92. 
Urga,     capital     of     Mongolia,     220, 

276. 
Urumtsi,  town  of,  214. 
Ussuri  line  inaugurated,  14. 
Usun  Hassan,  30. 

Vaharan  IV. ,  founder  of  Kermanshah, 
115. 

Vambery,  Professor,  190,  395. 

Vasco  da  Gama,  16,  282. 

Venice,  traders  of,  31. 

Verefkin,  Colonel,  207. 

Vermin  pit  at  Bokhara,  189. 

Verni,  town  of,  202,  207. 

Vladimir  quoted,  300  footnote,  303 
footnote. 

Vladivostok,  14,  299. 

Vodka,  272-274  ;  Government  mono- 
poly of,  273. 

Waddell,  L.  A.,  quoted,  346. 

Wapiti,  Asiastic,  226. 

Waugh,   Consul,  quoted,  91   footnote, 

102. 
Wei-hai-Wei,  300,  314,  378. 
Whigham,  Mr  A.  J.,  quoted,  82. 
Willcocks,    Sir    William,     irrigation 

scheme  of,  77-79. 


408 


INDEX. 


William,    Emperor   of  Germany,   85, 

327. 
Witte,  M.  de,  165. 
Wolff,   the  Rev.    Joseph,   quoted,   67 

footnote,  172  footnote,  173  footnote, 

184  footnote,   188-190  ;    journey   to 

Bokhara,  182,  189. 
Wolves,  260. 
WorontzofF,     Count,     ambassador     to 

George  III.,  19. 

Xenophon,  73. 

Xerxes,  9,  30  ;  inscription  of,  128. 

Yaik  Cossacks,  172. 
Yakub  Khan,  211,  212,-  214. 
Yakubieh,  village  of,  110. 
Yakutsk,  290. 
Yarkand,  214. 


Yatung,  349. 

"Yellow  Peril,"  the,  13. 

Yeniseisk  government,  267. 

Yermak,  283,  284. 

Yezidis,  67. 

Yomud  Turkomans,  174. 

Younghusband,    Colonel    F.    E.,    324, 

357. 
Yugra,  the  land  of,  283. 
Yumurtalik,  89. 

Zagros  Gates,  6,  115. 
Zaptieh,  36,  50. 
Zeminogorsk,  267,  271,  272. 
Zend  AA'esta,  157. 
Zerafshan,  21,  170,  176. 
Zingerli,  excavations  at,  52. 
Zobair,  89. 
Zoroaster,  157. 


THE    END. 


PRINTED   BY   WILLIAM   BLACKWOOD   AND  SONS. 


,  -  .^  ^      «f  %  — ■ 


■►■fK-^-ScO^ 


'♦ 


*  • 


^«%    H  "  "^  •"  M . 


.J  •■ 


''  I    ' 


•^   ;■■■,   »  "-^  -^^ 


»    •  ••"    >■•%.;■   *  *  ;^ii;^l 


?.V>f/*  ''V  ? 


i]C  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


AA    000  783  210    8 


''•.  /  ,  </     •* 


?    /  » 


Si^^4% 


A 


